Title       : Electronic Shearography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1995      
File        : a9212733

Award Number: 9212733
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141523             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arup K. Maji amaji@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ming-Liang Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1037,1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              "Shearography", a laser interferometry technique, enables direct               
              observation and measurement of strain concentrations and variation             
              of the displacement field.  Shearography performed with the aid of             
              electronic image acquisition and processing can eliminate the                  
              practical problems that have precluded the use of other laser                  
              interferometry techniques for nondestructive inspection under field            
              conditions.  Electronic Shearography (ES) is being tested as an                
              inspection technique for detecting cracking and other sources of               
              stress concentration in structures.  The technique offers full-                
              field inspection capability, can be performed in real time, and is             
              easily suited to automated computer aided data analysis.                       
                                                                                             
              The ES images, however, lack clarity due to their speckled nature,             
              and the technique currently lacks remote detection capability.                 
              This  drawback has seriously limited the scope of this technique.              
              Using higher resolution for image acquisition and processing will              
              alleviate this problem.  A newly developed geometric filtering                 
              technique will be applied to reduce speckle noise.  Additional                 
              telescopic lenses will be used to facilitate remote measurements.              
              The combination of the hardware and software tools will result in              
              excellent image quality that will make this ES technique acceptable            
              for field inspection of civil engineering structures.  The ES                  
              technique will then be evaluated during field inspection of                    
              bridges, in conjunction with other state of the art inspection                 
              techniques.
