Title       : Integrative Studies of Development and Function of Vocalizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1994      
File        : a9212175

Award Number: 9212175
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George W. Uetz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226164             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Beecher beecher@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Bird song is widely recognized as a model system for investigation             
              into the biological basis of learning.  Its status derives from                
              the many striking parallels between song communication and human               
              language and the recent discoveries concerning brain mechanisms                
              underlying song learning.  Indeed, bird song has become the major              
              vertebrate model for the study of the neurobiology of learning.                
              Dr. Beecher will use both field and laboratory studies to examine              
              song learning in one representative species, the song sparrow.                 
              The field perspective is crucial for understanding the song                    
              learning process, because the "rules" of song learning that Dr.                
              Beecher has discovered in the field turn out to be quite different             
              from the rules that had been inferred from laboratory studies.                 
              Dr. Beecher will try to resolve this discrepancy through a                     
              combination of laboratory and field studies.  Resolution of the                
              discrepancy is crucial to the effective use of bird song as a                  
              model system, for we cannot hope to work out the neurobiology of               
              song learning if our understanding of song learning is incomplete              
              or incorrect to begin with.  In the laboratory, Dr. Beecher will               
              directly test hypotheses concerning song learning derived from his             
              long-term field study.  The key point is that each of these                    
              hypotheses is either not indicated or actually contra-indicated by             
              laboratory studies to date.  (1) The young bird copies whole songs             
              of particular older individuals or "tutors" (he develops no cross-             
              tutor hybrid songs).  (2) He learns some songs from all tutors to              
              whom he is exposed.  (3) If two or more tutors sing different                  
              versions of the same song type, the young bird combines these.                 
              (4) Types shared by two or more tutors are preferentially learned.             
              (5) The critical period for song learning extends well beyond the              
              "classical" period identified in laboratory studies.  Dr. Beecher              
              will try to validate these conclusions by laboratory experiments               
              in which he simulates the essential conditions that occur in the               
              field (including:  the bird hears live tutors, not tapes, he is                
              exposed to the tutors sequentially during the critical period, and             
              he can socially interact with his tutors).  Dr. Beecher also will              
              continue laboratory experiments on song perception, with a                     
              particular view to relating these results to the increasing body               
              of knowledge concerning the function of song centers in the brain.             
              Finally, he will carry out further field studies on the natural                
              context of song learning.
