Title       : Excimer Laser System for Pump-Probe Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1992      
File        : a9212389

Award Number: 9212389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George P. Peterson                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65312              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Houston Miller houston@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Akos Vertes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0313010   Air Pollution                           
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              An Excimer Laser System will be purchased and used to support                  
              several established research programs in combustion chemistry,                 
              materials processing , and chemical analysis at George                         
              Washington University.  These programs include laser-solid                     
              interaction in synthetic diamond film formation, laser                         
              sampling of glass and ceramic targets for chemical analysis,                   
              laser production of radical species important in combustion                    
              processes, and photodissociation of chlorinated hydrocarbons.                  
              In the first two areas, the goal will be to follow changes                     
              occurring on the surface and within the bulk of the targets                    
              and to examine the properties of the generated plumes.                         
              Methods of investigation will include time-of-flight mass                      
              spectrometry, kinetic energy measurement of the ions produced,                 
              and analysis of particulates in the plumes.  In addition,                      
              laser-solid interactions will be examined theoretically for a                  
              broad range of lasers and selected materials.  In the third                    
              area, excimer laser photolysis will be used to prepare radical                 
              species which are important in combustion systems.  Absorption                 
              spectra for these species will then be obtained using an                       
              existing tunable diode laser spectrometer.  Use of excimer                     
              laser photolysis followed by IR absorption as a diagnostic for                 
              chlorinated hydrocarbons in lab scale diffusion flames will                    
              also be explored.                                                              
                                                                                             
              The general objectives of the first two activities are to                      
              enhance the understanding of laser-solid interactions and to                   
              use this knowledge in preparative and analytical applications.                 
              This will include optimization of laser sampling and pulsed                    
              laser deposition processes.  In addition, a better                             
              understanding of synthetic diamond formation is a goal.  In                    
              the latter activities, excimer laser photolysis has become the                 
              technique of choice for the preparation of a number of gas                     
              phase radical species for fundamental spectroscopic studies.                   
              Additionally, it is proposed that excimer laser photolysis of                  
              chlorinated hydrocarbons might also be used for the detection                  
              of undesirable combustion products.
