Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Ballistics and Military Change in Eighteenth Century
               Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1992      
File        : a9212810

Award Number: 9212810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8673               (Estimated)
Investigator: Brett Steele  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Brett D. Steele, Dissertation Student; Topic:  "Ballistics and                 
              Military Change."                                                              
                                                                                             
              The incorporation of scientific knowledge into the practice of war             
              has become an increasingly important topic.  In the 1960's,                    
              laboratories and research centers at universities were bombed by               
              anti-Vietnam protestors.  Even now, many universities are chary of             
              having defense-related research programs on their campuses.  Yet               
              this wariness of academic science to be actively involved in                   
              military research (and its counterpart, the traditional wariness of            
              the military to adopt quickly the fruits of science and                        
              engineering) is not new.  In Renaissance Europe, it is said that               
              Niccolo Tartaglia called for a moratorium on the study of                      
              ballistics research.  Shortly after this call, however, the Moors              
              were threatening the gates of Vienna and Western Europe was                    
              threatened with being overrun.  Tartaglia switched positions and               
              worked to use his scientific acumen to advance the theory of                   
              ballistics--he is the one who discovered the law that projectiles              
              fly farthest (in a vacuum) if shot at a 45 degree angle.                       
                                                                                             
              While much progress was made in the theory of ballistics during the            
              Renaissance, the crudity of the weapons made the theoretical                   
              discussions somewhat superfluous.  Mr. Steele, in his dissertation,            
              is examining the period when the scientific study of ballistics                
              began to make a real difference.  His dissertation has two goals:              
              to provide a more thorough investigation of historical publications            
              on ballistics, and to investigate the relationship between this                
              science and military developments.  More specifically, Mr. Steele              
              is documenting the relationship between the revolution in                      
              ballistics launched by Benjamin Robins and Leonard Euler and the               
              transformation of artillery shortly thereafter.  It was in this                
              period, according to Mr. Steele, that ongoing ballistics research              
              significantly improved gunnery or artillery "software."  This                  
              research will also shed light on an historically significant yet               
              generally ignored side of classical mechanics, namely the study of             
              motion in resisting media.  The resulting dissertation will connect            
              significant scientific and military activities that are currently              
              disconnected in history, integrating experimental and mathematical             
              research into a broad political framework.
