Title       : A Methodological Study of Mail Surveys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1992     
File        : a9212590

Award Number: 9212590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13569              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard Schuman hschuman@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This is a request for a Small Grant for Exploratory Research              
              (SGER) to do a study of mail survey response rates and response                
              bias.  The proposed study would be linked to an already scheduled              
              survey planned by the Detroit Area Survey (DAS) in the spring of               
              1992.  This study will use face-to-face interviews to collect                  
              data on racial attitudes and related issues.  The proposed study               
              would select an random sample from the DAS sample and send these               
              respondents a mail survey where some of the questions are                      
              identical to those asked in personal interviews.  It is the                    
              linkage to the DAS study that provides the rationale for                       
              requesting a SGER grant rather than a regular research grant.                  
                                                                                             
                   The proposed study will make two important contributions to               
              the study of response rates and response bias in surveys.  First               
              it will provide a measure of the response rates that can be                    
              obtained with mail surveys compared to a highly professional                   
              face-to-face survey.  This is an important issue in survey                     
              research because mail surveys are much less expensive than face-               
              to-face interviews.  The second contribution of the study will be              
              to test the hypothesis that with self-administered questionnaires              
              respondents are more candid about sensitive issues than they are               
              in face-to-face interviews.  The topic of the 1992 DAS study is                
              racial attitudes--a topic that is known to be quite sensitive to               
              the influence of social desirability factors.  The proposed mail               
              survey would include some of the same questions asked in the                   
              personal interviews thus providing a basis for comparing the                   
              answers under two different data collections scenarios.  A second              
              component of this part of the study would mail out the same                    
              questionnaire to individuals who contributed money to the recent               
              campaign of David Duke to become governor of Louisiana.  This                  
              part of the study will focus on the response rate of a sample                  
              believed to be unsympathetic to many of the issues raised in the               
              questionnaire on racial attitudes and on a comparison of their                 
              stated views with those of the randomly selected sample.
