Title       : Collaborative Research: Hormones and Avian Sociality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1994     
File        : a9212653

Award Number: 9212653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Barfield                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56636              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerram L. Brown JLB81@cnsvax.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of this project is to understand the hormonal basis of                
              social behavior, particularly aggressive and parental behavior in              
              birds.  The research will focus on two closely related species of              
              jays that live in close proximity to each other in Arizona but                 
              have very different social systems.                                            
                                                                                             
              This collaborative research effort will bring together Dr. Jerram              
              Brown's long-term (more than 20-year) study of Mexican jays, in                
              which the genealogies and breeding history of a large number of                
              color-banded birds are known, with a study by Dr. Carol Vleck on               
              the hormonal basis for the different behaviors that individual                 
              jays exhibit.  Of particular interest are (1) the mechanisms that              
              permit co-existence of many individuals within a social group in               
              Mexican jays but not in scrub jays and (2) the mechanisms that                 
              promote parental-like (helping) behavior in non-breeding Mexican               
              jays (e.g., why these birds help raise the young of others rather              
              than breeding themselves).  The research will concentrate on                   
              testosterone, which in other species is important in controlling               
              both aggressive and sexual interactions between individuals, and               
              on prolactin, which is important in promoting parental behavior                
              in birds.  By correlating hormone levels in small blood samples                
              with the behavior of the birds, and by altering the levels of                  
              these hormones in free-living individuals, Drs. Vleck and Brown                
              will test the hypotheses that (1) high levels of prolactin are                 
              responsible for both parental and helping behavior and that (2)                
              group living is promoted by a general decrease in testosterone                 
              levels.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This study will shed light on the hormonal basis for the                       
              differences in reproductive behaviors of individuals within one                
              species and will also provide information on the hormonal bases                
              of very diverse social organizations in different species.
