Title       : Dissertation Research: Physiological and Demographic Mechanisms of Tree
               Regeneration Following Hurricane Blowdown in a Temperate Deciduous Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1992    
File        : a9212683

Award Number: 9212683
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8195               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary C. Carlton  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              When catastrophic windstorms remove forest canopy, the forest                  
              floor                                                                          
              is disrupted by the uprooting of trees, leaving mounds, pits, and              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              other microsites.  These microsites are important for                          
              regeneration                                                                   
              of many tree species.  The objective of this suite of studies is               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              to describe the different microsite environments and examine the               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              physiological and demographic mechanisms by which trees respond                
              to                                                                             
              these environments.  An integrative approach, combining                        
              descriptive                                                                    
              community-level studies with experimental studies of individuals               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              and populations will be used.  This research is being conducted                
              on                                                                             
              the Harvard Forest Long-Term Ecological Research Sites, where                  
              hurricane blowdowns have been simulated by pulling down canopy                 
              trees.  Five canopy tree species:  red maple, red oak, black                   
              birch,                                                                         
              white birch, and yellow birch will be studied.  The central                    
              hypothesis is that forest regeneration can be explained in terms               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              of species-specific responses to light, temperature, water,                    
              nitrogen, and carbon dioxide.  Fluxes of these factors in the                  
              forest understory and on five microsites created by simulated                  
              hurricane blowdown will be examined.  Patterns of environmental                
                                                                                             
              factors will be related to seed and seedling demography and to                 
              growth and physiology of individual seedlings.  Changes in the                 
              understory community following disturbance will also be monitored              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              to detect effects of understory vegetation on the forest floor                 
              environment and on tree regeneration.
