Title       : A Model of Philosophical Value Studies in a Graduate Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1992 
File        : a9212248

Award Number: 9212248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52156              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Tenore tenore@cbl.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Paul  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry Rosemont, Jr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop a curriculum of philosophical studies,               
              with an emphasis on ethics, especially appropriate for graduate                
              students in the sciences.  The curricular model will be                        
              implemented in the specific setting of a marine biological                     
              laboratory.  In many respects such laboratories resemble small,                
              liberal arts college campuses.  The setting should be conducive                
              to integrating philosophical and scientific issues, methods, and               
              problems.  Four course modules or seminars are proposed in the                 
              following order:  1) Theories of Sciences; 2) Theories of Ethics;              
              3) Ethics of the Environment and Development; and 4) Professional              
              Ethics.  Each are two-credit, half-semester courses, which will                
              meet for two hours a week over eight weeks; students are expected              
              to participate in the entire sequence.  Novel features include                 
              introducing graduate students to philosophy through a course in                
              the history and philoosphy of science, requiring work in ethical               
              theory before truning to issues in applied ethics, including non-              
              Western (Chinese) materials and perspectives in all facets of the              
              curriculum, and exploring the question of need or desirability of              
              developing a specific code of professional ethics for research                 
              scholars in the biological and envirnomental sciences.  Results                
              from the project will be disseminated at the meetings of two                   
              scientific groups:  The National Association of Marine                         
              Laboratories and The Estuarine Research Federation.  There are                 
              also plans to develop a syllabus and annotated bibliography.
