Title       : Transformation of Legal Identities and the Relation to Entitlement Claims
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1992      
File        : a9212723

Award Number: 9212723
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8688               (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine B. Harrington harrngtn@is3.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This planning grant will enable exploratory research for                       
              development of a full scale proposal on the transformation of legal            
              identities.  The project investigates how the identity of "leper"              
              is being transformed on the island of Molokai, in Hawaii, in the               
              context of international tourism and of local, regional, and                   
              international struggles over the acquisition of land in Hawaii.                
              A central theoretical focus of the research is to flush out the                
              process and meaning of reclaiming or reinventing legal histories               
              and contemporary identities.  The case of "the leper" is an example            
              of a legal identity that was at one time excluded and punished and             
              now is being transformed and mobilized to secure entitlements, such            
              as property.  This transformation is examined in the context of the            
              colonial history of Hawaii and the present effort by remnants of               
              the nineteenth century leper colony in Kalaupapa to retain their               
              rights to the settlement in the process of its establishment as a              
              national historical park.  The project traces the emergence of a               
              new local identity for "lepers" by considering how contemporary                
              sufferers of Hansen's disease create a legal, cultural, and                    
              political space for themselves, reworking the imagery of an                    
              oppressive colonial past in the context of a neocolonialist tourist            
              industry through which their claims to entitlement may be secured              
              and/or threatened at the same time.                                            
                                                                                             
              The research contributes to empirical and theoretical work on the              
              ways in which law and other institutions construct identities while            
              at the same time structuring forums which people use to reshape                
              their histories and make entitlement claims.  It has wider                     
              theoretical implications for the intersection of legal and medical             
              definitions, the conflict of state and federal notions of land                 
              tenure and use, and the changes wrought in the legal landscape by              
              a dramatically changed economic situation.
