Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: Dynamic Mechanical Analyzers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1992  
File        : a9212964

Award Number: 9212964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133630             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Glenn Lipscomb   (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Mark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joel R. Fried  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stevin H. Gehrke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven K. Pollack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The PI proposes purchasing a Rheometrics Dynamic Analyzer                      
              (RDA) for the measurement of fluids mechanical properties such                 
              as steady and oscillatory viscosity under carefully controlled                 
              conditions, and a Rheometries Solids Analyzer (RSA) for the                    
              measurement of solid mechanical properties such as static and                  
              oscillatory elastic and dilatational moduli.                                   
                                                                                             
              The instrument will be used in several research programs.                      
              With the RSA, the coupling between the mechanical and                          
              transport properties of hollow fiber membranes will be                         
              investigated, the mechanical strengths of hydrogels will be                    
              characterized as a function of initiator and crosslinking, and                 
              the effect of sorbed gas as a polymer plasticizer will be                      
              investigated.  The RDA will be used for studying the effect of                 
              ionic aggregation on the dynamic viscosity of liquid                           
              crystalline polymers and in measuring viscosities in resin                     
              cure.  The purchase of the rheometers will have a significant                  
              impact on several research groups.  The research on hydrogels                  
              for controlled drug delivery is a particularly novel and                       
              promising idea.  The RSA will instrument will certainly be                     
              necessary for characterizing the strength of the hydrogels,                    
              and this information will be necessary for further                             
              technological development.
