Title       : Establishing a Dissolved Organic and Nitrogen Analytical Facility at the UNC-CH
               Institute of Marine Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1992  
File        : a9212397

Award Number: 9212397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32060              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans W. Paerl hpaerl@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brad M. Bebout  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project will support the University of North Carolina at                  
              Chapel Hill's Instituteof Marine Sciences (IMS) acquisition of                 
              equipment for an onsite dissolved.  This facility will                         
              support current and future needs of NSF-supported projects at IMS              
              and nearby marine laboratories (Duke University Marine                         
              Laboratory; National Marine Fisheries Service Laboratory).                     
              Currently, IMS has 10 active NSF research grants in the areas of               
              nutrient-productivity interactions, nitrogen cycling, chemical                 
              ecology and land margin ecosystems research (LMER) requiring on                
              site DOC and DON analyses.  IMS also serves as a field station                 
              laboratory facility for various callaborating investigators from               
              UNC-CH, N.C. State                                                             
              University (Raleigh), East Carolina University and UNC-W. These                
              investigators routinely                                                        
              require rapid on site DOC/DON determinations to compliment stable              
              isotope (Cand N) geochemistry, nutrient cycling, water quality                 
              and trophic interaction studies.  At least 16 current NSF and 10               
              federaVstate agency (NOAA, EPA, USGS, UNC Water Resources                      
              Research Institute, DOE'I-supported projects will benefit from a               
              DOC/DON analytical facility. Future expansion of  these                        
              analytical needs is documented within the scope of the recently-               
              established Duke-UNC-NOAA Cooperative Institute of  Fisheries                  
              Oceanography (CIFO).  An Antek model 7000 analyses, plus                       
              accessories will be acquired.  Equipment is designed for rapid                 
              and efficient analyses of a variety of liquid and gas samples and              
              adaptable to abovementioned research needs.  The infrastructure                
              for operation, maintenance and technical support is already in                 
              place at IMS.  This facility is of vital importance to successful              
              completion of existing and development of future NSF- supported                
              research thrusts in coastal North Carolina and the mid-Atlantic                
              region.
