Title       : The Effectiveness of Advocacy: Comparing Lawyers and Nonlawyers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1993   
File        : a9212756

Award Number: 9212756
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55645              (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert M. Kritzer KRITZER@POLISCI.WISC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In the United States, paid advocates are usually members of the                
              legal profession.  In many arenas, lawyers enjoy a legally                     
              enforceable monopoly on such representation; in other arenas,                  
              lawyers share the advocacy function with other professionals,                  
              paraprofessionals, and laypersons.  Recent research has raised                 
              questions about the wisdom of granting lawyers exclusive rights to             
              deliver services such as advocacy.  However, there has been no                 
              systematic research that has compared the work and performance of              
              lawyer and nonlawyer advocates in contexts where both are permitted            
              to appear.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Using a "taxonomic theory of representation" as a conceptual                   
              framework, this study compares different types of advocates in four            
              settings, using a combination of observation, structured                       
              interviews, and semi-structured interviews.  The focus is on "case             
              advocacy," as distinguished from "policy advocacy," involving both             
              adversary and nonadversary (inquisitorial) processes.  The study               
              will evaluate the effectiveness of lawyers and non-lawyers, isolate            
              the factors that determine the variable effectiveness of each type             
              of advocate, and potentially demonstrate the advantages of getting             
              away from the simple dichotomy of lawyers versus nonlawyers.                   
              Focusing on the question of the effectiveness of representation                
              will not only advance theory in this area but will allow                       
              consideration of some of the foundational arguments that are used              
              to justify the existence of the legal profession's monopoly on                 
              advocacy representation.
