Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: Acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron
               Spectroscopy Research Instrument
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1992    
File        : a9212295

Award Number: 9212295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Gardner gardner@che.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles U. Pittman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The PI proposes purchasing a Perkin-Elmer X-ray Photoelectron                  
              Spectroscopy (XPS)  research system. The instrument consists                   
              of a vacuum chamber with an attached pumping system that                       
              incorporates ion, turbomolecular, and titanium sublimation                     
              pumping to achieve pressures in the 10-10 torr range. Soft                     
              x-rays irradiate a specimen in the vacuum chamber,  and the                    
              incident energy of the rays ejects electrons. If the x-rays                    
              only graze the surface, then the radiation is adsorbed by                      
              surface molecules. The energy of the emitted electrons is                      
              characteristic of the element emitting the radiation, and the                  
              bonds the element shares with neighboring atoms.                               
                                                                                             
              The PI will use the instrument in his studies on the                           
              relationships between interfacial microstructure  in a                         
              composite material and material performance. In particular,                    
              the PI has been investigating the synthesis of novel,                          
              filamentary composite materials which incorporate elastomers                   
              to chemically bond carbon fibers to a polymer matrix. Fibers                   
              are activated via radio frequency plasmas to introduce a high                  
              density of specific types of functional groups on the fiber                    
              surface. Carbon and Kevlar fibers are functionalized with OH                   
              and -COOH functions with O2 and O2/H2O plasmas, and with -NH2                  
              functions using ammonia. Di-end functionalized elastomeric                     
              polymers are then used to join these functionalized groups to                  
              an epoxy resin. The goal of this fabrication is to produce a                   
              composite with improved damage tolerance due to the strong                     
              attachment of the fiber to the resin.  The XPS research system                 
                                                                                             
              will be used to characterize the fiber surface before plasma                   
              treatment, after functionalization and finally after chemical                  
              binding.  XPS  is an ideally suited technique for  this                        
              chacterization because the grazing angle of the incident                       
              radiation can be adjusted so that the penetration or sampling                  
              depth is of the order of 50-100 A,  small enough to insure                     
              that the emitted electrons characterize surface elements.
