Title       : Observational and Modeling Studies of the Mesoscale Land-Air-Sea Interaction
               Processes during GALE (1986)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1997       
File        : a9212636

Award Number: 9212636
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sethu Raman sethu_raman@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The rapid development and intensification of winter cyclones              
              in coastal regions presents a major weather forecasting problem.               
              Along the eastern seaboard, the development of cyclonic storms and             
              frontal systems often occurs along the coastal region of the                   
              Carolinas.  These weather systems may lead to severe weather in the            
              heavily populated Northeast Corridor in the form of freezing rain,             
              heavy snowfall, blizzards and extensive coastal erosion.  In order             
              to study these phenomena, the National Science Foundation sponsored            
              an intensive field investigation known as the Genesis of Atlantic              
              Lows Experiment (GALE).  The field phase of the GALE was a two-                
              month, multi-agency endeavor executed during the winter of 1986.               
                                                                                             
                   As part of the GALE, the Principal Investigator was                       
              instrumental in designing and implementing a network to study the              
              redistribution of heat and moisture in the lowest three kilometers             
              of the atmopshere over the ocean which is known as the marine                  
              boundary layer (MBL).  The MBL and ocean-atmosphere interaction                
              processes appear to play an important role in the genesis of                   
              cyclones or in the intensification of an existing cyclone.                     
                                                                                             
                   Analysis to date has demonstrated the importance of the Gulf              
              Stream and the land-air-sea interface in both the intensification              
              of cyclonic storms and the formation of frontal systems.  Low level            
              forcing by boundary layer circulations and increase in baroclinic              
              instability in the boundary layer appear to be primary mechanisms              
              for storm intensification.  Additionally, it has been found that               
              differential boundary layer modification may be the main mechanism             
              for the formation of some coastal fronts.                                      
                   Through diagnostic studies of the data collected during the               
              GALE and numerical modeling the Principal Investigator will                    
              continue to explore the dynamics of coastal cyclogenesis and                   
              cyclonic storm intensification.  Scientific questions to be                    
              addressed include: What is the relative contribution of surface                
              forcing versus upper level forcing in offshore cyclogenesis?  What             
              is the relationship between the coastal frontogenesis and incipient            
              cyclogenesis?  What is the effect of coastal curvature on the                  
              offshore cyclogenesis?  What is the role of the diurnal variation              
              of the land processes on the coastal front?
