Title       : Dissertation Research: The Evolution of Eusociality in the Aphid Tribe
               Cerataphidini
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1992    
File        : a9212755

Award Number: 9212755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Stern  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The evolution of eusociality presents a major paradox for                      
              evolutionary biology because it requires the evolution of sterile              
              individuals.  The aphid tribe Cerataphidini provides an ideal                  
              opportunity to investigate the evolution of eusociality because the            
              group is polymorphic for a relatively primitive form of                        
              eusociality, the production of a reproductively sterile "soldier"              
              caste.  To examine the origins of eusociality, the PIs will first              
              reconstruct a phylogeny for the cerataphidine aphids using DNA                 
              sequence data and then map onto this phylogeny behavioral                      
              ecological data pertinent to the evolution of a soldier caste.  The            
              PIs will test several hypotheses for the evolution of a soldier                
              caste by testing for significant associations among these variables            
              and soldier production using recently developed statistical                    
              methods.  The PIs propose to return to field sites where species of            
              aphids included in the phylogeny have been collected to measure                
              variables that are believed critical to understanding the evolution            
              of their social behavior.  The PIs will first sample colonies of               
              each species for later genetic analysis to estimate the average                
              relatedness within and between colonies.  Taking into account both             
              spatial and temporal variation, the PIs will then measure                      
              individual birth rates, soldier production, ant interaction,                   
              predation and parasitism.  The information obtained will be useful             
              in understanding both fundamental questions about sociality and the            
              population success or failure it brings to this group of plant                 
              feeders.
