Title       : All the Modern Conveniences: The Development of Household Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1992 
File        : a9212093

Award Number: 9212093
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32025              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen Ogle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Ogle is examining the history of a ubiquitous household                    
              technology, plumbing, as a way to document the larger relationship             
              between social and cultural values and the process of technological            
              change.  Americans use more plumbing and use it more often than                
              virtually any other people in the world.  Clearly, the history of              
              plumbing deserves study because of the role it plays in our lives              
              and what it illustrates about American culture.  Further, the                  
              history of this ubiquitous technology has never before been                    
              extensively studied.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Dr. Ogle has found that what was originally seen as a mere                     
              convenience became, through the work of "sanitarians," a necessity.            
              Originally plumbing was not sold as a technology for hygiene and               
              sanitation but as a "labor saving device."  Because it was a                   
              convenience, there was no legal or social pressure to place running            
              water and water fixtures in every home.  Only when Americans began             
              to fear germs did they treat plumbing as an essential part of                  
              household hygiene.  This reaction led first to a rejection of the              
              old plumbing technology which, sanitarians argued, carried germs               
              through the household because the water was unsafe and because                 
              gases from the household sewer systems were likely to back up into             
              the house (or explode|). The old technology was replaced by new                
              plumbing technologies; new health regulations were established to              
              insure the safety of the systems; and "safe" new municipal water               
              and sewer systems were constructed to provide a new level of                   
              hygiene in the household.                                                      
                                                                                             
              Dr. Ogle is examining books and magazines, patents and newspapers              
              in order to elaborate how changing cultural values affect                      
              technology.  She is also examining diaries and household account               
              books, architectural drawings and municipal documents such as water            
              and health department reports, sewer permits, and plumbing                     
              inspection reports to provide further documentation of these                   
              changes. With all these sources in hand, she will be able to                   
              provide a clear explanation of how and why plumbing technology was             
              shaped in the United States to take the form it has assumed today.
