Title       : N-acetylaspartylglutamate in Visual Pathways
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1996     
File        : a9212426

Award Number: 9212426
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzannah Bliss Tieman tieman@csc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David O. Carpenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Cells in the brain communicate with one another by releasing                   
              chemical messengers, called neurotransmitters, which activate                  
              specific receptors on the next cell.  Understanding the brain thus             
              requires a knowledge of the identity and function of these                     
              neurotransmitters.  Yet, despite thirty years of research on the               
              mammalian visual pathway, the neurotransmitters used by the cells              
              remain largely unknown.  Receptors for the excitatory amino acids              
              are involved in this neurotransmission, but evidence suggests that             
              neither of the obvious candidates, aspartate or glutamate is the               
              neurotransmitter.  N-acetylaspartylglutamate (NAAG) is an                      
              endogenous brain peptide that acts at an excitatory amino acid                 
              receptor.  Evidence is mounting that NAAG may be a neurotransmitter            
              for retinal ganglion cells.  Dr. Tieman's experiments are directed             
              at this question.  The lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) is one of              
              the areas of the brain that receives input from the eye.  Dr.                  
              Tieman will examine the responses of LGN neurons to stimulation of             
              the input from the eye and to direct application of NAAG.  If NAAG             
              is the neurotransmitter, then these responses should be the same.              
              Immunocytochemistry is a technique that uses antibodies to localize            
              specific chemical compounds in brain.  Dr. Tieman will use this                
              technique for NAAG combined with a variety of other techniques,                
              such as electron microscopy, to better characterize both the cells             
              that contain NAAG and NAAG's distribution within these neurons.                
              For example, if NAAG is the neurotransmitter for retinal ganglion              
              cells, then it should be localized at the synapse, which is part               
              of the cell that is specialized for communicating with the next                
              cell.  Results obtained from these experiments should help to                  
              clarify NAAG's role in the visual system and provide a better                  
              understanding of intercellular communication in the brain.***//
