Title       : Vesicular Biomimetic Membranes for Metal Recovery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1993       
File        : a9212270

Award Number: 9212270
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192184             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold G. Monbouquette harold@seas.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal studies a vesicular membrane based biomimetic                    
              system for removing hazardous metals cation from aqueous                       
              streams.  In preliminary work, the PI has used equilibrium                     
              detergent dialysis to fabricate unilamellar vesicles made of                   
              soybean phosphatidylcholine harboring a lipophilic metal                       
              carrier, the ionophone A23187, in the vesicle membrane, and a                  
              chelating agent (NTA, nitrilotiacetate) in the vesicle                         
              interior.  When the vesicle dispersion is mixed with an                        
              aqueous solution containing the metal cations, the cations                     
              become bound to the metal carrier in the membrane.  The                        
              complex is soluble in the membrane, and it diffuses across the                 
              lamella to the inside surface of the membrane vesicle where                    
              the metal ion is released.  The released ion complexes with                    
              the chelator, thereby keeping the concentration of the ion-                    
              lipophile complex at the inside surface of the vesicle                         
              membrane extremely small.  With this value small, the driving                  
              force for diffusion of additional complexes of the ion and the                 
              lipophile remains large, and the vesicle continues to strongly                 
              uptake the metal ions.  Results of batch experiments in which                  
              the vesicles were mixed solutions containing only Cu(II),                      
              Cd(II), or Pb(II) cations demonstrate that the vesicles are                    
              effective scavengers of these metal ions with rapid uptake and                 
              high loading.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The primary problem with this technique is the high cost of                    
              the lipophilic carrier and the phosphidylcholine.  The                         
              proposed research will explore less costly lipophilic carriers                 
              such as cleft type metal binding agents and crown ether-based                  
              agents, and less costly components for the vesicles such as                    
              alkyl benzene sulfonate surfactants.  Competitive metal ion                    
              uptake will also be studied, and a bench scale continuous                      
              metal recovery system will be tested which uses hollow fiber                   
              membrane cartridges to contact the vesicle dispersion and the                  
              waste stream in a countercurrent mode.
