Title       : Normative Economics: Theory and Practice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1994      
File        : a9212337

Award Number: 9212337
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216114             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amartya Sen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              Analyses of applied problems and the nature of public interest in              
              them is used to motivate and strengthen the examination of the                 
              informational base of welfare economics and choice theory.                     
              Particular attention is paid to the neglect in traditional welfare             
              economics of considerations other than utility, including freedoms,            
              rights, and liberties, on the one hand, and also health and                    
              morbidity, in which the public take a prominent and direct                     
              interest.  Similarly, the concentration of traditional rational                
              choice theory on intelligent pursuit of self-interest leads to the             
              neglect of other norms and values, such as loyalty, commitment, and            
              fairness, which figure more prominently in public understanding of             
              actual motives for action.  These perceptual features require                  
              critical scrutiny and discriminating assessment in the light of                
              their practical relevance as well as conceptual viability.                     
                                                                                             
              The results of the theoretical investigations will be applied to               
              the study of policy responses to global environmental change.                  
              Public discussions of environmental issues are often dominated by              
              alleged violations of rights and entitlement, and also by fear of              
              increased illness and death in addition to forecasts of economic               
              disasters.  These concerns sometimes serve as the basis of unifocal            
              recommendations and fairly extreme solutions based on assessments              
              involving the neglect of other aspects of the problem.  This                   
              project accepts the legitimacy of these concerns and then links                
              them with other concerns, with reasoned assessment of defendable               
              trade-offs and relative weights.  Public discussions of global                 
              warming are often much influenced by the rhetoric of equity and                
              justice, e.g., between poor countries than cannot easily afford to             
              pay for the proposed policies and rich ones that are seen as having            
              an obligation to help.  Since the gap between rhetoric and                     
              political feasibility can be quite large, it can lead to proposals             
              that deflect discussion from what might really be possible to do.              
              Equity considerations are important and will be integrated within              
              a framework of rational assessment and informed political                      
              discussion, making them less ambitious but possibly more effective.
