Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolutionary Relationships Among Taxa of the Genus
               Thylamys (Marsupialia, Didelphidae) in Southern South America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1992  
File        : a9212839

Award Number: 9212839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emily B. Rudin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald W. Duszynski eimeria@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Eduardo Palma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 5926,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This Science in Developing Countries award will                                
              support travel to Chile and Paraguay, per diem,                                
              and materials associated with the dissertation                                 
              research of R. Eduardo Palma, a Chilean                                        
              doctoral student working under Donald Duszynski                                
              at the University of New Mexico.  The project                                  
              aims to evaluate phylogenetic relationships                                    
              within the marsupial genus Thylamys, using                                     
              molecular analytical methods of allozyme                                       
              variation and mtDNA.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The molecular data are expected to elucidate                                   
              evolutionary relationships within the genus,                                   
              since most studies have been limited to                                        
              morphologic and chromosomic analyses.  The                                     
              research also will likely provide results                                      
              needed to develop conservation strategies in                                   
              the Neotropics, a region in which research in                                  
              systematic mammalogy is critical.  Both the                                    
              U.S. and Chilean sides will benefit from new                                   
              advances in South American biogeography.  The                                  
              Chilean side will benefit from dissertation                                    
              research support, which will enhance                                           
              collaborative ties between the U.S. and South                                  
              America, the region's scientific                                               
              infrastructure, and its capacity for basic                                     
              biological research.
