Title       : Japan Long-Term Visit: Administered Mass Organizations in Nondemocratic Japanese
               Regimes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1993      
File        : a9212268

Award Number: 9212268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24160              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Kasza   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 5983,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a nine month long-term visit by Professor              
              Gregory Kasza, Department of Political Science, Indiana                        
              University, Bloomington, to Japan for a cooperative research                   
              project with Professor Michio Muramatsu, Professor of Political                
              Science, Faculty of Law, Kyoto University.  The researchers plan               
              to undertake a study of administrered mass organizations (AMOs)                
              in nondemocratic Japanese regimes.  This research identifies a                 
              major problem in Japanese political life that has gone relatively              
              unstudied.  Many nondemocratic regimes have created official mass              
              organizations to control patterns of participation, mobilize for               
              war, and effect ambitious programs of socioeconomic change.  This              
              research project examines ten systems of administered mass                     
              organizations in detail, particularly that of interwar Japan.                  
              Along with the Soviet Union and Fascist Italy, Japan was one of                
              the originators of the AMO.  AMOs were Japan's main tools of mass              
              mobilization during World War II, and the Japanese spread this                 
              form of organization to many parts of their Asian empire.                      
                                                                                             
              The research will be helpful in distinguishing these state-                    
              controlled, mobilizational mass organizations from political                   
              parties and interest groups.  The research should have                         
              significant theoretical payoffs regarding the nature of AMOs, the              
              ways they differ from other kinds of mass organizations and, the               
              range and variations among AMOs in terms of their characteristics              
              and patterns of operation.  Professor Kasza is also receiving                  
              partial support for this research under a Fulbright Scholarship.               
              Professor Muramatsu is one of Japan's most accomplished political              
              scientists.  Kyoto University's library is an excellent facility               
              in which to carry out this research.  It is anticipated that this              
              research will result in a fruitful collaboration that will                     
              continue many years after this project is completed.
