Title       : Polymer Dissolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1995   
File        : a9212482

Award Number: 9212482
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217076             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas A. Peppas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dissolution of glassy polymers can be considered as a                          
              combination of solvent penetration featuring Case II transport                 
              and polymer dissolution controlled by polymer disentanglement.                 
              In the present work, an anomalous transport model is developed                 
              for solvent penetration and is coupled with a disentanglement                  
              model for polymer dissolution.  Solvent penetration is                         
              controlled by the relaxation or deformation of polymer and the                 
              diffusional Deborah number is shown to be a major model                        
              parameter.  In the disentanglement model, dissolution of                       
              polymer molecules requires that solvent concentration be                       
              greater than a critical gel concentration and that a polymer                   
              molecule be allowed a certain time to complete the                             
              disentanglement of diffusion movement from the gel state to                    
              liquid state.  This time is assumed to be equivalent to the                    
              reputation time, which is a function of molecular weight,                      
              solvent concentration and chain rigidity.  A concept of                        
              disentanglement clock is introduced as the material time clock                 
              controlling the dissolution.  The new model may explain many                   
              experimental observations, such as effects of type of solvent                  
              and polymer on dissolution rate and the thickness of the gel                   
              layer.  Experimental studies are performed with well-                          
              characterized samples of polystyrene and poly(methyl                           
              methacrylate) in various solvents using interferometry and                     
              critical angle illumination microscopy.  The solvent                           
              concentration profiles and dissolution rates are measured                      
              using ellipsometry.  The necessary self-diffusion coefficient                  
              of the polymer is measured by pulsed gradient spin echo NMR                    
              spectroscopy.  In addition, experimental studies are performed                 
              using poly(acrylic acid) and poly(vinyl alcohol) in water to                   
              study the influence of ionic conditions on dissolution.
