Title       : Marine Biotech Fellowship: Molecular Analysis of Bacterial Genes Involved in
               Establishing the Vibrio Fischeri/Euprymna Scolopes Symbiotic Relationship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1994   
File        : a9212452

Award Number: 9212452
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 15,  1993   
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne Gilson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9212452  GILSON    The long term objective of this project is to understand the 
              mechanisms involved in establishing a bacterial/animal symbiosis.   Vibrio
              fischeri exists both as a free-living marine bacteria and as  a bioluminescent
              inhabitant of the light organ of sepiolid squid  and monocentrid fish. The
              association of V. fischeri and the small  squid, Euprymna scolopes, offers a
              model mutualistic relationship  and has already proven to be amenable to
              laboratory and molecular  genetic methodologies.  This project is directed at
              identifying the  genes and gene products that are expressed as V. fischeri
              senses  and responds to the conditions within the host.    Genes that are
              expressed only when the bacteria is in association  with the squid will be
              identified by fusions with a gene whose  expression is essential for bacterial
              survival within the host,  but, under selective conditions, is lethal outside
              the host.  Protein gels (2-D) will be used to identify proteins that are 
              preferentially synthesized in these two different environments.   And since
              bioluminescence is preferentially exhibited under  symbiotic conditions and is
              controlled by a density-dependent,  pheromone-like molecule, other genes that
              are also part of this  regulon will be identified through mudlac fusion
              technology.    The relationship between V. fischeri and E. scolopes is
              apparently  a mutualistic one, however its establishment and maintenance is 
              evolutionarily related to commensal, parasitic and pathogenic  associations. 
              Information of the genetic basis for mechanisms of  cell-cell communications,
              signal transduction and gene activation  will be applicable to all of these
              systems.  ***
