Title       : Southwest Regional Developmental Biology Conference (May 22-24, 1992,
               Albuquerque, New Mexico)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1992     
File        : a9212662

Award Number: 9212662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Stricker sstr@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sherry L. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The tenth Annual Southwestern Developmental Biology Conference                 
              will be held May 22-24, 1992 in Albuquerque, N.M. The meeting is               
              sponsored by the Society for Developmental Biology, which states               
              in its guidelines: "The function of the Regional Conference is to              
              provide a more informal opportunity than national meetings for                 
              the exchange of information on development. Participation by                   
              graduate students, postdoctoral and junior faculty is                          
              particularly encouraged..." The meeting will adhere to the goals               
              outlined above. For this conference, three prominent speakers                  
              (Drs. Cameron, Capco, and Eisen) have been invited to give papers              
              related to the following theme: "Imaging Developmental                         
              Processes". In addition, various developmental biologists from                 
              the Southwest will be encouraged to present recent and                         
              preliminary findings on this topic, or on any other field of                   
              developmental biology. The participation of graduate students and              
              postdoctoral fellows will be particularly promoted by providing                
              financial support to cover the costs of registration, housing,                 
              and travel wherever possible. The conference  will thus give                   
              developmental biology students in the Southwest an excellent                   
              opportunity to give a talk, interact with a variety of                         
              investigators, and gain a better understanding of research bering              
              pursued in their own geographic region.
