Title       : Marine Biotech. Fellowship: Molecular Characterization of Cytochrome P450(s) in
               a Marine Fish: Applications to Environmental and Ecological Questions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1993   
File        : a9212979

Award Number: 9212979
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 23,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas H. Vrolijk   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas T. Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objectives of this project are to clone and characterize                   
              induced cytochrome P450 cDNA(s) from hepatic tissue of the fish,               
              Chaetodon capistratus, and develop quantitative assays for                     
              cytochrome P450 mRNA and enzyme levels.  Induction of cytochrome               
              P450 gene expression will be characterized in C. capistratus using             
              two model substrates:  1) beta-naphthoflavone (beta-NF), a 3-                  
              methylcholanthrene type xenobiotic and 2) curcuhydroquinone, and               
              ichthyodeterrent allelochemical from the gorgonian coral,                      
              Pseudopterogorgia rigida.  Characterization utilizing the first                
              substrate will address the potential use of C. capistratus as an               
              environmental biomonitor in coral reef environments.                           
              Characterization utilizing the second substrate will address the               
              effect of an ichthyodeterrent allelochemical on P450 induction.                
              Taken together, the evolutionary relationship between                          
              detoxification of these two classes of foreign compounds can be                
              addressed.  Furthermore, the potentially confounding effect of                 
              dietary allelochemicals on xenobiotically induced P450 will be                 
              investigated.  Field sampling sites with and without recent                    
              polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) exposure will then test the              
              feasibility of using C. capistratus cytochrome induction as a                  
              biomonitor of environmental contamination.                                     
                                                                                             
              Coral reefs are ecologically and economically important                        
              environments which are increasingly being subjected to detrimental             
              anthropogenic influences, but effective monitoring mechanisms are              
              lacking.  Chronic, sublethal effects of pollution due to                       
              contamination by PAH and synthetic organic chemicals, though not               
              readily apparent, can become lethal.  The ability to detect low                
              levels of contaminants may be crucial for preventing long-term                 
              damage.  There are presently no molecular studies which have                   
              characterized a PAH-induced P450 in a tropical marine organism.                
              Characterization of C. capistratus P450 will not only add to our               
              knowledge of the diversity of this biologically important class of             
              enzymes, but more importantly will provide a molecular probe with              
              which to assess questions of ecological as well as environmental               
              significance with great sensitivity.  In particular, is cytochrome             
              P450 responsible for the ability of C. capistratus to feed on                  
              gorgonian corals which are otherwise defended by ichthyodeterrent              
              allelochemicals.  This finding has potentially broad significance              
              for understanding patterns of predation and herbivory in the marine            
              environment.  Molecular characterization of C. capistratus P450 and            
              the development of molecular probes to test the effects of                     
              chemicals at sublethal levels thus has applicability to important              
              environmental and ecological questions.
