Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: A Modified STM/AFM for Complex Fluid
               Investigations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1992    
File        : a9212790

Award Number: 9212790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35565              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Zasadzinski gorilla@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The proposal requests equipment to upgrade the scanning                        
              tunneling and atomic force microscopic capabilities in the                     
              PI's laboratory.  The PI currently possesses a Nanoscope II                    
              AFM/STM.  He proposes to construct a sealed chamber to contain                 
              the instrument that will allow constant temperature control,                   
              and will permit experiments to be undertaken at low vacuum and                 
              under a clean gas such as nitrogen or at a fixed humidity.  He                 
              also proposes to upgrade the Nanoscope II AFM/STM to a                         
              Nanoscope III; the upgrade instrument will allow for a larger                  
              scanning field while still maintaining excellent molecular                     
              resolution, and will also allow for the measurement of                         
              frictional forces as well as normal forces at the cantilever                   
              tip.  The PI also requests funds for the purchase of a image                   
              analysis system independent of the Nanoscope software which                    
              will enhance the visual inspection of images, and will enable                  
              better quantification of structure characteristics such as                     
              periodicity.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The PI uses the AFM/STM apparatus primarily to image self                      
              assembled monolayer and bilayers of amphiphillic molecules at                  
              fluid-fluid and fluid-solid interfaces with nanometer scale                    
              resolution.  The research activity of the PI in this area is                   
              of the highest quality, he has produced several notable                        
              achievements such as the identification of a ripple phase for                  
              the biological surfactant DMPC.  The fundamental imaging                       
              studies of bilayers and monolayers will lead to a better                       
              understanding of the relationship between the chemical                         
              structure of an amphophil and the structures it forms in self                  
              assembly.  This information is of importance in cell membrane                  
              research, and in the research on the technological                             
              applications of Langmuir-Blodgett films.  The upgrade for the                  
              existing equipment will significantly improve the quality and                  
              reproducability of the PI's studies.  With the environmental                   
              control upgrade, experiments in clean atmospheres can be                       
              undertaken which will remove capillary force effects arising                   
              from pendular bridges which can form at the cantilever tip.
