Title       : U.S.-Czech Mathematics Research on Symbolic Derivation, Analysis, and
               Programming of Finite Difference Schemes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1993     
File        : a9212433

Award Number: 9212433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11655              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanly L. Steinberg stanly@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 5930,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This US-Czech mathematics research project on                                  
              Symbolic Derivation, Analysis, and Programming                                 
              of Finite Difference Schemes is between Dr.                                    
              Stanly Steinberg of the University of New                                      
              Mexico and Dr. Richard Liska of the Czech                                      
              Technical University, Prague.  Their research                                  
              effort will extend the current symbolic                                        
              techniques used to study finite-difference                                     
              approximations.  The researchers hope to                                       
              improve the existing technology for analyzing                                  
              truncation errors and stability, and the                                       
              algorithms for generating code.  Cylindrical                                   
              decomposition algorithms will be used to study                                 
              a system of inequalities that arise in a Routh-                                
              Hurwitz problem obtained from the Von Neumann                                  
              stability condition.  Techniques for comparing                                 
              finite-diffence algorithms on non-orthogonal                                   
              grids will be developed.  The researchers will                                 
              pursue work with numerical diffusion and                                       
              dispersion, group velocities, stability of                                     
              boundary conditions, conservation laws, and                                    
              stability analysis via the energy method.  As a                                
              result of their collaboration, the researchers                                 
              expect to extend the FORTRAN-code generation                                   
              algorithms to a high-performance computing                                     
              environment for use in study of a five-                                        
              dimensional Fokker-Planck equation and the                                     
              three-dimensional Navier Stokes equation.                                      
                                                                                             
              This project in mathematics fulfills the                                       
              program objective of advancing scientific                                      
              knowledge by enabling leading experts in the                                   
              United States and Eastern Europe to combine                                    
              complimentary talents and pool research                                        
              resources in areas of strong mutual interest                                   
              and competence.
