Title       : The Public Interpretation of Biotechnological Risk
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1992  
File        : a9212306

Award Number: 9212306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50121              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susanna H. Priest susanna@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              The social production of scientific knowledge and media accounts               
              of that knowledge have received more scholarly attention than                  
              have the social processes through which readers and audiences                  
              without technical training interpret this information.  Risk                   
              communication issues relevant to newly emerging biotechnology                  
              highlight the importance of understanding how public opinion is                
              formed in this area, a process that may depend as much on ethical              
              and value considerations as on the assimilation of technical                   
              information.  This research is intended to develop empirical data              
              that will contribute to a better theoretical understanding of the              
              interaction between the scientific community, the public, and the              
              media.  Communicating scientific information to nontechnical                   
              publics can be analyzed as a problem in cross-cultural                         
              communication.  The study proposed will focus on media accounts                
              of biotechnology and associated risks and audience responses to                
              these accounts to generate a fuller understanding of the more                  
              general dynamics of how lay publics evaluate or interpret                      
              information on the risks associated with new science and new                   
              technology.  The research proposed will take place in two phases:              
              content analysis of newspaper coverage of medical and                          
              agricultural biotechnology, and focus group research to elucidate              
              the concerns that arise in actual social decision making                       
              situations involving these technologies.  The technique involves               
              assigning groups of subjects the task of reading a news article                
              about risks associated with a new development and reaching a                   
              group consensus on the acceptability of that risk.  Discussions                
              are tape recorded and both transcript analysis and analysis of                 
              post discussion questionnaires are used to gain insight into the               
              reasoning used.  In this study, results from content analysis of               
              recent news clippings will be used to select articles that cover               
              a variety of issues to form the basis for the focus group                      
              discussion.   There will be three groups of six participants each              
              who will consider each of six articles, for a total of 18 group                
              discussions.  Two groups will be composed of students and one of               
              adults.  The research will help to answer three sets of                        
              questions.  The first asks whether responses to media coverage of              
              biotechnology are similar to responses to other science or                     
              technology coverage.  The second asks whether the responses                    
              result from the coverage, or do readers' concerns shape their                  
              responses independently of the way the media cover the issues.                 
              The third asks what types of preexisting values, beliefs, and                  
              opinions are brought into the process, and in what ways?                       
              Presentation and discussion of results will occur in a campus                  
              seminar on risk, at national meetings, and in journal                          
              publications.
