Title       : Engineering Research Equipment: Multidimensional Gas Chromatography System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1992      
File        : a9212892

Award Number: 9212892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George P. Peterson                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13728              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas P. Cernansky cernansk@cbis.ece.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This equipment grant will be used to purchase a                                
              multidimensional gas chromatography system to support                          
              combustion research activities at Drexel University.  The                      
              complex analytical problems of separating the intermediates                    
              and products from the oxidation of fuel-like hydrocarbons                      
              require sophisticated chromatographic techniques.  Two                         
              complementary methodologies to provide these capabilities are                  
              capillary columns and computer-controlled programmed valve                     
              switching, also called multi-dimensional or "heart cutting"                    
              analysis. While capillary columns by themselves provide                        
              increased resolution, they have not been sufficient to                         
              separate very complicated mixtures of alkanes, olefins, and                    
              oxygenates.  To achieve separation, it is often necessary to                   
              use multiple columns which are switched into and out of the                    
              carrier gas during an analysis.  Further separation is often                   
              achieved by holding selected fractions of the gas sample in a                  
              column and backflushing this partial sample into a second                      
              analytical column.  This technique is called multidimensional                  
              gas chromatography and has been successfully applied to                        
              hydrocarbon oxidation studies.  The system to be purchased                     
              will permit implementation of these sophisticated separation                   
              techniques.  To allow analysis of permanent gases, the system                  
              will be configured to allow dual detector operation using both                 
              flame ionization and thermal conductivity detectors.                           
                                                                                             
              It is necessary to have a basic understanding of the oxidation                 
              and ignition characteristics of pure single component fuels                    
              and simple mixtures of these fuels before understanding of the                 
              oxidation and ignition characteristics of full-boiling range                   
              fuels can be developed.  This requires development of detailed                 
              kinetic mechanisms and verification using analysis techniques                  
              to assess the reaction intermediates and products formed                       
              during the combustion process.  The number of such species                     
              formed progressively increases with increasing molecular                       
              weight of the fuel.  Thus, determination of the large number                   
              of compounds involved using conventional gas chromatography                    
              becomes extremely difficult and tedious.  Use of                               
              multidimensional gas separation techniques greatly facilitates                 
              species identification for multicomponent samples and thus                     
              allows for basic research into the oxidation chemistry of                      
              realistic hydrocarbons of higher molecular weight.
