Title       : Surface Analytical Equipment for Investigation of Surface Reaction of
               Organometallic Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1992       
File        : a9212984

Award Number: 9212984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44937              (Estimated)
Investigator: Klavs F. Jensen kfjensen@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1403,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Surface reactions of organometallic compounds play an                          
              important role in growth of multilayered compound                              
              semiconductor structures by a variety of techniques including                  
              organometallic chemical vapor deposition (OMCVD), chemical                     
              beam epitaxy (CBE) and atomic layer epitaxy (ALE).  The                        
              synthesized compound semiconductor films such as AlGaAs, ZnSe                  
              and CdHgTe, in turn form the basis for advanced high-speed                     
              devices as well as solid state lasers and detectors.  High                     
              quality materials have been grown by trial and error                           
              approaches.  As applications continue to expand, the demand                    
              for increasingly more precisely controlled film stoichiometry                  
              and dopant concentrations requires improved understanding of                   
              basic growth processes.  Fundamental insight into                              
              organometallic surface reactions on compound semiconductors is                 
                                                                                             
              thus critical to the further development of thin film growth                   
              techniques and, implicitly, novel device applications.                         
              Identification of surface reaction mechanisms will also lead                   
              to improved process models suitable for reliable design of the                 
                                                                                             
              next generation of process equipment.                                          
                                                                                             
              This grant is for the purchase of Auger electron spectroscopy                  
              (AES), low energy electron diffraction (LEED), temperature                     
              programmed desorption (TPD) surface analytical equipment for                   
              research in vapor phase growth of compound semiconductors for                  
              advanced high speed and optoelectronic devices.  The equipment                 
                                                                                             
              will be incorporated into an existing ultra-high vacuum system                 
                                                                                             
              used for chemical beam epitaxy (CBE) of compound                               
              semiconductors and already equipped with in situ Fourier                       
              transform infrared spectroscopy.  The surface spectroscopy                     
              tools will be used in systematic investigations of the                         
              fundamental adsorption and desorption processes of group V and                 
                                                                                             
              VI organometallic species, as well as their surface reactions                  
              with group III and II species.  The chemical structures of the                 
                                                                                             
              ligand will be systematically varied to explore the                            
              relationship between chemical structure and reactivity.  The                   
              PI will also investigate the surface reactions of these                        
              compounds with common group II and III precursors to elucidate                 
                                                                                             
              the growth mechanisms underlying the synthesis of important                    
              binary compound semiconductors.  These experimental studies of                 
                                                                                             
              adsorption, surface reaction, and desorption processes of                      
              group V and VI organometallic reagents should provide new                      
              insight into the growth of compound semiconductors by vapor                    
              phase techniques such as CBE and low pressure OMCVD.  They                     
              should also lead to new fundamental understandings of the                      
              relationship between metal-ligand structure and surface                        
              reactivity useful in the design of novel precursors.
