Title       : REG: Equipment to Modernize a Subsonic Wind Tunnel for Gust Simulation and
               Measurment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1992  
File        : a9212953

Award Number: 9212953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Devendra P. Garg                        
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19526              (Estimated)
Investigator: Earl H. Dowell dowell@mail.ee.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deman Tang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A subsonic wind tunnel for gust simulation and measurement will                
              be modified and regimented  with a new control system. The gust                
              generator employed is a novel device based upon a recently                     
              patented concept, the rotation slotted cylinder. The control                   
              system and equipment will have wide applications for nonlinear                 
              aeroelastic investigations for aircraft and rotorcraft,                        
              especially for the application of aerodynamic feedback techniques              
              to reduce aircraft and rotorcraft response. There is also the                  
              potential for the use of this gust generator and associated                    
              control system to provide a novel and improve aerodynamic or wind              
              excitation source for scaled models of bridges and buildings. By               
              means of a wind-tunnel gust generator, the harmonic components of              
              aerodynamic loads acting on a rotating blade can be simulated on               
              a non-rotating blade model. Higher harmonic control (HHC)                      
              concepts for reducing blade vibration response can therefore be                
              investigated using the gust generator to produce aerodynamic                   
              excitation of the model at specified harmonics of a rotor blade                
              system. The rotor blade model feedback control system will be                  
              based either on a PC-based controller similar to that planned for              
              the gust generator system or on a simple analog feedback                       
              controller. Regardless of the controller, the system software                  
              will provide the ability to enter a simple control law algorithm               
              or coefficients.***      //
