Title       : Testing The "Drought Follows the Plow" Hypothesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1992    
File        : a9212216

Award Number: 9212216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87247              (Estimated)
Investigator: Will D. Swearingen   (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                 Despite periodic failures of farms and ranches in semi-arid regions         
              like the American Great Plains, a variety of factors seem to encourage         
              people to extend agricultural activities into environments where such          
              activities cannot be permanently sustained.  Some scholars have                
              formulated a theory of interactions called the "drought follows the            
              plow" hypothesis to characterize the ways that population pressure, the        
              shortage of arable new farmland, and other social and economic factors         
              stimulate the expansion of agriculture into marginal areas with low            
              rainfall, thereby increasing the vulnerability of those areas to               
              drought.  This project will assess the validity of those relationships         
              by examining factors related to incidences of drought in Morocco in            
              recent decades.  Among the variables that will be examined are the             
              spatial and temporal patterns of agricultural expansion and                    
              intensification; the changing mixes of cropland in drought-prone areas;        
              the demographic, social, political, governmental, economic, and                
              environmental factors related to agricultural change; and the socio-           
              economic impacts of specific episodes of drought.                              
                 This project will provide valuable new insights about the dynamics of       
              human impacts on and responses to changing natural environmental               
              conditions.  Of special value will be perspectives on the dynamic              
              ecological interactions among human activities and environmental               
              conditions, including drought; critical distinctions between the               
              physical and societal "causes" of drought; and variations in localized         
              (micro-scale) environmental interaction as opposed to more regional and        
              global (macro-scale) changes.  This project also will facilitate               
              collaboration between skilled young American scientists and scholars in        
              Morocco.
