Title       : The Units of Selection Problem in Evolutionary Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1992    
File        : a9212294

Award Number: 9212294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elliott Sober   (Principal Investigator current)
              David Sloan Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Evolutionists from Darwin to the present have discussed the problem            
              of the units of selection.  Darwin understood the issue as follows:            
              Do traits evolve because they benefit individual organisms or                  
              because they are good for the group in which they occur?  More                 
              recently, a third alternative has been proposed--that it isn't the             
              organism or the group that is the unit of selection; rather, traits            
              evolve because they benefit the genes that code for them.  This                
              issue becomes important because of the issue of evolutionary                   
              altruism.  An altruistic trait is none that reduces the fitness of             
              organisms that possess it while benefitting the group in which it              
              occurs.  Altruistic traits are bad for the individual but good for             
              the group.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              In the past ten years, there has been a considerable amount of                 
              interest among both philosophers and biologists in the unit of                 
              selection problem.  Some of their work has been in reaction to the             
              ideas presented by the two investigators in this project,                      
              specifically, Professor Wilson's study of 1980 and Professor                   
              Sober's work of 1984.  Under this grant, Professors Sober and                  
              Wilson are collaborating to evaluate the work over the past decade             
              and produce a synthetic treatment of where the conceptual issues               
              now stand.  They are also investigating possible connections                   
              between the issue of evolutionary altruism and selfishness and the             
              psychological issues and altruism and egoism.  Although the                    
              evolutionary  and psychological concepts are logically independent             
              of each other, the question remains of how one might argue for or              
              against theses concerning their empirical connection.
