Title       : Toward a Federal Theory of Partisanship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9212646

Award Number: 9212646
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Maggiotto   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Wekkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research involves the second wave of a panel study of the                 
              American electorate begun with federal funds at the university of              
              the researchers.  The project identifies the distribution,                     
              stability and roots of segmented partisanship and assesses its                 
              impact on the way in which Americans think about and react to                  
              politics, political institutions, and candidates.                              
                                                                                             
              The role of political parties in ordering democratic institutions              
              and in framing electoral choice has not been seriously questioned              
              since political scientist E.E. Schattschneider proclaimed, in 1942,            
              that " . . . modern democracy is unthinkable save in terms of the              
              parties."  Similarly, at the individual level, while its predictive            
              power has fluctuated over time, the centrality of party                        
              identification to any understanding of electoral turnout, vote                 
              direction, the assessment of candidates, the impact of issues, and             
              the role of ideology has never been seriously disputed.  If                    
              anything, the most productive research has enriched our                        
              appreciation of partisanship by demonstrating its                              
              multidimensionality.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The impact of federalism on the dimensionality of partisanship,                
              however, has been largely ignored.  Research has emphasized the                
              constancy of party identification within each citizen across levels            
              of government.  Because the scope and type of political decisions              
              often vary among levels of government, Americans may develop                   
              different expectations for the performance of government at                    
              different levels.  Hence, it is both logical and often appropriate             
              for voter approval, contempt, and indifference to be localized and             
              not fully generalizable across all levels of government.  Moreover,            
              when party programs and personalities are linked to level-based                
              performance expectations, variation in citizen response to those               
              programs and personalities should be an expected, not a surprising,            
              outcome.  In short, it should be anticipated that people will                  
              respond differently to the different powers and purposes of                    
              national and state government.                                                 
                                                                                             
              This second wave of interviews in the panel study of the American              
              electorate involves 1,350 respondents selected using random-digit              
              dialing and random selection within households.  It should allow               
              greater understanding of the way in which Americans think about and            
              react to politics, political institutions, and candidates.
