Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Velocity and Concentration Measurements in the
               Turbulent Jet and the Jet in Counterflow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1993 
File        : a9202425

Award Number: 9202425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Minami Yoda   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              51        Engineering-Aeronautical                
Program Ref : 1268,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Long and Medium-Term Research:  Velocity and Concentration                     
              Measurements in the Turbulent Jet and the Jet in Counterflow                   
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at                       
              Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S.                      
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                 
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the             
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and                       
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit             
              by Dr. Minami Yoda of Stanford to work with Dr. Heinrich                       
              Fiedler at the Technical University of Berlin.  Their research                 
              project involves development of techniques for the simultaneous                
              acquisition of two-dimensional concentration and velocity fields for           
              application in turbulent water flows.  This technique will initially           
              be developed in a fundamental flow, the axisymmetric jet, to                   
              evaluate its accuracy and applicability.  They will then use their             
              technique to investigate the jet in counterflow, a new flow which is           
              of interest because it displays transition from convective to absolute         
              instability.  In both cases their approach will involve marking the            
              flows first with flueorescent dye to measure the two-dimensional               
              (passive scalar) concentration field, then with neutrally buoyant              
              particles to measure the velocity field, and finally with a                    
              combination of the two to acquire both fields at once.  The results            
              from this new technique will clarify the role of convective mixing             
              in turbulent free shear flows.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel and a stipend for twelve months.
