Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Variable Coefficient Fourier Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1992       
File        : a9202489

Award Number: 9202489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher D. Sogge   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project continues mathematical research on problems in               
              Fourier analysis and partial differential equations which are                  
              related to the wave equation and microlocal analysis.  Included                
              are efforts to prove sharp norm-local smoothing estimates for the              
              wave equation in two dimensions, improving those obtained for                  
              dispersive equations.  Newly designed methods of microlocal                    
              analysis will play a major role here.  A primary application                   
              envisioned concerns embedding results for the spherical wave                   
              equation, establishing regularity properties of periodic                       
              solutions to nonlinear wave equations and possibly proving local               
              decay estimates for solutions to initial value problems for                    
              hyperbolic operators with a potential.                                         
                   A second project involves the Lebesgue and Hardy space                    
              mapping properties of Fourier-Airy operators and efforts to prove              
              sharp estimates for solutions to the wave equation in manifolds                
              with geodesically concave or convex boundaries.  This would                    
              extend recent results on Fourier integral operators which are                  
              locally a graph.  The obstacle which must be overcome is presence              
              of oscillatory integrals with singular phase functions.  This                  
              makes standard plane wave decompositions of solutions much more                
              delicate.                                                                      
                   The model for all of these problems is the study of Fourier               
              integral operators having the property that the projections from               
              the canonical relation to the cotangent spaces have Whitney                    
              folding singularities.                                                         
                   Work on this project concerns fundamental mathematical tools              
              related to the study of differential equations.  The equations                 
              are used to model natural phenomena and predict their changing                 
              characteristics as they evolve in time and space.
