Title       : Scientific Workstations for Research in Computationally- Intensive Econometric
               Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1992      
File        : a9202562

Award Number: 9202562
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Blackman                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137470             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. McFadden mcfadden@econ.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Ruud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The explosion in computer capacity in the past decade                     
              has been accompanied by a reorientation of econometrics                        
              toward using computer-intensive methods to reveal more about                   
              data and sharpen the inferences drawn.  Innovations have been                  
              particularly intense in the areas of semiparametric and                        
              nonparametric estimation,  use of resampling methods and                       
              cross-validation in parametric and nonparametric models,                       
              simulation methods for inference,  estimation of dynamic                       
              stochastic programming models,  and Bayesian methods.                          
              Translation of these methods into applications software and                    
              empirical econometrics has been uneven,  partly because                        
              computational capacity has not been generally available.                       
                   The primary objective of this project is to accelerate                    
              research on computationally intensive methods and                              
              applications,  and to encourage more rapid testing ,                           
              documentation,  and dissemination of algorithms.  It plans to                  
              provide UNIX workstations for a consortium of researchers                      
              working on computationally intensive econometrics,  and a                      
              common file server to facilitate access to software and data.                  
              In addition to the facilities at Berkeley, described in this                   
              core proposal,  there are subproposals from scholars at                        
              several other institutions who are working in the same area.                   
              The Berkeley file server will provide access not only for                      
              these scholars,  but also for others not included in this                      
              proposal,  to specialized software and data sets.                              
                   The technology which is planned for both the Berkeley                     
              research programs and the consortium computing facility is                     
              well suited to the computing demands.  It offers the promise                   
              of significant advances in theoretical econometric modelling                   
              methods.
