Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: On Middle Miocene Biogeography and Biostratigraphy in
               the Northern Rocky Mountains of Idaho, Montana, and Wyoming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1994  
File        : a9202597

Award Number: 9202597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51930              (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Harbert harbert@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor A. Schmidt  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project continues work on the effect of middle Miocene               
              tectonism on mammalian biogeographic patterns in the northern Rocky            
              Mountains.  The project will test hypotheses concerning the                    
              concordance between morphologic patterns, biogeographic patterns               
              and development of the Mid-Tertiary unconformity in Idaho, Montana,            
              and Wyoming.  The study will focus on interpreting the                         
              geochronologic and biogeographic patterns of the geomyoid rodents              
              (gophers, kangaroo rats, and such) from Barstovian deposits in 5               
              intermontane basins.  Geomyoid rodents are the focus because they              
              underwent a pronounced radiation just after the unconformity                   
              developed.  Computerized imaging and Geographic Information                    
              System techniques, combined with a cladistic approach, will be used            
              to analyze the biogeographic meaning of the abundant geomyoid                  
              dental remains from well-dated horizons in each of the basins, as              
              well as appropriate comparative material from other localities in              
              the Great Plains and Great Basin.  The research is of widespread               
              interest in (1) identifying the interplay between geologic and                 
              biotic processes on a timescale that has received little attention             
              (2-3 million years); (2) applying new paleontological techniques               
              (imaging and GIS) that allow us to address problems of interest to             
              both paleontologists (evolution, speciation) and geologists                    
              (chronology of basin formation) and (3) refining links of the                  
              magnetostratigraphic, vertebrate biochronologic, and radiometric               
              time scales in the middle Miocene, which is critical for                       
              understanding the tectonic evolution of the northern Rockies.
