Title       : Solvent Permeation, Swelling Profiles and Mechanical Properties of Thin Polymer
               Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1995     
File        : a9202413

Award Number: 9202413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria M. Santore   (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond A. Pearson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1444,9146,9161,9187,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This research will study thin siloxane and epoxy                          
              polymeric films which will be spin cast as linear chains onto                  
              a variety of substrates (sapphire, BK7 glass, and silica) to                   
              thicknesses of 50 nm to several microns, and then crosslinked                  
              to form a rigid structure. The study focuses specifically on                   
              the mechanisms by which these films uptake solvent, and how                    
              solvent permeation and swelling affects the adhesion of the                    
              film to the substrate, and the membrane mechanics.                             
                                                                                             
                   Solvent permeation will be studied using total internal                   
              reflectance fluorescence  (TIRF), a technique in which the                     
              substrate onto which the film is adhered is placed on an                       
              optical prism, and a laser beam impinges at a  grazing angle                   
              to the substrate /polymer film surface producing  an                           
              exponentially decaying evanescent wave which penetrates                        
              through the film. By varying the angle of incidence, different                 
              penetration depths can be achieved. Using TIRF,  two types of                  
              experiments will be undertaken.   In the first, diffusion of a                 
              free dye into an equilibrium swollen film or a partially                       
              swollen film will be followed by placing a chromophore on the                  
              dye. The radiation due to the evanescent wave causes the                       
              chromophore to fluoresce, and by detection of the total                        
              fluorescence of the film as a function of the penetration                      
              depth (by changing the grazing angle), the dye concentration                   
              can be computed by deconvolution (cf. eq. 3). By repeating the                 
              TIRF angling as a function of time, the time dependent                         
              concentration profile of the dye can be constructed.  In the                   
              second type of experiment,  the polymer network of an                          
              unswollen film will be tagged. The face of the film will then                  
              be exposed to a permeating solvent, and as the film swells due                 
              to the solvent uptake, the polymer chains will deform and the                  
              concentration of the tag will vary.  Again, by using time                      
              resolved TIRF angling, the time dependent concentration                        
              profile of the labels can be computed, and from these, insight                 
              into the spatial distribution of the labels during swelling                    
              can be obtained. The dynamical mechanical response of the                      
              membrane will be measured, and a microhardness tester will be                  
              used to determine the bond between the polymer film and the                    
              substrate.
