Title       : Laboratory for Applied Manufacturing Controls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1996      
File        : a9202885

Award Number: 9202885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ming C. Leu                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1040000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin F. DeVries devries@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil A. Duffie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry L. Sanders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Lorenz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Slawomir A. Spiewak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This award is intended to facilitate a multi-disciplinary                 
              effort to integrate the various research activities in the area of             
              manufacturing controls in a manner that focusses these efforts with            
              greater emphasis and efficiency.  Research activities to be pursued            
              will include, but not be limited to, motion controllers for                    
              precision and sensorless actuators, predictive monitoring and                  
              diagnostics systems for manufacturing equipment, Linear Induction              
              Motor (LIM) based manufacturing equipment and the surface                      
              measurement and processing of sculptured surfaces.  Further                    
              projects that will have a significant impact on manufacturing in               
              the United States will be identified by the research team in close             
              consultation with industry and the research community.  All these              
              projects will be closely coupled with the Manufacturing Systems and            
              Engineering program to enable the transfer of the results of the               
              research activity to the classroom.  Technology transfer to the                
              industrial sector will be an essential part of the activity.                   
                   The integration of multiple investigators into a team focussed            
              on research in the area of manufacturing controls will assist in               
              the research and development of new solutions to traditional                   
              problems in manufacturing.  Significant long-term benefit could be             
              derived if this is successfully coupled with technology transfer               
              in the classroom and to the industry sector.
