Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Population Ecology of Marine Specialist
               Herbivores on New Zealand Rocky Shores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1992       
File        : a9202846

Award Number: 9202846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia D. Trowbridge   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1650,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Long & Medium-Term Research:  Population Ecology of Marine                     
              Specialist Herbivores on New Zealand Rocky Shores                              
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at                       
              Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S.                      
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                 
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the             
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and                       
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit             
              by Dr. Cynthia D. Trowbridge to visit Dr. Robert Creese at the                 
              University of Auckland, Leigh Marine Laboratory.                               
                                                                                             
              Dr. Trowbridge proposed to study the population ecology of                     
              oligophagous ascoglossan sea slugs (Mollusca:  Gastropoda:                     
              Opisthobranchia).  She has already documented the population                   
              ecology of several species of intertidal ascoglossans in the N.E.              
              Pacific.  She now proposes to collect complementary information                
              for three ecologically similar species in the Hauraki Gulf region of           
              the North Island of New Zealand to address the following three                 
              questions.  First, do ascoglossans seasonally reduce algal host                
              abundances?  Second, does interspecific competition among                      
              generalist and specialist herbivores reduce the effect of ascoglossan          
              herbivory?  Third, do fish and crab predators significantly reduce             
              ascoglossan densities in the field?  This study will provide valuable          
              information about the role of marine specialists on temperate rocky            
              shores.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel, a stipend for twelve months, and a dependent allowance.
