Title       : Chemical Synthesis in the Barium-Titanate System: Controlling the Chemical to
               Ceramic Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1994  
File        : a9202565

Award Number: 9202565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick K. Gallagher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1774,9161,9294,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal outlined a program which will introduce chemical                 
              synthesis methods in the Ba-Ti-O system.  It will use an array of              
              characterization techniques to provide a molecular understanding of            
              the formation of Ba-Ti-O ceramics.   It will also correlate the                
              microstructure and properties of sintered ceramic specimens                    
              prepared from these powders.  Effects of chemical composition,                 
              substitution, doping and impurities on the nucleation and growth               
              behavior of these precursors during decomposition will be examined             
              using thermal analysis techniques (DTA, TG, and EGA) and hot-stage             
              x-ray diffraction.  Paralle; electron energy loss spectroscopy                 
              (PEELS) will correlate these changes with small variations in                  
              chemical structure.  Electron diffraction will be used to identify             
              emerging, and possibly transient, phases.  Optical spectroscopy                
              will investigate the mechanism of ceramic formation from the                   
              chemical matrix.  Low to very high frequency dielectric                        
              measurements will monitor the properties and  microstructures of               
              the ceramics.                                                                  
              %%%%                                                                           
              This project proposes to investigate the influence of the chemical             
              state on final products through a novel combination of analytical              
              techniques situated at the interface boundaries between chemistry              
              and ceramics.  Chemical and structural parameters will be evaluated            
              in the compounds existing in-between the chemical and the ceramic              
              states.  An array of techniques are used to investigate this                   
              problem.  This project can provide a molecular understanding of the            
              ceramic formation.  The Ba-Ti-O system is selected for study.                  
              Information from this project can reveal a great deal about the                
              formation mechanisms.   This type of knowledge will lead directly              
              to improvements in the processing as well as in the new compounds.
