Title       : Novel Growth and Processing Technologies for Non-Planar Epitaxy and
               Selective-Areas Strained Layer Epitaxy of Photonic and Electronic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1995        
File        : a9202290

Award Number: 9202290
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven P. DenBaars denbaars@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Evelyn L. Hu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9161,9294,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Complementary, novel growth and processing techniques for photonic and         
              electronic materials are being investigated.  Metalorganic chemical            
              vapor deposition (MOCVD)-based growth on non-planar substrates can give        
              rise to innovative, three-dimensional device concepts.  Selective layer        
              epitaxy onto pre-patterned substrates can be used to extend the amount         
              of strain and lattice mismatch possible for defect-free                        
              heterostructures.  High quality regrowth necessitates clean, defect free       
              surfaces, which imposes constraints in the concomitant etch processes          
              used. This research utilizes largely ion-free, dry chemical cleaning and       
              etch processes.  In both materials growth and etching, laser-induced           
              processing to extend the process control possible is being explored.           
              Laser-assisted atomic layer epitaxy will be used to obtain self-               
              limiting, monolayer control of grown layers.  Laser-induced                    
              photoelectrochemical dry etching will be studied in order to achieve           
              highly controlled, bandgap selective dry etching of heterostructures.          
              %%%                                                                            
              Modern electronic and optical semiconductor devices impose increasingly        
              stringent demands on the materials and processes used to form them.  The       
              research proposed here, utilizes laser controlled materials deposition,        
              low-damage laser-induced etching and extensive process monitoring,             
              allowing greater inherent process control.  Moreover, the innovative           
              approach of growth on previously sculpted structures allows a truly            
              three dimensional approach to device and circuit formation allowing            
              higher ultimate device density in integrated circuits.
