Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some Topics in Generalized RegressionModels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1994     
File        : a9202857

Award Number: 9202857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. Pierce   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dawn M. Peters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel W. Schafer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   For generalized linear models, including those for survival               
              analysis, improved asymptotic methods based on saddlepoint and                 
              related methods will be developed and evaluated.  These improve-               
              ments are a natural extension of the asymptotic methods ordinari-              
              ly used for generalized linear models and should come into                     
              routine use to verify or to improve on application of standard                 
              methods.  Aside from practical import, these developments provide              
              insight into the basic nature of asymptotic methods particularly               
              in regard to the effects of nuisance parameters.  Closely related              
              Laplace approximations will also be developed for likelihood                   
              calculations in generalized mixed linear models involving                      
              additional random effects in linear predictors.                                
                   Statistical regression models relate a response variable to               
              a set of explanatory variables and factors or attributes.  A                   
              major development in statistics during the past 15 years has been              
              the expansion of classical regression modeling to a much broader               
              field of applications often involving more complicated dependen-               
              cies on the explanatory variables and factors.  The aim of this                
              project is to continue the development of this broader theory for              
              generalized regression modeling, emphasizing two directions:                   
              first, improvement on necessary approximations in the analysis                 
              calculations and second, allowance for still more general                      
              dependencies reflected in the variability of the data.
