Title       : RUI: Path-integral Simulations of Solids - Ordered and Disordered
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1992      
File        : a9202907

Award Number: 9202907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Roger Cowley   (Principal Investigator current)
              George K. Horton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              The effects of anharmonicity and of atomic disorder on the                     
              vibrational properties of crystals are to be studied by means of               
              simulation and other computational techniques.  Molecular dynamics             
              simulations will be used to study the structure in phonon                      
              lineshapes arising from both sources.  These will be supplemented              
              by lattice dynamical calculations using theories such as the                   
              coherent potential approximation for disordered crystals.                      
              Previous studies of the thermodynamic properties of quantum                    
              anharmonic solids will be continued.  The primary technique here               
              will be the effective-potential Monte Carlo procedure which has                
              recently been developed, as well as quantum Monte Carlo for                    
              comparison.  We also intend to explore the extension of the                    
              effective potential method to deal with dynamical properties.                  
              Disordered materials to be studied will include mixtures of the                
              alkali halides, noble metal alloys and iron-based alloys.  The                 
              quantum solids will include the high pressure phases of helium.                
              %%%                                                                            
              This award is a Research at Undergraduate Institution one to                   
              conduct computational studies of the properties of solids which are            
              affected by anharmonic vibrations and disorder associated with the             
              underlying atomic structure.  Materials to  be studied include                 
              alkali halide mixtures and metal alloys.
