Title       : RUI: Variation in the Dispersal of Fertilizing Sperm as a Function of Population
               Density
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1994      
File        : a9202805

Award Number: 9202805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93560              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip O. Yund   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/286-6000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              I seek funding to explore the impact of variation in population                
              density on the dispersal distance of fertilizing sperm (those                  
              sperm that successfully fertilize an egg, as opposed to all of                 
              the sperm that are released) and the incidence of multiple                     
              paternity in a colonial ascidian.  Work to date has demonstrated               
              that:                                                                          
                   1) Sperm concentration in the field decreases rapidly with                
                   distance from isolated males.                                             
                                                                                             
                   2) The fertilization rate of eggs is a function of sperm                  
                   concentration.                                                            
                                                                                             
              These preliminary data suggest that the dispersal distance of                  
              fertilizing sperm when multiple males are contributing to                      
              fertilization will be much shorter than the distances previously               
              reported for isolated males.  If the probability of a given male               
              fertilizing an egg is proportional to the concentration of his                 
              sperm relative to that of other males, then the dispersal                      
              distance of fertilizing sperm will decrease as population density              
              increases.  As a consequence, more males may participate in the                
              fertilization of each female at higher population densities,                   
              leading to an increase in multiple paternity within a brood of                 
              larvae.  I propose to test these hypotheses by establishing                    
              populations of ascidians with known genetic markers at different               
              densities and conducting paternity analyses to assay the                       
              paternity of brooded larvae after fertilization has occurred.                  
              This study will contribute to our knowledge of benthic marine                  
              organisms by examining the potential for variation in population               
              density to impact aspects of population structure such as                      
              interbreeding population size, levels of inbreeding, relatedness               
              of neighboring individuals or colonies, and gene flow among sub-               
              populations.
