Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Upstate New York Topology Seminar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9202598

Award Number: 9202598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Douglas R. Anderson will work on several problems in the                  
              areas of boundedly controlled topology and its applications.                   
              Some of the problems are designed to expand the uses of the                    
              methods of boundedly controlled topology by applying them to                   
              problems in other areas, while others lie entirely within the                  
              domain of boundedly controlled topology itself.  Attempts to                   
              expand the scope of the methods are intended to demonstrate their              
              relevance and clarify their limitations and may expose additional              
              questions within the subject which need to be addressed.  The                  
              problems within the area itself represent extensions of research               
              already done by Anderson and H. J. Munkholm of Odense, Denmark.                
              The objectives are to understand more clearly the exact                        
              relationship between this part of topology and the versions of                 
              controlled topology introduced by such other researchers as T. A.              
              Chapman, S. C. Ferry, and F. S. Quinn, and, if necessary, to                   
              enlarge the body of foundational results within boundedly                      
              controlled topology.                                                           
                   Topology is the study of properties of geometric objects                  
              which are not destroyed by continuous transformations, such                    
              properties as connectedness, knottedness, and so forth.                        
              Topological properties are as basic and ubiquitous as the more                 
              familiar geometric properties of length and area, but they call                
              for entirely different techniques to deal with them.  By now the               
              topology of high dimensions has been intensively developed, and                
              the array of techniques available is quite extensive.  From time               
              to time in the development of a subject, it becomes necessary to               
              organize its methods to make them more readily available to                    
              others and easier to pass on to future generations which will                  
              wish to use them without having been directly involved in their                
              invention.  Such a time has arisen in high dimensional topology,               
              and the boundedly controlled approach is a natural codifying                   
              principle that is proving useful in making order in the toolbox,               
              so to speak.
