Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic Topology and Its Interactions With
               Representation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1994  
File        : a9202052

Award Number: 9202052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Ando   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas J. Kuhn  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Although historically distinct, algebraic topology, group                 
              theory, and representation theory have increasingly interacted.                
              Algebraic K-theory and work on classifying spaces of finite groups             
              are good examples of this.  Professor Kuhn has long been interested            
              in such overlaps, most recently in his work relating Steenrod                  
              algebra technology to group representation theory.  Here he will               
              study various topics in this spirit.  One project consists of using            
              his representation theoretic tools to study some very classical                
              types of topological realization questions.  Another consists of               
              using these same tools to study state-of-the-art questions in                  
              algebraic K-theory.  A third involves applying algebraic K-                    
              theoretic methods to the group ring isomorphism problem.                       
                   The details of these three parts vary, but all are concerned              
              either with reducing geometric information to a subject for                    
              calculation or to perfecting one of the principal algebraic tools              
              used for this purpose.  The nature of the geometric information                
              involved is the crux of the difficulty.  While questions about                 
              lengths, areas, angles, volumes, and so forth virtually cry out to             
              be reduced to calculations, it is far different with what are known            
              as topological properties of geometric objects.  These are                     
              properties such as connectedness (being all in one piece),                     
              knottedness, having no holes, and so forth.  All systematic study              
              of such properties, for example, how to tell whether two geometric             
              objects really differ in respect to one of these properties or are             
              only superficially different, or how to classify the variety of                
              differences that can occur, all these have only truly been                     
              comprehended and mastered when they have been reduced to matters of            
              calculation.  Algebraic K-theory has been developed into a major               
              tool for this purpose, and the interplay between the algebra and               
              the topology involved remains a fascinating subject.
