Title       : Biological Synthesis and Materials Properties of Bacterial Polyesters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1994     
File        : a9202419

Award Number: 9202419
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Clinton Fuller   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Lenz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Goodwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1773,9108,9162,9165,9181,9295,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research program would elucidate the molecular and                
              supermolecular processes involved in the intracellular synthesis of            
              reserve polyesters by bacteria and their intracellular and                     
              exocellular depolymerization by enzymes.  Specific goals of the                
              program include:  (1) an understanding of the cellular transport               
              processes and biochemical reactions involved in the utilization of:            
              (a) good-growth good-polymer producing substrates, (b) good-growth             
              non-producing substrates, and (c) non-growth substrates, especially            
              in the cometabolism of mixtures of (a)+(b) and of (a)+(c) by which             
              the coploymers from the non-productive substrates, (b) and (c), are            
              produced; (2) an understanding of the enzymatic processes involved             
              in polymer formation within the granule, especially the number,                
              activity and location of the polymerase enzymes and the ability of             
              isolated granules to participate in extracellular polymerization               
              reactions; (3) an understanding of the interaction between                     
              depolymerase enzymes and individual polymer molecules, especially              
              on solid surfaces.  Additional goals of the program include the                
              following: (i) to prepare entirely new, non-natural polyesters and             
              evaluate their materials properties (including biodegradability) as            
              plastics or elastomers; (ii) to contribute to the basic                        
              understanding of the biochemistry of cometabolism by using polymer             
              production as a model system; and (iii) to isolate and characterize            
              the intracellular polymerase and depolymerase enzymes excreted by              
              bacteria and fungi that can utilize these polyesters as growth                 
              substrates in their biodegradation in natural environments.                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Polyesters have proven to be extremely versatile thermoplastics in             
              wide use in many industrial products.  They can be fabricated into             
              films, fibers and molded products.  Polyester can also be used for             
              packaging as well as in pure form, or when blended with wool,                  
              cotton, etc., for clothing material.  These products produced                  
              chemically from petroleum provide many useful and indeed necessary             
              items for industrial and medical uses.  However, because they are              
              synthetic organic chemicals from petroleum distallates, they are               
              not biodegradable in any known current process and waste disposal              
              of these products is an increasing problem world wide.                         
              Polyesters of identical chemical makeup and properties can be made             
              by a large number of bacteria.  Because they are made by enzymes in            
              cells as opposed to chemical synthesis, they produce stereoregular             
              polymers which are fully biodegradable.  Essentially, these                    
              bacteria use biosynthetic polyesters as food.  Theoretically these             
              polyesters can be treated for disposal like any organic waste.  We             
              will be undertaking a study of the enzymatic mechanisms of                     
              degradation of these new biomaterials.  In addition we have shown              
              that these bacterial or "natural" polyesters have many new and                 
              potential properties that cannot be duplicated by chemical                     
              synthesis.  For instance we have discovered a bacterium that can               
              synthesize a polyester that is an elastomer, i.e. it behaves like              
              rubber.  The use of such a product in the production of many items--           
              surgical gloves for example that are biodegradable or diapers with             
              biodegradable plastics liners would be a big advance in solving the            
              plastic waste disposal problem.
