Title       : Acquisition of a Solids Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1992      
File        : a9202755

Award Number: 9202755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren T. Ford wtford@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew J. Mort  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward T. Knobbe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Corinna L. Czekaj  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project provides  an Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)                     
              spectrometer with a 300 MHz, 7 Tesla, wide bore magnet, dedicated              
              to the fundamental investigation of a wide variety of solid                    
              materials.  NMR spectroscopy is the only tool available for the                
              characterization of the molecular structures of many noncrystalline            
              and nanocrystalline solids. The fundamental structures of ternary              
              chalcopyrite compounds having potential applications as catalysts,             
              ceramics, and optical materials will be analyzed.  The structures              
              of solid state laser and nonlinear optical materials containing                
              dyes, nonlinear optical polymers, and semiconductor quantum dots               
              prepared by sol-gel methods from siliconal koxides, from mixed                 
              metal alkoxides, and from mixtures of alkoxides and organic                    
              polymers will also be analyzed.  Additional studies of                         
              polymer-silica composites and polymer liquid crystals, composites              
              of colloidal silica crystals in noncrystalline polymers, and                   
              nonlinear optical polymers will be studied.  Yet another project               
              includes studies of modified sol-gel derived hosts as solid state              
              laser and nonlinear optical materials, solid state laser materials             
              using mixed organic/inorganic polymer hosts, and nonlinear optical             
              materials based on active dopants in a sol-gel derived host.  A                
              study of the structures of plant cell walls is also planned.                   
              Knowledge of the chemical structures will aid in understanding the             
              properties and functions of the materials and in the design of                 
              synthetic materials with improved performance.  The instrument will            
              be shared by four faculty and several other users within the                   
              university, as well as a few  individuals from outside the                     
              university.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The instrument will also be equipped with two 5 kHz magic angle                
              spinning probes.  There are presently two liquids spectrometers and            
              one multinuclear NMR.  This will be the only solids NMR capability             
              in the State of Oklahoma.
