Title       : International Study of Acoustically Significant Rooms in North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1995   
File        : a9202905

Award Number: 9202905
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  1992  
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary W. Siebein   (Principal Investigator current)
              Harold W. Doddington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This research will provide funding for participation by a team of              
              experts from the U.S. in an international study of acoustically                
              significant rooms in North America.  Objectives of the research                
              are:                                                                           
              1. The acoustical conditions in many significant rooms in North                
              America will be characterized in detail by the new measures of                 
              acoustical quality.                                                            
              2. Comparisons of the simultaneous measurements made by three                  
              research teams will test the acceptability of the draft of ISO 3382            
              standard for the new impulse response type of acoustical                       
              measurements regarding many specifics of the data acquisition and              
              analysis process.                                                              
              3. The comparisons of the different measurement techniques would               
              also allow the extensive data base of detailed acoustical                      
              measurements for the statistical modeling of room acoustics with               
              the architectural properties of the rooms on an unprecedented                  
              scale.  These models based on an extremely large sample would                  
              provide a deeper understanding of the build-up and decay of sounds             
              in complex rooms and the fundamental relationships among acoustical            
              measurements and architectural properties of rooms.                            
              4. High quality impulse responses from multiple source and receiver            
              locations would be gathered in each room studied.                              
                                                                                             
              The results of this research will have a major and immediate impact            
              on the state of architectural acoustics.  the scientific basis for             
              acoustical decision-making in the design of buildings will be                  
              greatly expanded.  The active participation of the acoustical                  
              consulting community (evidenced by their financial support of the              
              project) would also allow for the rapid translation of the research            
              results into everyday design practice.
