Title       : Biomineralization Processes on Natural and Synthetic Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9202775

Award Number: 9202775
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Galen D. Stucky stucky@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul K. Hansma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel E. Morse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1762,9108,9161,9162,9178,9251,9295,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Biomineralized materials such as molluscan shells are complex                  
              lamellar aggregates of inorganic single crystals and biopolymers               
              that form at low temperature with exceptional strength and                     
              crystalline ordering.  The biosynthesis process gives and                      
              incredible regularity to 1) inorganic and protein structure at                 
              nanoscale (atomic) dimensions, and 2) the initiation and                       
              termination of growth at mesoscale  (is greater than                           
              approximately 0.1 microns) dimensions, thus generating the highly              
              ordered microlaminate composite formation that gives the                       
              resulting biomaterial its strength and flexibility.  This                      
              interdisciplinary research will investigate the fundamental                    
              chemical and stereochemical interactions which, at the molecular               
              level control such biologically mediated mineral nucleation and                
              growth at both the nano- and mesostructure level.  Nucleation and              
              growth of inorganic phases will be carried out from solutions at               
              low temperatures and pressures on:  i) inorganic and biological                
              mineral templates; ii) synthetic organic templates with optically              
              active groups and surface arrays of ionic sites similar to those               
              found on biopolymeric templating surfaces in vivo; and iii)                    
              biogenic templating polypeptides.  The proposed experiments will               
              use a novel combination of synthesis and characterization                      
              techniques, including polypeptide sequencing and synthesis to                  
              form structure directing templates, in situ atomic force                       
              microscopy and grazing incidence X-ray diffraction.                            
              %%%                                                                            
              Nature's use of templating involves material growth from                       
              solutions at low temperatures and pressures, a process that is                 
              currently only poorly understood  and little used by materials                 
              scientists.  Increasingly, it is becoming apparent that these new              
              materials, which have been referred to as "chemically bonded                   
              ceramics", have exceptional flexural strength.  The proposed                   
              activity of this research is expected to lead to the development               
              of new methods for the low temperature synthesis of mechanically               
              superior and/or highly oriented materials using nanostructure                  
              design and synthesis techniques.  It is hoped that as more light               
              is shed on templating mechanisms involved, templating kinetics                 
              will be improved and template-directed materials synthesis can be              
              done on a faster time scale.                                                   
                                                                                             
              While the research will initially be centered around the                       
              mineralization processes of molluscs, which specifically involves              
              CaCO3 growth, all multicellular organisms appear to have evolved               
              with chemically similar tools for carrying out genetic control                 
              over mineral nucleation and growth.  We therefore expect that our              
              experimentation will increase insight on related areas of                      
              biomineralization, including bone growth.  By more fully                       
              realizing how mineralization is orchestrated in one particular                 
              species, the answers to more complex biomineralization problems                
              will surely follow.  Implications of our results for the medical               
              field are foreseeable; bone nucleation growth is based on the                  
              same fundamental chemical and structural interactions as occurs                
              in mollusc shells, except that the nucleating macromolecules are               
              part of a bilipid membrane which encloses the mineralization                   
              space.  Thus, the study of hydroxyapatite nucleation onto such                 
              lipid  bilayer surfaces may follow.  On the other hand, a greater              
              understanding of soluble growth inhibitors can be useful for the               
              prevention of undesirable crystal growth.  Medical examples                    
              include dental plaque, organ stones, hardening of the arteries,                
              and calcification of implanted heart valves.  In industrial                    
              cooling systems, oil recovery systems, and municipal water                     
              supplies, undesirable water-formed scale deposits of CaCO3 and                 
              CaSO4 foul treatment facilities.  New organic compounds may                    
              inhibit scale formation, be cost effective, and be useful over a               
              larger range of temperatures, pH, and salinity.
