Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Models of Cell Population Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1994       
File        : a9202550

Award Number: 9202550
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn F. Webb webbgf00@ctrvax.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator will study the linear and nonlinear partial              
              differential equations of structured models of cell population                 
              dynamics.  The equations model growth and treatment of normal and              
              tumor cell populations.  The models use age and size as structure              
              variables to track individual cells through the cell cycle.  The               
              models involve systems of equations to account for interaction                 
              between proliferating and quiescent or drug-resistant cell                     
              subpopulations.  The objective of the research is to obtain                    
              qualitative information about the behavior of the solutions of                 
              the equations.  Such behavior includes asynchronous exponential                
              growth of early growth stage tumors, quiescence as a mechanism in              
              Gompertzian type growth in late stage tumors, comparison of                    
              continuous and periodic treatment, and resonances in phase-                    
              specific periodic treatment.  The methods of the research use                  
              spectral theory of linear operators, semigroup theory of linear                
              and nonlinear operators in Banach lattices, and nonlinear                      
              perturbation techniques.                                                       
                   The project uses mathematical modelling and numerical                     
              simulation to understand essential biological features of cell                 
              population growth.  Inherent qualitative features of population                
              growth processes can be revealed by these mathematical models.                 
              The complexity of the population processes requires sophisticated              
              mathematical models incorporating individual cell behavior.  The               
              significance of this research lies both in the development of                  
              mathematical methods to analyze structured population models and               
              in the identification of the qualitative features of these models              
              that have potential biological applicability.  Results of the                  
              project may shed light on the behavior of tumors.
