Title       : Distribution and Survival of Cod Larvae in Relation to Hydrography on Georges
               Bank
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1995    
File        : a9202061

Award Number: 9202061
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153406             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Townsend   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9202061  Townsend        This project will investigate the "distributional
              histories" of  larval cod on Georges Bank during the spring and early summer 
              period of developing thermal stratification.  The period of thermal 
              stratification is a time during which the intricacies of larval cod  vertical
              and areal distributions may hold important implications  for survival and
              ultimately recruitment.  This project will utilize  a new technique of otolith
              analyses (Sr/Ca ratios), which has  recently been developed, to hindcast the
              temperature histories, and  hence distributional histories (that is from the
              time of hatching  to capture), of individual cod larvae collected in various 
              hydrographic regimes in the Georges Bank area.  The technique will  be advanced
              by employing a new technology, electron energy loss  spectroscopy, which will
              increase the resolution of the Sr/Ca  technique to a level capable of resolving
              sub-daily temperature  histories.  These analyses could reveal diel vertical
              migrations  into or through a thermocline.    Larval cod are believed to be
              more closely associated with the  stratified waters on the sides of Georges
              Bank than the tidally  mixed waters on top of the Bank, and are transported
              around Georges  Bank and to the southwest with the residual circulation.  The 
              abundances of their zooplankton prey are also more abundant on the  stratified
              side of the thermal front in early spring, and the  larvae are often associated
              with the depth of maximum prey  abundance in the thermocline.  Later in the
              year the late larvae  and early juveniles are on the top of the Bank, where
              zooplankton  densities become greater than on the flanks.  The exact nature of 
              the vertical and areal distributions of the larvae in relation to  mixed and
              stratified waters may be very important with regard to  horizontal transport
              processes, temperature effects on growth, and  the availability of zooplankton
              prey items.  This project will  employ new technology to examine the
              distributions of cod larvae  a nd will form a collaborative link with an
              already-funded study  (NOAA) that focuses on the physics of the vernal
              stratification  process as it relates to the complete suite of zooplankton, and
              the  distribution, growth and condition of cod and haddock larvae, thus  making
              for a strong interdisciplinary program.   ***
