Title       : Deposition of AlN Films from Organoaluminum-Nitrogen Compounds: A Paradigm for
               CVD from Single-Source Precursors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1995 
File        : a9202973

Award Number: 9202973
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard V. Interrante interl@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Hudson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles W. Gillies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,9294,
Abstract    :
              This award is made in the Special Projects Office of the                       
              Chemistry Division under the Materials Synthesis and Processing                
              Initiative. The research will address the problem of formation                 
              of thin films of compound materials by chemical vapor                          
              deposition (CVD) from organometallic precursors. The intent is                 
              to correlate the basic gas phase and surface chemical behavior                 
              of the precursors with the structure and purity of the                         
              resulting films, and with the efficiency of precursor                          
              conversion to final product. The system to be investigated is                  
              the production of AlN films from organoaluminum-ammonia or                     
              -amide precursors containing aluminum and nitrogen in the                      
              correct stoichiometric ratio. The gas phase and surface                        
              chemistry of these precursors will be studied using a                          
              combination of mass spectrometry with time-of-flight                           
              measurements of product species, and pulsed beam Fourier                       
              transform microwave spectroscopy.  Thin film deposition will be                
              carried out in a cold-wall, hot-stage CVD system.  Films formed                
              in this system and in the course of the surface chemistry                      
              studies will be characterized by a range of surface and                        
              analytical techniques to determine their composition, structure                
              and orientational relationships.                                               
              %%%                                                                            
              This study will provide a comprehensive picture of the steps                   
              leading from precursor to film in AlN deposition, and in the                   
              process identify the critical reaction steps controlling                       
              composition and structure. This information can also be used in                
              the design of improved precursor systems for AlN as well as                    
              serving as a paradigm for the CVD of other electronic and                      
              ceramic systems.
