Title       : Pelagic to Benthic Coupling in Lobster (Homarus americanus) Recruitment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1996    
File        : a9202760

Award Number: 9202760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172599             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lewis S. Incze lincze@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Rates of larval settlement may be a major determinant of                       
              subsequent year-class size for many benthic invertebrates.  Often              
              it is difficult, however, to elucidate the relative importance of              
              pre- and post-settlement processes to spatial and temporal                     
              variability in recruitment.  The American lobster, Homarus                     
              americanus, recruits from a pelagic postlarva to shelter-                      
              providing benthic substrata, but little is understood about the                
              regulating factors or the consequences of this process.  We plan               
              to study the linkage from late pelagic to early benthic phase                  
              along the central coast of Maine, where shallow subtidal cobble                
              provides prime recruitment habitat.  Our collaborative studies                 
              from 1989-1991 suggest that lobster recruitment at some sites may              
              be limited by larval supply, whereas others may be limited by the              
              availability of suitable habitat.  We intend to use an                         
              experimental approach at two sites that consistently represent                 
              the extremes in recruitment density despite apparent                           
              similarities of their habitat.  At these sites we will use                     
              habitat manipulations and postlarval seeding experiments to test               
              the influence of postlarval supply, habitat quality, and density-              
              dependent processes on benthic recruitment.  Hydrographic data                 
              will be collected to examine possible differences in                           
              stratification as well as absolute temperature structure that may              
              influence postlarval diving behavior.
