Title       : Retrospective Determination of Atlantic Croacker Migration Through Laser-Based
               Elemental Analysis of Otoliths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1993      
File        : a9202937

Award Number: 9202937
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia M. Jones cjones@odu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Year to year variations in the number of fish which survive the                
              first year of life (termed recruitment or year class strength) are             
              often sufficient to control the success or failure of the fishery              
              a few years later.  Despite the scientific and economic benefits               
              which would result if year class strength could be estimated before            
              fish reached a marketable size, recruitment prediction has proved              
              to be an elusive goal.                                                         
                                                                                             
              Likely mechanisms contributing to year-to-year variations in the               
              year class strength of Atlantic croaker include variations in the              
              location and timing of spawning, the age and date of subsequent                
              advection to the estuarine nursery area, the duration and relative             
              growth rate while in the estuary, and the age and date of migration            
              of the estuary as an adult. In conjunction with age-structured                 
              measures of growth and survival based on otolith daily growth                  
              rings, this project will test these hypotheses using a new laser-              
              based elemental analysis technique (LS-ICPMS) to retroactively                 
              determine the hatching site and estimate the age and date of                   
              subsequent migrations in individual fish.  The technique is based              
              on the acellular nature of the fish otolith (earstone), which forms            
              through the concentric daily additions of mineralized tissue around            
              a central nucleus.  Given the fact that the elemental composition              
              of a given daily ring reflects the elemental composition of the                
              water which passed through the fish's gills on that same day,                  
              migration between water masses at some age and/or date will be                 
              recorded as a change in the elemental composition of the otolith at            
              the appropriate daily increment.  By corollary, water mass                     
              differences at the time and place of hatching will be reflected in             
              elemental composition differences in the otolith nucleus.                      
                                                                                             
              At present there are few (if any) markers of marine fish                       
              populations, let alone indicators of past movement and water mass              
              association.  Successful completion of this project has                        
              implications not only for recruitment predication of Atlantic                  
              croaker, but for studies of recruitment, stock structure, migration            
              and fisheries management around the world.
