Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Cellular Analysis of Cell Cycle Regulatory
               Phosphoproteins and Cytoskeletal Proteins in Developmental Mutants of Nicotiana
               and Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1992      
File        : a9202131

Award Number: 9202131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Heidi S. Feiler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Jacobs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1114,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Long and Medium-Term Research:  Cellular Analysis of Cell                      
              Cycle Regulatory Phosphoproteins and Cytoskeletal Proteins in                  
              Developmental Mutants of Nicotiana and Arabidopsis                             
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at                       
              Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S.                      
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                 
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the             
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and                       
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit             
              by Dr. Heidi S. Feiler to work with Dr. Jan A. Traas at the Institut           
              National de la Recherche Agronomique in Versailles, France.                    
                                                                                             
              Dr. Feiler plans to characterize several Nicotiana and Arabidopsis             
              developmental mutants, which are perturbed in cell cycle regulation            
              and division plane alignment.  Using in situ cell biology                      
              techniques, she will study the expression and subcellular                      
              localization of a set of highly conserved phosphoproteins and                  
              cytoskeletal proteins implicated in cell cycle control.  It is                 
              presumed that a subset of these proteins will act as markers                   
              delineating between normal and aberrant cell cycle control and that            
              comparisons such as these will help identify the contribution of cell          
              cycle regulation to plant development.  The analysis of cellular and           
              subcellular localization patterns of the cdc2 and MPM-2                        
              phosphoprotein regulators and potential cytoskeletal targets in situ           
              will better define their interactive, in vivo functions.  Experiments          
              such as these will be required to ultimately understand cell cycle             
              regulation as it occurs within the plant.                                      
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel and a stipend for twelve months.
