Title       : Application of Space Geodesy-The Global Positioning System (GPS) Methods for
               Earthquake Studies, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1992     
File        : a9202466

Award Number: 9202466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1233600            (Estimated)
Investigator: V K. Nagar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Travel Award
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description: This project supports the participation of Dr. Roger              
              Bilham of the University of Colorado and Dr. V.E. Nagar of the                 
              Geodetic and Research Branch of the Survey of India in field                   
              research in India.  The objective is to use GPS geodesy to                     
              determine the vertical and horizantal positions of survey markers              
              spaced at crucial locations across the active Himalayan                        
              deformation that marks the collision zone between the                          
              Indo/Australian Plate and the Euro/Asian Plate.  This is part of               
              a larger project in which Dr. Bilham is also conducting similar                
              studies in Nepal and Pakistan to cover various segments of the                 
              Himalayan deformation.                                                         
                                                                                             
              Scope:  This project allows for valuable cooperation between the               
              Indian team and the U.S. team.  Dr. Nagar is more familiar with                
              the Indian conditions and is better prepared for long term data                
              acquisition in that country, while Dr. Bilham can provide                      
              coordination with the neighboring countries as well as supply                  
              sophisticated instruments and broader expertise in measuring                   
              techniques.  The project fits well within the U.S.-India                       
              Cooperative Science Program criteria.
