Title       : Synthesis and Properties of Intelligent/Smart Ceramics and Ceramic Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1994   
File        : a9202111

Award Number: 9202111
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raj N. Singh Raj.Singh@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1774,9161,9294,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal outlined two novel but "intelligent" applications of             
              the piezoelectric phenomena in ceramics and ceramic composites.                
              One utilizes the piezoelectric effect in the detection of stresses             
              and cracks in monlithic ceramics and ceramic composites.  It will              
              also prevent cracking and crack growth as a result of the                      
              piezoelectrically generated compressive forces.  the other                     
              application utilizes the piezoelectric effect to produce forces,               
              either compressive or tensile, on fiber-matrix interfaces in order             
              to modify the fiber-matrix interfacial shear strenths in the                   
              ceramic composites.  Special tape-casting and laminating technique             
              will be used to produce the monolithic BaTiO3 ceramics and the                 
              uniaxially-reinforced sapphire fiber BaTiO3 matrix composites.                 
              This proposed program will provide fundamental understanding of the            
              synthesis  of "intelligent" ceramics and ceramic matrix composites             
              and their properties.                                                          
              %%%%                                                                           
              This program outlined two "intelligent" applications of the                    
              piezoelectric phenomena in ceramics and ceramic matrix composites.             
              One uses the piezoelectric effect to detect stresses and cracks and            
              to use the piezoelectrically generated forces to prevent cracking              
              and crack growth.  The other uses the effect to produce forces on              
              the fiber-matrix interfaces and to modify shear strengths through              
              them.  Special tape-casting and laminating technique will be used              
              to produce the BaTiO3 ceramics and uniaxially-reienforced sapphire             
              fiber BaTiO3 matrix composites.  This study will provide                       
              fundamental understanding of the synthesis and "intelligent"                   
              ceramics and ceramic matrix composites and their properties.                   
              Potential commercial applications can be enormous and wide-ranged              
              into many industrial sectors.
