Title       : PRF: Effects of Spatial Heterogenity and Population-level Phenomena on Host-Pest
               Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1992      
File        : a9202346

Award Number: 9202346
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela L. Wiener   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1182,
Abstract    :
              Spatial heterogeneity has been shown to exert a strong influence               
              on population and evolutionary dynamics.  The nature of the                    
              spatial structure as well as intrinsic characteristics of the                  
              population affects the dynamics.  Using techniques from                        
              population genetics and ecological theory, the effects of spatial              
              structure on host-pest interactions, specifically plant-herbivore              
              or plant-pathogen systems, will be modeled.  Questions of the                  
              evolution of resistance of plants and the potential for the                    
              spread of pests will also be addressed.  The P.I. will                         
              incorporate into these models the nature of spatial structure;                 
              characteristics of the plant population such as the mating                     
              system, local adaptation, and dispersal ability; and                           
              characteristics of the pest such as host specificity and                       
              dispersal patterns.  In addition, these models will be applied                 
              using the well studied system of Brassica campestris to obtain                 
              realistic bounds on parameter values and make quantitative                     
              predictions.  These models will also be used to develop                        
              qualitative predictions for managed plant systems.
