Title       : Dissertation Research: San Lorenzo Regional Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1992     
File        : a9202822

Award Number: 9202822
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stacey C. Symonds  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Arthur Demarest, Ms Stacey Symonds                  
              will collect data for her doctoral dissertation.  Building on her              
              prior work in the region, she will examine a series of Olmec                   
              sites in the Gulf coast region of Mexico.  She will conduct a                  
              regional settlement survey over a five month period.  The survey               
              will include full coverage of three transects that cross-cut four              
              environmental zones -- rive levees, lowland floodplains, elevated              
              lands, and coastal routes.   With the data she collects she                    
              should be able to estimate how Olmec subsistence strategy and                  
              population density developed over time.  Comparison of site size               
              and distribution should provide information on the degree of                   
              hierarchical organization while data which relates to intrasite                
              patterning should shed light on changing social organization.                  
                                                                                             
              The Olmec have been characterized as "America's First                          
              Civilization" and are best known for their massive stone                       
              sculptures and ceremonial sites.  However, very little is                      
              understood about the origins or development of their society.  It              
              is from this base that Mayan and Aztec civilizations arose and to              
              understand this entire process it is important to obtain more                  
              information on this earliest stage.                                            
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              data of interest to a large group of archaeologists.  It will                  
              increase our understanding of how complex societies develop and                
              will assist in the training of a promising young scientist.
