Title       : Significance of Paste-Sand Interfaces in Micromechanical Behavior of Concrete
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9202134

Award Number: 9202134
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140071             (Estimated)
Investigator: Menashi D. Cohen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wai-Fah Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1037,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the proposed investigation is to introduce a new              
              approach to the study of the micromechanical behavior of concrete              
              by combining its materials science and structural engineering                  
              aspects, based on the assessment of the qualitative and                        
              quantitative significance and role of cement paste-sand particle               
              interfaces in stress-strain behavior of concrete that is                       
              subjected to pure uniaxial compressive force. In the                           
              experimental part, mortar cylinders having sand particles of                   
              different packing characteristics are tested for their stress-                 
              strain behavior and their micromechanical properties.  Concrete                
              cylinders will also be tested to compare the significance of the               
              coarse aggregate with the sand particles.  These are then                      
              correlated with the microstructural properties using SEM with                  
              backscatter electron analysis and image analysis capabilities,                 
              mercury intrusion porosimetry, and electrical conductivity                     
              measurement techniques. In the analytical part, a model is                     
              developed which describes the micromechanical behavior of                      
              concrete and defines quantitatively the role and significance of               
              interfacial parameters. In the model development a nonlinear                   
              fracture mechanics approach is taken using the finite element                  
              method as a tool to analyze crack propagation and localized                    
              deformation.  The relationship between crack propagation and sand              
              particles packing characteristics will be studied.  In this                    
              approach, interfaces are treated as weak planes or initial flaws.              
              Results of this investigation can be extended to other cases                   
              including durability, creep, and shrinkage considerations, and                 
              optimum mixture proportioning of conventional and advanced                     
              cement-based concrete composites.
