Title       : RUI: Implementation and Analysis of Inference Techniques for Classical and
               Multiple-Valued Logics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1995  
File        : a9202013

Award Number: 9202013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104419             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik Rosenthal erik.rosenthal@snet.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Haven
	      300 Orange Avenue
	      West Haven, CT  065161916    203/932-7000

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project is for research in computational logic.  The areas of             
              research stem directly from prior analysis of the structure of                 
              formulas in negation normal form.  That work raised many questions and         
              led to explorations in several directions.  Substantial experimental           
              results at the propositional level, preliminary experimental results           
              at the first order level, and certain theoretical results indicate             
              that the most important of these may be path dissolution, a rule of            
              inference that is strongly complete at the ground level.  This project         
              will continue exploration of this and related inference mechanisms,            
              largely through experimentation.                                               
                                                                                             
              One major thrust will be to further the implementation of the                  
              techniques developed earlier.  The current first order system                  
              ("Dissolver") is a solid platform on which the techniques proposed             
              below can be tested:  link selection; computing prime implicants;              
              backtracking; theory links and dissolution; and star chains.                   
                                                                                             
              While abstract proof-theoretic questions are of interest in their own          
              right, enhancing the performance of Dissolver is an important                  
              motivation for the theoretical work in this project.  The planned              
              investigations into multiple-valued logics largely fit the former              
              category; the expectation is that the study of the following issues            
              will contribute to the development of Dissolver:  dissolution and              
              multiple-valued logics; dissolution, analytic tableaux, and the                
              distributive law; quantifier duplication, proof length, and cycles;            
              algorithms for computing prime implicants; and induction and equality.
