Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Factors Affecting the Adaptation Period Preceding
               Aerobic Degradation of Chlorinated Benzenes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1992      
File        : a9202389

Award Number: 9202389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Flynn W. Picardal   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Arnold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1114,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Long and Medium-Term Research:  Factors Affecting the                          
              Adaptation Period Preceding Aerobic Degradation of Chlorinated                 
              Benzenes                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at                       
              Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S.                      
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                 
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the             
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and                       
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support an eleven-month postdoctoral research visit            
              by Dr. Flynn W. Picardal of the University of Arizona to work                  
              with Dr. Alexander J. B. Zehnder of the Swiss Institute for Water              
              Resources and Water Pollution Control (EAWAG).  Their research                 
              project will study the effect of environmental factors on the                  
              acclimation period which precedes the biodegradation of mono-, di-             
              and trichlorobenzenes by a microbial population.  The factors to be            
              examined include choice  of substrate, substrate concentration,                
              presence or absence of co-substrate, and temperature.  Experiments             
              will utilize microcosms containing soil, water and/or sediments to             
              examine the interspecies or interstrain movement of genes encoding             
              known degradation pathways.  Chlorobenzenes are being used as                  
              model compounds in these studies because the biochemistry and                  
              genetics of chlorobenzene degradation have already been                        
              elucidated.  Pseudomonas sp. Strain P51 will be used as a donor                
              organism to provide a source of genetic sequences capable of                   
              chlorobenzene degradation.  This recently isolated organism (van               
              der Meer et al, 1991) has been shown to have chlorobenzene                     
              biodegradation genes grouped into two clusters.  The                           
              chlorobenzene dioxygenase gene for this organism has been shown                
              to be located on a transposable element.  Mutations and genetic                
              rearrangements in the population will be stimulated through the use            
              of known chemical and physical mutagens and other methods.                     
              DNA hybridization and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)                          
              techniques are among those that will be used to study genetic                  
              movement and acquisition of new genetic material.  The frequency               
              and extent of such movement will be examined as a function of the              
              varied environmental factors.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel and a stipend for eleven months.
