Title       : Enhanced SQUID Electronics and Sensors Adapted for Use with Cryogenic Detectors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1995   
File        : a9461848

Award Number: 9461848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74844              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Singsaas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Quantum Magnetics, Inc.
	      7740 Kenamar Court
	      San Diego, CA  921212425    858/566-9200

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1248,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the need for
              improvements n the readout electronics for cryogenic radiation and particle
              detectors which are being developed for diverse applications in astrophysics,
              particle detection, medical imaging, and materials science.  Many of these
              devices use a superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) for reading
              out the signal from the detector.  The extreme sensitivity of SQUIDs to small
              changes in current, voltage or magnetic flux are essential for reaching the
              detection and resolution limits of the new detectors.  Although currently
              available SQUID systems have characteristics which make them ideal for use with
              these new detectors, existing SQUID systems are often ineffectual or of limited
              usefulness in exploiting the full potential of these detectors.  Limitations of
              bandwidth and slew rate make high count rate detection and pulse shape
              determination difficult or impossible.  The sensitivity of the sensors to
              radiation and thermal fluctuations make them difficult to use in accelerator or
              space applications.  Recent work on high-speed SQUID electronics and improved
              sensors has shown that performance can be greatly improved not only in
              frequency response but also in slew rate, stability, reliability and noise
              level.  This will be a significant advance for cryogenic radiation and particle
              detector readout; as well as improve operation in the earth orbit environment,
              significantly advancing space-based metrology.  The improvements will also aid
              in enabling SQUID technology to emerge out of the laboratory for other
              industrial, military, and field use applications.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
