Title       : Preprocessing of Diesel Fuels for Use in Fuel Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1995   
File        : a9461199

Award Number: 9461199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64935              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marek A. Wojtowicz Marek@afrinc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Fuel Research Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  06138    860/528-9806

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1065,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the
              possibility of employing currently used liquid fuels in fuel-cell vehicles.
              Fuel cells of commercial interest operate on streams of (nearly) pure hydrogen,
              which is not readily available in most vehicles. Neither is a source of
              hydrogen convenient and safe to carry on board commercial trucks, buses and
              other vehicles. Liquid fuels, however, are easily available and routinely
              handled. The wide use of fuel cells will require conversion of standard fuels
              into hydrogen, or hydrogen/CO2 mixtures, with only traces of CO and sulfur.
              This will require a multi-step process to be carried out on-board vehicles. The
              use of reformers for generation of hydrogen from light hydrocarbons has already
              been demonstrated. The objective of Phase I is to show the technical and
              economic feasibility of using an on-board hydropyrolysis unit to preprocess
              diesel fuel (heavy hydrocarbons) for the reformer. Three tasks are envisaged:
              1) Simulation of the hydropyrolysis/reformer/shift reactor/fuel cell system
              using a pyrolysis/hydropyrolysis model developed at Advanced Fuel Research, and
              the ASPEN software; 2) Design, construction and testing of a laboratory-scale
              hydropyrolysis unit; and 3) Assessment of the fuel preprocessing system
              (materials requirements, transient response, part-load efficiency, emissions,
              economics and life-limiting factors). Phase II would involve the design,
              construction and testing of a prototype system in cooperation with a fuel cell
              vendor. The expected results of the Phase I and Phase II projects would be a
              prototype preprocessing unit that would be coupled with a portable reformer and
              which would allow diesel fuels to be used with currently available (hydrogen)
              fuel cells. The system would also be flexible enough to be used with the next
              generation fuel cells which could directly utilize light hydrocarbons.
              Employing standard petroleum-based fuels to power fuel-cell vehicles would
              greatly facilitate the transition from internal-combustion engine to fuel-cell
              technologies.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
