Title       : A Control System to Optimize Biological Nutrient Removal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1995   
File        : a9461485

Award Number: 9461485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick L. Conley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Conley Engineering, Incorp
	      205 N. 40th Avenue, Suite 201
	      Yakima, WA  98908    509/965-9872

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the
              feasibility of an automated process control system for optimizing biological
              nutrient removal wastewater treatment plants. Nitrogen and phosphorus removal
              is needed at many municipal wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs) to control
              problems of algae and plant growth in receiving waters. This is of special
              concern in certain coastal areas, around the Great Lakes and in other locations
              around the U.S. Chemicals have been used at hundreds of plants for phosphorus
              removal, but an alternative is to use biological phosphorus removal designs
              that promote the growth of bacteria with high phosphorus storage capacity.
              Biological phosphorus removal has many advantages over chemical addition,
              including cost and less sludge production. However when biological phosphorus
              removal is combined with biological nitrogen removal systems, phosphorus
              removal efficiencies may be lower than required and chemicals are still used.
              This problem discourages other facilities from changing to biological
              phosphorus removal designs. The lower phosphorus removal efficiency may be due
              to release of phosphorus in the nitrogen reduction zones of combined nutrient
              removal systems. This release, termed secondary phosphorus release, is related
              to the inflexibilities of current process designs, and lack of a control system
              to respond to plant load variations. The purpose of this proposed Phase I
              research is to study factors that affect secondary phosphorus release, so that
              a control system can be developed to prevent it. Bench-scale reactors will be
              set up at the Yakima, WA. WWTP to study operating conditions and factors that
              affect the rate and extent of secondary phosphorus release. Full-scale combined
              biological nutrient removal facilities will also be visited to conduct tests on
              secondary phosphorus release.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
