Title       : Processing of Bimetallic Centrifugal Cast Cylinders Using Aluminum Matrix
               Silicon Carbide Particulate Composite
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1995     
File        : a9461303

Award Number: 9461303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mouli Vaidyanathan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Schevers Laboratories Inc
	      6499 Rhine Road
	      Watertown, WI  53094    414/261-9474

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1730,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The development of new metal matrix composite materials such as the aluminum
              matrix silicon carbide particulate composite, has provided substantially
              improved materials for corrosion and wear resistant applications. This is
              especially true in the food and plastic processing industries, where, wear and
              corrosion resistance and thermal conductivity are important. The present
              industry standard is chrome plated nickel and nickel/cobalt alloy bimetallic
              cylinders. The food and plastics industry are in dire need for better
              processing chambers (cylinders) due to the advent of in-line processing and
              newer highly abrasive and corrosive fluropolymers. The goal of the research
              project is to develop a unique new composite material for use as processing
              chambers in the food and plastics industries. Working in close cooperation
              between Schevers Laboratories Inc. and Wisconsin Bimetallic Corporation, the
              processing parameters necessary to manufacture bimetallic cylindrical chambers
              having an aluminum matrix silicon carbide particulate composite inner diameter
              will be investigated. Processing variables such as bonding of the aluminum
              composite to the backing steel, casting temperatures, centrifugal speed,
              silicon carbide wetting, anodizing, machining and honing will be investigated.
              Besides processing of the bimetallic cylinders, materials characterization like
              wear, corrosion. thermal conductivity, microstructure and particle distribution
              after bimetallic centrifugal casting will be studied.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
