Title       : Microwave-Assisted Control of NOx, NH3, and Nitrous Oxide Emissions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  1995    
File        : a9461287

Award Number: 9461287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64905              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marek A. Wojtowicz Marek@afrinc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Fuel Research Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  06138    860/528-9806

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1440,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the question
              of mitigating the undesirable side-effects associated with ammonia, urea, or
              cyanuric acid injection for NOx control in coal combustion. (Urea and cyanuric
              acid act as convenient ammonia precursors.) The above method is known as
              selective noncatalytic reduction (SNCR) or selective catalytic reduction (SCR),
              depending on whether or not a solid catalyst is used. Both techniques have a
              common shortcoming known as ammonia slip, which is simply the release of
              unreacted ammonia into the stack. The effectiveness of ammonia/urea injection
              depends on current process conditions, especially the temperature and NOx
              levels, and thus sophisticated process control is required, but not always
              provided. As a consequence, combustors often operate under high-NOx or
              high-ammonia conditions. SNCR has also been reported to give rise to incomplete
              NOx reduction and the formation of appreciable amounts of nitrous oxide (N2O).
              A strong need thus exists for a simple and cost-effective method for the
              removal of residual NOx, excess ammonia and N2O from the combustion flue gas.
              As the main innovation of this program, Advanced Fuel Research proposes the use
              of microwave discharge in the stream of flue gas in order to generate free
              radicals (microwave plasma) instrumental in the destruction of NOx, NH3 and
              N2O. The objective of the Phase I program is to demonstrate the technical and
              economic feasibility of a novel gas-cleanup method based on microwave-induced
              radical generation. If proved successful, the proposed approach may result in a
              powerful method of mitigating undesirable side-effects of ammonia/urea
              injection, and in significantly reducing N2O emissions which plague
              fluidized-bed systems. The proposed method can be conveniently combined with
              virtually any other pollution-control measure. Due to the `end-of-pipe`
              approach, only minor, if any, modifications in combustor design and operation
              will be required to accommodate the new technique. These advantages will be
              partly offset by the cost of microwave-power generation but the overall
              economics are expected to be favorable.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
