Title       : An Antimonide Strained Quantum Well Laser Operating at Lambda > Micrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  1996  
File        : a9461791

Award Number: 9461791
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Tompa   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Forsythe  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Nanopowder Enterprises Inc
	      120 Centennial Avenue
	      Piscataway, NJ  088543908    908/885-5909

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1492,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate
              feasibility of development of laser diodes by MBE, operating in the
              mid-infrared (MIR) range ((>6ªm) using the InGaAsSb/AlGaAsSb strained quantum
              well (QW) structure. The development of our MIR laser structures serves a
              variety of dual-use applications having immediate use in molecular
              spectroscopy, remote sensing, as well as in optical fiber telecommunications
              and laser radar systems. The emitting wavelengths are extendible to cover the
              6-ªm range. Structured Materials Industries, Inc.'s laser diode is constructed
              with three regions. In the middle is the active region where undoped AlGaAsSb
              layers confine the InGaAsSb QWs. The active region is sandwiched by two heavily
              doped AlGaAsSb cladding layers which form a pn junction and provides the
              optical confinement. In Phase 1, the laser structure will be grown InP
              substrates with a buffer layer to which the AlGaAsSb layers are
              lattice-matched. Using InP substrates with a buffer layer has demonstrated
              advantages over GaSb and InAs for the antimonides. They anticipate a major
              increase in laser wavelength by the use of strained QW structures as compared
              to conventional antimonide based QW or double heterostructure (DH) lasers. The
              modification of the density of states in QWs associated with the quantum
              effects can result in lower threshold current and reduced temperature
              sensitivity. They will study strain and quantum effects as well as the Auger
              recombination process, an important nonradiative mechanism in low bandgap
              materials, in order to optimize their laser design. In Phase I, their design
              will be implemented, characterized and compared to the model. The Phase I
              effort will create a firm base for the further development in Phase II. The
              strained QW approach  chosen will allow them to develop this material to cover
              the laser wavelength range from 6 to 10ªm in later Phases. The growth,
              processing and packaging capability will be refined and a distributed feedback
              mechanism will be implemented to improve the mode selectivity for single mode
              operation in Phase II in order to produce lasers suitable for military and
              commercial applications. They will also implement the lasers in IR
              spectroscopic Trace Gas Concentration Monitoring and Analysis system.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
