Title       : Environmentally Benign Processing of Stainless and Nitrided Stainless Steel
               Coatings Using Jet Vapor Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1995   
File        : a9461364

Award Number: 9461364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arun Srivatsa   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jet Process Corporation
	      24 Science Park
	      New Haven, CT  065111968    203/786-5130

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1407,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Coatings are widely used to protect metal surfaces from corrosion and
              environmental degradation. Serious environmental hazards associated with the
              most widespread coating processes, such as electrodeposition and painting, have
              spurred the development of environmentally benign coating technologies. Jet
              Process Corporation has developed an environmentally benign, high rate, low
              cost coating process, Jet Vapor Deposition (JVD). In addition to being a
              practical, environmentally sound alternative, JVD also has the capability to
              deposit multicomponent coatings with excellent compositional control. The
              corrosion resistant properties of stainless steels, a class of multicomponent
              materials, are well known. Recent work by Prof. Clayton et al, the
              collaborators in this proposal, and others has shown that nitrogen alloying
              leads to significant improvements in the corrosion resistance of stainless
              steels: especially for stainless steels containing Ni and Mo. Preliminary work
              on synthesizing coatings of stainless and nitrided stainless steel using JVD is
              extremely promising: it suggests that JVD offers the practical possibility of
              synthesizing coatings of such materials at around room temperature.
              Consequently, in the proposed Phase I program, they will focus on the synthesis
              of JVD stainless steels and nitrided stainless steels and demonstration of
              their corrosion resistance. Phase II extensions of the program will include
              applications to a variety of surfaces and scale-up of the coating process.
              Achievement of these goals will result in an economical, pollution-free process
              for the synthesis of stainless and nitrided stainless steel coatings.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
