Title       : Amorphous Silicon Carbide Thin Film Photovoltaic Cells by the Sol-Gel Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1995  
File        : a9461530

Award Number: 9461530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheng-Jye Chu chemat@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chemat Tech Inc
	      9036 Winnetka Avenue
	      Northridge, CA  913243235    818/727-9786

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1730,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The sol-gel process for thin film has been proved to be a low cost and high
              productivity technique, which also provide many advantages like no limitation
              on size and shape of the coating substrates, simple process and molecular level
              tailoring of composition and properties. Amorphous and microcrystalline SiC
              thin films were also prepared from polycarbosilane (PCS) by the sol-gel
              process. Preliminary results showed that n-type and p-type SiC can be prepared
              by using doped polycarbosilane (PCS) with good electrical and optical
              properties. Heat-treatment in hydrogen can drastically decrease the defect
              concentration of the sol-gel derived silicon carbide. Therefore, device quality
              hydrogen-induced silicon carbide thin film can be apply on PV cells
              application. Transparent conductive electrode (ATO, ITO) can also be fabricated
              by the sol-gel process, which can further decrease the manufacture cost of the
              PV cells. In this proposal, sol-gel derived hydrogen-induced silicon carbide
              thin films PV cells has been proposed PV solar cell consist p-i-n layers of
              hydrogen-induced amorphous or microcrystalline silicon carbide will be prepared
              on low cost (stainless steel) substrate by the sol-gel process. The transparent
              conductive electrode will be prepared by their proprietary polymeric
              oxoalkoxide using the sol-gel process. The PV cells derived from the sol-gel
              process can be expected to have reasonable conversion efficiency with much
              lower manufacturing cost than the existing process techniques. Large-scale
              utilization of solar power can be achieved. More applications on electroptical
              device are expected from this hydrogen-induced amorphous silicon carbide thin
              film.                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
