Title       : Ultrafiltration Membranes Prepared by Polymerization of Lyotropic Liquid
               Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1995  
File        : a9461137

Award Number: 9461137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64953              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dongbin Zhang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lyotropics Inc
	      1576 Sweet Home Road
	      Amherst, NY  142282710    716/636-3626

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1407,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on a new
              generation of materials with potential commercial and technological impact on
              filtration of proteins, viruses, pharmaceuticals and other sub-microscopic
              particles. Although it is intuitively obvious that any filtration material
              should have pores of all the same width (so as to achieve precise and reliable
              separations based on particle size) and also a high density of pores (for lower
              resistance and higher fluxes), there is an important particle size range over
              which no materials exist satisfying these fundamental requirements. Nature
              provides a certain type of liquid crystal -- a `lyotropic` liquid crystal --
              that exhibits a very high degree of order and refinement at this scale size. It
              was first shown by a consultant on this project (Prof. David Anderson) that
              certain of these lyotropic liquid crystals can be converted to polymers, thus
              providing a new material that satisfies these two requirements. The Principal
              Investigator (Dr. Dongbin Zhang) has trained under Prof. Anderson and extended
              the range of chemistries afforded by these materials to include ultrafiltration
              materials with optimal porewall properties for minimizing adsorption. The
              purpose of the study is to produce membranes from these new materials using
              state-of-the-art ring opening metathesis polymerization catalysts, and to
              characterize their performance in ultrafiltration of proteins. The test results
              will include curves quantifying the sharp cut-off of protein separations based
              on the particle size (or molecular weight) and values of flux rates (or
              throughput), both of which are standard tests that will instantly convey the
              improved filtration performance of these materials compared with other
              materials currently available for similar uses.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
