Title       : Evidence of Reductive Dechlorination and Mineralization of Lower Chlorinated
               Biphenyls by Anaerobic Microbial Consortia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1994  
File        : a9461465

Award Number: 9461465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64913              (Estimated)
Investigator: Murugiah R. Natarajan natarajan@mbi.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grand River Tech Inc
	      P.O.Box 27008
	      Lansing, MI  48910    517/336-4610

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1144,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are widespread priority toxic pollutants, which
              are persistent in the environment and tend to bioaccumulate. Phase I of this
              project will undertake studies to investigate the reductive dechlorination and
              mineralization of lower chlorinated PCB-defined congeners by anaerobic
              microbial consortia developed in Grand River Technologies, Inc. laboratory. In
              the past, reductive dechlorination processes have resulted in the accumulation
              of ortho-chlorinated congeners. Their current investigations have indicated
              that the MBI anaerobic granules are capable of dechlorinating all substitutions
              of chlorines from PCB mixtures and congeners. Higher chlorinated congeners were
              dechlorinated extensively, but accumulation of corresponding lightly
              chlorinated products was not seen in these studies. Accumulation of biphenyl as
              an intermediate or end product was inconsistent and thus, it is difficult to
              calculate a material balance. These results are intriguing since it is widely
              accepted that lower chlorinated biphenyls and biphenyl do not undergo further
              dechlorination and mineralization anaerobically. Since their results strongly
              indicate that process exists, they intend to obtain evidence to prove it.
              Further if that is happening then they want to understand the primary mechanism
              for it. Under Phase I of this proposal, the fate of 2-Chlorobiphenyl,
              2,6-Dichloribiphenyl and Biphenyl, and their 14C-labeled isotopes will be
              examined with their anaerobic microbial consortia under different conditions.
              Enzymatic evidence will also be sought to determine the mechanism of ring
              cleavage under anaerobic condition. The ultimate strategy will be to utilize
              these anaerobic  consortia to develop an in situ bioremediation process to
              treat PCB-contaminated lake or river sediments. This project will be the first
              demonstration of complete dechlorination and mineralization of PCBs by
              anaerobic microbial consortia.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
