Title       : Permeability and Complex Resistivity Measurements for Determination of Pore
               Structure in Low Permeability Rocks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1995   
File        : a9461046

Award Number: 9461046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74946              (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg N. Boitnott   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New England Research Inc
	      76 Olcott Dr
	      White River Junction, VT  050012313    802/296-2401

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,1575,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will adapt a new method
              for permeability measurement to allow for simultaneous measurements of
              electrical resistivity and deformation. Many fundamental bulk properties of
              rock such as permeability, electrical resistivity, and elastic constants are
              highly dependent on details of the pore structure. Attempts to infer properties
              such as permeability from measurements of electrical resistivity and acoustic
              velocities (common in borehole geophysics) require a thorough understanding of
              the inter-relationships between these and other bulk properties and the
              underlying pore structure which controls them. While a number of models have
              been developed which predict the inter-relationships between fundamental bulk
              properties and pore structure, validation and routine use of these models
              requires a means of making a large number of diverse measurements on core in a
              routine fashion. Permeability and electrical resistivity are two of the most
              important properties for understanding pore structure. While laboratory
              measurement techniques for these properties are well developed, simultaneous
              measurements of permeability and electrical resistivity have been difficult to
              perform, inhibiting routine and integrated measurement. The proposal work will
              adapt a new method for permeability measurement in order to construct an
              apparatus for routine and automated measurement of permeability, specific
              storage, electrical resistivity, and deformation. The apparatus and technique
              to be developed will be well suited for routine measurements as well as
              experimental studies of pore structure and its relationship to the fundamental
              bulk properties of rock.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
