Title       : Confusion to Precision: Tools for Assessing Expert Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1995   
File        : a9461513

Award Number: 9461513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74834              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Korsan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lumina Decision Systems
	      59 North Santa Cruz Avenue
	      Los Gatos, CA  95030    408/354-1841

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 1321,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Lumina Decision Systems, Inc. will develop software which obtains expert
              judgment on uncertain quantities in the form of probability. Bayesian
              probability techniques are increasingly used for a wide variety of
              decision-making and risk-analysis. Currently, specially trained analysts are
              required to obtain expert probability judgments to avoid cognitive biases. The
              time now required of the analyst and expert is burdensome, often rendering the
              approach impractical. A reliable and easily used automated tool for the
              elicitation of uncertainty could substantially reduce these costs, and render
              the approach far more widely usable, as a natural adjunct to decision and risk
              management software tools. The software will allow assessors to use qualitative
              phrases, such as unlikely or very frequent, and map them into numerical
              probabilities. They will develop and evaluate methods to calibrate each user's
              language to obtain reliable and stable mappings. A second focus will be to
              develop geometric, animated density assessor for the direct assessment of
              continuous probability densities. This method will use a flexible family of
              distributions, allowing rapid graphical specification of unimodal, bimodal,
              bounded, and unbounded distributions. They will compare the time, effort, and
              reliability of continuous and discrete probabilities obtained using standard
              methods with the results from our prototype assessment tool. They will develop
              calibration methods for mappings between verbal phrases and numerical
              probabilities, and evaluate their reliability and stability.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
