Title       : New Microwave Dielectric Ceramic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1995   
File        : a9461119

Award Number: 9461119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64943              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott L. Swartz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mission Research Corporati
	      720 Lake View Plaza Blvd Ste I
	      Worthington, OH  432351279    614/842-6606

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1730,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project will address the
              synthesis and processing of ceramic materials for microwave dielectric
              resonators used in mobile telephones and other telecommunications applications.
              Mission Research Corporation (MRC) proposes to conduct research on a new family
              of bismuth-based dielectric materials, with potential for reducing the size of
              ceramic resonators while improving resonator performance. These new dielectric
              ceramics also can be sintered at low temperature, thus allowing low-cost
              multilayer device fabrication and eventual integration into co-fired microwave
              integrated circuitry. In previous research, MRC identified a family of
              bismuth-based ceramic compositions that offer high permittivity, low microwave
              dielectric loss, and temperature-compensation of the resonant frequency. These
              properties are desired for the dielectric resonators used in mobile telephones.
              The primary objective of this Phase I project is to establish compositions and
              processing methods that provide low microwave dielectric loss in
              high-permittivity and temperature-stable dielectric ceramics. In this project,
              several ceramic compositions will be prepared and evaluated. The effects of
              composition and ceramic processing on the crystal chemistry, dielectric
              properties, and microwave dielectric loss of these ceramics will be determined.
              At the conclusion of this Phase I project, the feasibility of using these new
              dielectric ceramics in microwave dielectric resonator devices will be
              established. The Phase I research will provide a basis for further
              compositional and processing optimization and prototype resonator fabrication
              in Phase II.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
