Title       : Improvement of Subsoils for Support of Pavements Using a Grid of Stabilized
               Granular Columns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1995  
File        : a9360798

Award Number: 9360798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathaniel S. Fox   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Earthwater Corporation
	      1685 East Park Place, Suite 201
	      Stone Mountain, GA  30087    770/465-8980

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,1448,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9360798  Fox      A method  is proposed whereby subsoils for support of roadway,
              airfield, and parking area pavements will be improved and reinforced by the
              incorporation of a grid of small diameter, short, stabilized, vertical,
              granular columns.  The proposed method is a smaller-scale variation of a
              patented process developed by the proposers to reinforce bearing soils beneath
              building foundations, which recently won a national award for innovation in
              construction.  the columnar material can consist of soil, soil with chemical
              agents, soil with special synthetic inclusions, artificial soil, or stone.  The
              grid of columns will be constructed simultaneously using a single apparatus. 
              The improvement of subsoils in this manner will be rapid and economical many
              applications.    To determine qualitatively and quantitatively there degree of
              improvement which can be obtained, a finite element analytical study and
              laboratory and field experimental research programs will be conducted on a
              variety of soils using the proposed stabilization method.  Laboratory tests to
              be conducted include one-dimensional compression, triaxial, and large-scale
              plate bearing tests.  A series of plate bearing tests, as well as borehole
              shear, K0-blade, and dynamic penetrometer tests, will be conducted in the field
              on in-situ will be produced and used to construct the granular columns for the
              field experiments.  The finite element analyses will be conducted to model the
              results from the laboratory and field tests, and to perform a parametric study
              of the important factors influencing the degree of improvement which can be
              obtained from incorporation of granular columns constructed of a variety of
              materials within a different subgrade soils.  In this manner, the results from
              the laboratory and field tests can be extrapolated to subgrade soils and
              conditions not tested in the experimental research program.  Evaluation of the
              results from the analytical and experimental studies will establish the
              feasibility of the proposed meth od for stabilizing subsoils to support
              pavements.  ***
