Title       : Reinforcing Rubber Char
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1993  
File        : a9360524

Award Number: 9360524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51502              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carleen Wischt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Industrial Rsch Tech Group
	      6188 Parkinson Lane
	      Columbus, OH  432321670    614/898-5200

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1473,1577,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Guild Associates, 9360485      High quality paper, e.g., magazine
              paper, accounts for millions of tons of product per year.  A large portion of
              this paper consists of mechanical pulp which has characteristically weak fiber
              strength.  Newer paper machines and printers demand increasingly stronger pulp
              which is leading to stronger chemical (Kraft) pulp displacing weaker but less
              environmentally intrusive mechanical pulp.  Chemical (Kraft) pulp is more
              costly than mechanical pulp and chemical pulp plants are plagued with pollution
              problems.  The plants emit noxious sulfur containing gases.  Kraft plants can
              also discharge chlorinated hydrocarbons into receiving bodies of water, with
              unknown consequences for downstream communities and for the natural
              environment.  The objective of this SBIR Phase I project is to utilize ozone
              treatment of mechanical pulps to improve their strength properties while
              maintaining high optical and printing quality.  The results of the research
              will confirm whether such targeted ozone treatment of a fraction of mechanical
              pulp can sufficiently improve its characteristics to enable it to be
              substantially substituted for chemical pulp.    Ozone is a very strong
              oxidizing agent.  When exposed to mechanical pulp, it reduces the molecular
              weight of the lignin content in the pulp without loss of yield.  It is
              therefore surmised that ozone will promote fiber collapse, increase internal
              fibrillation and increase fiber to fiber bond strength.  These alterations will
              cause the relative bonded area in the pulp to increase and the strength
              properties to improve in the final paper products.  This is the basis for the
              ozonation treatment that is to be tested here.    The process will involve
              screening mechanical pulps to remove the long fiber fraction of the pulp from
              the medium and fine fractions.  The recovered long fiber fraction will be
              ozonated to increase its flexibility and blended back into the medium and fine
              fractions for use in paper making.  The fundamental condi tions required for
              the ozonation process will be determined, the characteristics of the pulp will
              be delineated, and the economics of the process will be evaluated.  The
              properties of the paper manufactured  from the pulp will be compared to high
              quality publication paper available in current markets.  If it meets or exceeds
              the same performance properties, a comparatively inexpensive mechanical pulp,
              manufactured by environmentally benign methods, will become a candidate to
              substitute for chemical pulp in publication paper markets.
