Title       : Improving the Strength Properties of Mechanical Pulps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1994   
File        : a9360485

Award Number: 9360485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Salvatore T. DiNovo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Guild Associates Inc
	      4089 North Leap Road
	      Hilliard, OH  430261117    614/876-5252

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1403,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Industrial Research Technology Group, LTD., 9360524      Each year
              the U.S. population generates over 250 million scrap ties, equivalent to one
              tire for each man, woman, and child.  Tires can not be buried in landfills
              because they eventually float to the surface, breaking the seal between
              landfill layers and ruining the integrity of the landfill.  Landfilling while
              tires is illegal in most states.  The historical disposal method is to collect
              them in piles and store them in open fields.  The inherent risk of tire piles
              are demonstrated in occasional massive fires.  These are difficult to
              extinguish and send huge clouds  of thick smoke into the atmosphere.  In
              addition, such piles are the breeding grounds to rats and mosquitoes.  The U.S.
              stockpiles of discarded automobile tires have in excess of 4.0 billion tires. 
              The piles are growing in spite of all efforts to convert scrap tires to some
              usable form.  Recovery and recycling to date have met a success rate of less
              than 10% of the annual discarded totals for automobile tires and less than 30%
              for truck tires.    Scrap tire distillation is the most economical way to
              recover the energy in scrap tires, particularly if one can reuse the solid char
              distillation product.  The char has properties similar to carbon black which
              makes up about 25% of the rubber formula.  The rubber industry wants to recover
              scrap tires and reuse the ingredients.  This SBIR Phase I research project will
              provide data that could facilitate using distillation char.    Characterization
              of the carbon black properties of char is planned followed by the formulation
              of rubber compounds substituting char for commercial carbon black.  Compounds
              of natural rubber, SBR, and EPDM will be formulated and compared with
              conventional compounds for mechanical performance.  The formulae will then be
              adjusted to match the performance of conventional carbon black.  This project
              hopes to demonstrate that scrap tire distillation char can produce rubber
              compounds with competitive prop erties.  Char is lower cost than conventional
              carbon black since the char raw material production provided a service of
              recovering scrap tires and the char manufacturing process produces energy
              rather than consuming it.  This should reduce the barriers to using scrap tire
              distillation char in rubber compounds and pave the way for economical recovery
              of scrap tires and rubber.
