Title       : Establishing an Internship Program for Underrepresented Minority Students at
               Science and Technology Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0314353

Award Number: 0314353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $556452             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley M. McBay smmcbay@qem.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : QUALITY ED FOR MIN NET
	      1818 N ST NW
	      WASHINGTON, DC  200362406    /   -

NSF Program : 1642      SPECIAL INITIATIVES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              OIA-0314353
McBay
Quality Education for Minorities Network

Since the late
              1980's, the Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network, a non-profit
              organization, has been instrumental in improving the education of
              under-represented groups in science, mathematics, engineering and technology
              that have been historically underserved by the nation's educational system.  A
              successor to the Quality Education for Minorities Project based at MIT, QEM
              continues to develop effective strategies of STEM education for minorities, and
              focuses on issues and barriers that prevent minorities from receiving a high
              quality education. Through technical assistance workshops, conferences and
              internships, QEM has been successful in providing students and faculty with the
              necessary tools required to be competitive in securing federal program support
              for research, research-training and science education projects. 

Building
              upon the success of its internship programs for undergraduate students, QEM
              will develop and implement an internship for STEM doctoral students and faculty
              at minority-serving institutions to participate in research and educational
              activities at NSF-sponsored Science and Technology Centers (STCs).  Besides
              providing a rich atmosphere for encouraging future scientists and engineers,
              STCs conduct innovative, world-class research of national importance, that
              promise to contribute to the Nation's competitive potential through discovery
              and education. The QEM-STC internship will offer a significant number of
              under-represented students and faculty the opportunity to participate in
              STC-based research. Consequently broadening the participation of all citizens,
              and enhancing diversity within NSF's programs in regards to the Foundation's
              strategic goal of People, Tools, and Ideas. 





