Title       : Midwest Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics Conference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0314080

Award Number: 0314080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7260               (Estimated)
Investigator: Isamu Kusaka kusaka@che.eng.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Tomasko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Isamu Kusaka
Ohio State University Research Foundation

"Midwest
              Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics Conference."

The Midwest
              Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics Conference will be held in Columbus,
              OH on May 28-29, 2003. This is a small student-centered conference emphasizing
              presentations by graduate students, postdoctoral scholars, and young faculty
              working in all areas of thermodynamics and statistical mechanics. Funding will
              reimburse graduate students and postdocs for travel and registration costs
              associated with the meeting. Funds for other aspects of running this meeting
              have been arranged from other sources, primarily donations from the Ohio State
              University. NSF-CTS has provided student travel funds for this meeting several
              times in the past, and this action has been important in making attendance at
              this meeting widely accessible to graduate
students.
	
Intellectual merit:
              During the two-day conference, various topics from thermodynamics and
              statistical mechanics will be discussed. We expect about 65 to 70 attendees,
              which is small compared to typical national conferences. This allows avoidance
              of parallel sessions, encouraging in-depth discussion and exchange of ideas
              among attendees. 

Broader impact: The conference proceeds in a collegial
              atmosphere, which is an ideal way of building a community of researchers who
              might continue interacting with each other at various levels even long after
              the conference. About two thirds of the attendees are graduate students and
              postdocs. For them, the conference can serve as an introduction to the
              thermodynamics and statistical mechanics community. For faculty, the conference
              affords an opportunity to meet and evaluate potential faculty candidates in an
              informal yet intellectually stimulating environment.

