Title       : RIME Implementation Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0314424

Award Number: 0314424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Bromwich bromwich@polarmet1.mps.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This award will provide funds for the support of a workshop on Antarctic
              regional-scale synoptic meteorological processes and their representation in
              numerical forecast models.  Its objectives are to assess our current
              understanding of physical processes at high southern latitudes and to provide a
              means for formulating specific experiments to generate new information so that
              necessary parameterizations within numerical models can be tested and improved.
               The workshop will be held at the National Center for Atmospheric Research on
              February 4-6, 2003.
	Nearly every study that addresses issues of global change
              identifies the polar regions as among those most sensitive to climatic shifts. 
              The Antarctic continent is a particular importance in global change scenarios
              because of its massive ice sheets and potential impacts on sea level change. 
              In addition, numerous teleconnections between Antarctica and lower latitudes
              over time scales ranging from synoptic periods to those associated with the El
              Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and beyond have been documented in recent
              years.  However a physical understanding of how Antarctic processes are linked
              to those over the rest of the globe is still lacking on all time scales.  A
              prerequisite for investigating and understanding the links between Antarctica
              and the rest of the globe is a thorough understanding of regional physical and
              synoptic processes and transports to and from the continent.  Proper
              representation of Antarctic processes is basic to global change studies,
              especially since Antarctic transports are strongly tied to local topographic
              and mesoscale processes that are currently not resolved within global climate
              models (GCMs).  These considerations have been brought together in the Ross
              Island Meteorological Experiment, a basic and applied research program,
              designed both to highlight and remedy current gaps in our knowledge of
              Antarctic synoptic processes.

