Title       : Geoscience Education at Grand Canyon: Integrating Research and Education through
               the Trail of Time Exhibit (planning grant)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0314133

Award Number: 0314133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura J. Crossey lcrossey@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl E. Karlstrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Grand Canyon offers one of the best exposed and most complete records of
              geologic history on Earth.  In cooperation with the National Park Service, we
              propose to design a world-class geologic exhibit entitled:  "The Trail of
              Time."  The core project involves a 4.6 km-long trail at the edge of the Canyon
              on the south rim.  The trail itself is the primary "exhibit"; it will be scaled
              and marked so that one meter represents one million years of Earth history. 
              Its goal is to teach visitors about deep time and how geologic history is
              recorded in the rock record.  Large rocks, interactive displays, maps, and
              photos will be placed along the Trail to illustrate geologic history and Earth
              processes, all in the context of the spectacular vistas which provide
              inspiration for learning about geology, as well as the best "visual aid"
              imaginable.  

This award provides funds for a second planning year for the
              Trail of Time.  The first planning year (nearly over) has been very successful.
              1) The PIs formed an Advisory Board, 2) had a first workshop, 3) began exhibit
              design and front-end assessment, and , most importantly, 4) forged a formal
              agreement between the National Park Service and the University of New Mexico to
              develop the Trail of Time.  During the workshop and in discussion with the
              National Park, it became clear that a second planning year was necessary in
              order to better define the goals and design for the project.  Thus, the overall
              goal for this award is to develop the scientific content for the Trail of Time,
              start the Trail of Time website, and develop the broader geoscience education
              vision for the Trail of Time that includes K-12, teacher training, and college
              curriculum development.  In particular, this second planning year will be used
              to 1) develop a multi-level science content plan that attempts to convey
              concepts of geoscience and of the scientific method to all ages and levels of
              ability; this will require further surveys to evaluate the different target
              levels, 2) begin to design the Trail of Time website and Park brochures that
              will announce and track the formal development of the Trail of Time concept and
              the time table for implementation of the physical Trail of Time, and 3) Develop
              a formal plan for the broader Trail of Time geoscience program.
