Title       : 2003 Gordon Research Conference on Coatings and Films, July 13-18, 2003, New
               London, NH
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0314251

Award Number: 0314251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlyle B. Storm grc@grc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marek W. Urban  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The 2003 Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Coatings and Films will focus of
              response-driven polymeric films and coatings, and will be chaired by Dr. Marek
              Urban. The conference will be held in Colby-Sawyer Academy, July 13-18, 2003.
              The theme of the conference, Stimuli-Responsive Polymeric Films, will encompass
              the following areas of polymer science: Frontiers in Polymer Synthesis, Flow
              and Rheology, Film Formation, Frontiers in Photo-Polymerization, Waterborne
              Coatings, Functionalized Polymeric Coatings, Corrosion and Barrier Properties,
              and Surfaces and Interfaces. Each session will consists of 2-3 presentations on
              the most current discoveries. Specific topics will include Modeling and
              Prediction of Coatings Properties through the Use of Artificial Neural
              Networks, Electrodeposition of Adhering Polymer Films: a Route to
              Multifunctional Surfaces, Novel Proton Exchange Membrane Dispersion Coatings
              for Electroactive Catalysts, Less Utilized Reactions in Polyurethane Chemistry,
              Functional Polyurethane Surfaces, The Flow of Binary Polymeric Fluids Through
              Patterned Microchannels, How to Control the Rheology of Mixed Polyelectrolyte
              Fluids Through the Polyanion/Polycation Ratio, Photophysical Techniques for
              Studying Latex Film Formation, Adhesion and Friction between Polymer Films,
              Coatings Prepared from Suspensions of Latex and Functional Inorganic Particles,
              Photopolymerization of Thin Polymer Films, Initiators and Catalysts for Rapid
              Formation of Coatings, Quest for an Ambient Cure Thermoset Latex Crosslinked
              with a Cycloaliphatic Epoxide, Pigment Distribution and Characterization of
              Waterborne Coatings, Vinyl Acetate Ethylene Copolymer Emulsions, Why Don't
              Barnacles Stick to Silicones?, The Weathering of Paints Made with Thermoplastic
              Resins, Using an EIS Corrosion Sensor to Monitor Coating Degradation,
              Flake-Filled Barrier Materials, Coatings for Automotive Plastics:
              Characterization of Interfacial Properties and Mechanism of Adhesion, Study of
              Mechanical and Tribological Properties of Polymeric Films and Coatings in Micro
              and Nano-Scale w/Nano-Indenter and Scanning Probe Microscope. 

This NSF
              award is directed to help with travel expanses of junior faculty, postdoctoral
              associates, or senior graduate students who are interested in pursuing science
              carriers.   

