Title       : Private Land Conservation Decisions: The Role of Information and Public Lands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0314556

Award Number: 0314556
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy W. Ando amyando@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Heidi J. Albers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1369,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Private land trusts play an increasingly important role in the provision of
              environmental amenities and services in the U.S.  Surprisingly little analysis
              of their behavior exists, however.  This project will characterize land trust
              behavior with models and data, and identify policies that could encourage
              trusts to conserve land in a manner that is most socially beneficial.  The
              research will examine the land conservation decisions of private land trusts,
              focusing on the extent to which they consider the land conservation actions of
              other actors, both public and private.  The project will consist of two
              components of analysis that inform each other, one empirical and one modeling. 
              The empirical work will use econometric techniques to examine actual
              private-public land conservation interactions in each of three data-rich states
              (California, Massachusetts, and Illinois) that have important differences in
              their ecology, conservation goals, and amounts of privately and publicly
              conserved land.  The modeling work will construct and analyze a
              spatially-explicit simulation model of the land conservation decisions made by
              diverse land trusts and public actors, characterize the resulting pattern of
              conservation, and explore policy options.

These analyses will increase
              understanding of how private land trusts, which provide so many environmental
              benefits, make decisions.  From the foundation of data-based models, the
              project will inform policy by: determining the extent to which land trusts make
              decisions based on information about other land conservation actions; examining
              the impact of information exchange and coordination among diverse land trusts
              and between trusts and government; and identifying the role of government
              protected lands in encouraging ("crowding in") or discouraging ("crowding out")
              private land conservation. The research will be particularly useful in
              considering two different types of policy.  First, the analysis will determine
              a role for government in disseminating ecological and land use information. 
              Second, the analysis will identify situations in which strategic land purchases
              and the promotion of coordinated actions among public and private groups are
              policies that increase the private provision of environmental services.  Adding
              these policies to the portfolio of current land conservation policies could
              decrease the costs of achieving a more desirable level of land conservation and
              environmental benefits.  This research is supported under the FY 2002 NSF/EPA
              Decision Making for Valuation and Environmental Policy (DMVEP) special
              competition.

