Title       : CAREER: The Study of Turbulence and Compressible Flows Using Molecular Filter
               Based Diagnostics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0314402

Award Number: 0314402
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael W. Plesniak                     
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 22,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32225              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory S. Elliott gelliott@jove.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    Proposal Number:  CTS-9733388    Principal Investigator:  Elliott   
              The Study of Turbulence and Compressible Flows Using Molecular  Filter Based
              Diagnostics    The primary goal of this CAREER Award is to support the
              development of a non-intrusive flow diagnostic technique termed Filtered
              Angularly Resolved Rayleigh Scattering (FARRS), which will simultaneously
              measure instantaneous velocity, density, temperature, and pressure.  This
              technique measures the scattering from a point measurement volume from a
              focused beam of a ND:YAG pulsed laser which interrogates the flow.  An
              anamorphic optical system is used to separately record rays which view the
              Rayleigh scattered signal at different angles.  The image recorded onto an
              intensified CCD camera results in an intensity verses viewing angle profile. 
              By placing an iodine filter in front of the camera and tuning the laser to an
              absorption line of iodine, the scattered intensity verses viewing angle profile
              recorded on the CCD changes shape depending on the velocity, density,
              temperature, and pressure of the flow. The profile for each instantaneous (10
              ns) laser pulse can then be used to compute the fluid properties.  Experiments
              will be made in subsonic and supersonic axisymmetric jets to quantify the
              accuracy of the measurements, explore improvements to the system to reduce
              sources of error, and extend the technique to measure multiple points
              simultaneously.  These measurements will be used to verify computational
              turbulence models of the axisymmetric 'et and improvements will 'II be made to
              the models when possible.  Also during the funding period, improvements will be
              made to a technique termed Planar Doppler Velocimetry (PDV) which allows the
              measurement of multiple velocity components in a two dimensional field. 
              Following success of the development of FARRS and PDV, measurements will be
              made in more complex flows to study compressible turbulence (i.e. boundary
              layers, and shock boundary layer interactions) and flowfields which are 
              currently being funded at Rutgers by other agencies (a transverse jet in a
              supersonic cross flow, weakly ionized supersonic flows, and the gas dynamics
              associated with thermal spray processes).  Collaborations have been set up with
              industry (Innovative Scientific Solutions Inc. and Spectra Physics) and
              government laboratories (i.e. Wright Laboratory) for this research plan.
