Title       : SGER: Microorganisms in Sub-ice Sediments from The Western Antarctic Ice Sheet,
               Ice Stream C
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0314293

Award Number: 0314293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deneb Karentz                           
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian D. Lanoil brian.lanoil@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Ice streams of the Western Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS) are thought to have
              unfrozen, water-saturated sediments at their base. Similar water-rock-ice
              interfaces beneath Arctic and alpine glaciers have been demonstrated to house
              abundant microbial communities which, through their metabolic activities,
              affect the geochemistry of these environments. If microbial communities are
              present in the sediments beneath the WAIS ice streams, they will have been
              isolated from outside environmental influences for a minimum of 20,000 years.
              This projectwill focus on the molecular characterization of microbes in a
              unique sediment core collected from beneath Ice Stream C, WAIS (WAISC) with two
              main hypotheses: 1) There is a unique microbial community present in the WAISC
              sediments, and 2) The WAISC sediment microbial community is active at near in
              situ conditions. The WAISC sediment microbes will be compared to microbes from
              other subglacial and marine sedimentary systems and microbes with
              geochemically-relevant metabolic activitie will be isolated. Work will be
              coordinated with other laboratories for pore water chemistry and sediment
              physical parameters to define this unique habitat. Resulting data should
              provide insight into microbial population dynamics and survival mechanisms in
              this cold, dark, and isolated environment. Furthermore, this study will expand
              our knowledge of microbial community structure and function to include
              Antarctic subglacial environments and may provide insights into possible roles
              of microbes during extreme "Snowball Earth" events and astrobiology. This
              project will support the training of a postdoctoral scholar and an
              undergraduate student in an interdisciplinary research project. The PI will use
              concepts from this project in both an introductory undergraduate course and a
              graduate level course. Data, images, and other materials will be made available
              through a publicly available web site. 
