Title       : CAREER: Fundamental Aspects of Electrocrystallization Phenomena: An Experimental
               and Modeling Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0314233

Award Number: 0314233
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $386138             (Estimated)
Investigator: Giovanni Zangari gz3e@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1682,9150,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0093154
Zangari

Process control in electrochemical deposition (ECD) is a
              challenging task. A fundamental understanding of the processes involved in film
              formation is needed to develop a predictive, quantitative model for the effects
              of deposition variables on film microstructure. In this CAREER grant a
              comprehensive investigation of nucleation and growth processes of a
              representative set of electrodeposition systems is undertaken with the
              objective to develop such a model and thus provide better tools for ECD
              fabrication of metallic films. Electrochemical techniques, which yield
              spatially averaged information on the growth process, and microscopy/structural
              methods, that provide morphological data at the microscopic scale, are coupled
              to yield a comprehensive description of the electrocrystallization behavior of
              the model systems. These two techniques are uniquely combined by monitoring
              in-situ and in real time the electrical response and nucleation and growth
              processes of metals into micro- and nano-electrodes fabricated by lithographic
              methods. The experimental effort is integrated with a kinetic Monte Carlo
              simulation of the nucleation and growth process to quantify the effects of
              metal type, electrolyte chemistry, and deposition variables on the
              microstructure of the resulting films.  The experimental results are used to
              validate and improve the numerical simulations, and the resulting models are
              utilized to develop a quantitative description of electrocrystallization
              phenomena in electrolytic solutions. The theory, research and practice of ECD
              will be integrated into the undergraduate and graduate materials engineering
              curricula at the University of Alabama with the objective of enhancing skills
              and creative thinking of students in the area of ECD technology and
              applications. Students at the undergraduate level will be exposed to laboratory
              projects in this field. Attention will be devoted to recruitment and retention
              of minorities as well as economically and socially at risk students. Graduate
              students will have the opportunity to attend a highly interdisciplinary course
              on the theory and practice of ECD, wherein the lectures will be complemented by
              laboratory sessions and simulation tools. Multimedia modules developed using
              these tools will be employed in lectures and made available to the general
              public through web publishing. 
%%%
ECD techniques are widely employed for
              fabrication of thick coatings and for deposition through lithographic patterns.
              ECD processes have unique capabilities to monitor and control the nucleation
              and growth of coatings.  This makes ECD ideal for the synthesis of high
              performance metallic coatings for microelectronics, magnetic recording, and
              MEMS applications, where control of microstructure and texture over a wide
              range of length scales is essential.
***

