Title       : SGER: Feasibility of High Gradient Magnetic Implants for Targeted Drug Delivery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0314157

Award Number: 0314157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49999              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Ritter   (Principal Investigator current)
              Armin D. Ebner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Proposal Title: 	SGER: Feasibility of High Gradient Magnetic
              Implants for Targeted Drug Delivery
Proposal Number:		CTS-0314157
Principal
              Investigator:	James Ritter
Institution:			University of South
              Carolina


The objective of the proposed research is to incorporate magnetic
              particles into drug carriers and direct the drug to a specific site using a
              magnetic field.  This project will build on the PI's expertise in high gradient
              magnetic separation (HGMS) concepts to determine the feasibility of a using
              magnetically enhanced targeted drug delivery as a viable therapeutic tool. 
              Although a general phenomenological theory to describe the retention of a
              ferrofluid drop in a flowing stream has been developed, no theoretical work has
              been doen to explore the limitations of the use of magnetic fields for targeted
              drug delivery.  The first objective is to determine theoretically the
              feasibility and limitations of using ferromagnetic wires to locally enhance the
              force on a drug-containing nanoparticle as it travels through the artery. 
              Simulations over a wide range of conditions will be explored.  Parameters of
              interest include wire magnetic properties, wire diameter, fluid velocity, and 
              blood viscosity.  In terms of the broader impacts, this concept has the
              potential to target drugs to specific locations, thus reducing overall dosage
              and reducing potential side effects.  The traditional mentoring of graduate and
              undergraduate students will also be carried out.  The novelty of this project
              is to determine the feasibility of using electrically-generated magnetic fields
              for directing drug delivery.  If successful, the project may lead to a new
              technique for effectively delivering increased con.centrations of drugs for use
              in the treatment of cancer, blood clots, and other medical conditions

