Title       : Genomics Databases: Striking a Balance for Information Sharing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0314614

Award Number: 0314614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frances Sharples fsharples@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The National Research Council will convene a committee to oversee a one-day
              workshop that will identify issues surrounding the release to the public domain
              of genomic data for bioterrorism threat agents.  This workshop will be designed
              to complement related NRC activities, including the January 9, 2003 workshop on
              "Dual Use" Information in the Life Sciences, the January 23-24, 2003 workshop
              on Biotechnology and Bioterrorism: Anticipating Future Threats and
              Countermeasures, and the ongoing study on Improving Research Standards and
              Practices to Prevent the Misuse of Biotechnology Research.  The committee will
              be appointed in accordance with standard NRC procedures designed to ensure that
              the membership has appropriate expertise and lacks inappropriate bias.  The
              appointment of the committee will follow the solicitation of suggested members
              from sponsors, NRC board members and other experts in the field of
              bioterrorism.  The committee will then design an agenda and identify and invite
              speakers for the one-day workshop.  The agenda will be designed to facilitate
              interaction and discussion on the following questions. 
	--What are the
              categories of genomic data that present the greatest concern?
	--What are the
              pros and cons of unlimited versus restricted access to such data, including
              	threats posed to the scientific community or to national security?  
--What
              are some options for making decisions about release to the public
              domain?
Following the workshop the committee will author a report based upon
              the results of the workshop. The workshop and subsequent report will enhance
              understanding of the policy issues surrounding the release to the public domain
              of information on the genomic sequence data of bioterrorism threat agents.  A
              diverse community, including the interagency genomics coordinating committee,
              will benefit from the dialogue and later the final report, which can be used to
              continue the debate about these issues and move national and international
              policy forward. The project will be completed within August 31, 2003. 
