Title       : Collaborative Research: The Use of Ground Penetrating Radar Data in the
               Development Of Facies-Based Hydrogeologic Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0314360

Award Number: 0314360
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Allen G. Hunt                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64491              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richelle M. Allen-King allenkng@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Gaylord  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0314360
Allen-King

In order to predict the fate and transport of subsurface
              contaminants we require an accurate model of the subsurface hydrogeologic
              properties.  The focus of our research is the use of ground penetrating radar
              data for the construction of facies-based hydrogeologic models.  The approach
              we have adopted builds on the concept of radar facies analysis where the radar
              data are divided into regions that are similar in character or appearance.  Our
              working hypothesis is that the spatial distribution of radar facies can be
              related to that of lithofacies;  and, through the relationship between
              lithofacies and hydrofacies at a given site, to hydrofacies.  The goal of our
              research is to determine the optimal way to obtain and use a subsurface model
              of radar facies to develop a subsurface model of hydrofacies.

Our first
              objective is to develop a method for the classification and identification of
              radar-facies.  The method will be based on the use of neural networks and will
              provide an efficient way of converting a large, complex radar data set to a
              simplified model of the facies-scale structure of the subsurface.  Our second
              objective is to determine the relationship between radar facies and the
              lithofacies and hydrofacies at one well-characterized site. We have elected to
              work at the Borden groundwater research site in Ontario, Canada where
              collaboration with Richelle Allen-King and co-workers from Washington State
              University provides us with a unique and exciting opportunity to investigate
              the link between radar images and subsurface properties.  The successful
              completion of this research will contribute to our fundamental understanding of
              the link between what is seen in a radar image, and the facies-scale
              sedimentary structure of the subsurface.  The results of this research will be
              of value to all researchers currently addressing the issue of how best to use
              radar data as a basis for the development of hydrogeological models.

