Title       : Numerical Simulation of Solidification and Shrinkage Prediction of Cast Irons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9102682

Award Number: 9102682
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce M. Kramer                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred J. Bradley bradley@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
                   Research will develop numerical simulation-based  shrinkage               
              prediction criteria for the optimization of casting design of                  
              commercial ductile and gray iron castings.  The initial focus                  
              will be on ductile iron.  Shrinkage prediction for this                        
              important commercial alloy is complicated not only by the                      
              complexity of solidification behavior, but also by its extreme                 
              sensitivity to metallurgical processing conditions.  Thus, an                  
              essential requirement for the development of practically useful                
              design software is the development of a kinetic model of cast                  
              iron solidification which realistically accounts for the effects               
              of metallurgical processing on mode and sequence of the                        
              solidification.  A combined micro-modeling/thermal analysis                    
              approach to solificaction modeling will be developed,                          
              along with an algorithm for applying the solidifaction model to                
              the estimation  of volume changes during freezing on the basis of              
              conservation of energy and mass, and thermodynamic                             
              considerations.  The ultimate goal of the research is the                      
              development of an integrated computer-based methodology for                    
              process control, optimization of  casting design, and diagnosis                
              of casting defects which takes into account the interdependent                 
              effects of metallurgical variables, molding factors, and geometry              
              on casting quality.                                                            
                   Castings are designed in industry by a process that involves              
              much trial and error, since experience is the only available                   
              tool.  This project involves the development of a design tool                  
              which incorporates current understanding of the metallurgy of the              
              cast metal and additional insights that result from the research               
              project.  Therefore, parts can be designed more precisely,                     
              reducing the number of failed attempts.
