Title       : Metalloid Biogeochemistry in Contrasting Oceanic Regimes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1991      
File        : a9102658

Award Number: 9102658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33177              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Cutter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The biogeochemical cycles of antimony, arsenic, and selenium in                
              the marine environment are complex, and include processes such                 
              as oxidation-reduction reactions, selective biological uptake,                 
              and kinetic controls on their chemical speciation.  However,                   
              the potential toxicity of several metalloid species and the                    
              anthropogenic mobilization of these elements by fossil fuel                    
              combustion, are compelling reasons to fully understand the                     
              cycling of metalloid in the ocean.  Of the three elements, very                
              few data are available on antimony speciation and distributions                
              in the open ocean.  Selenium and arsenic have been extensively                 
              examined in the North Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, but several                 
              aspects of their cycling remain to be elucidated.  This                        
              research utilizes samples collected from vertical profiles and                 
              horizontal transects in the North and South Atlantic, and                      
              eastern tropical North Pacific.  Selective hydride generation                  
              methods will be used to analyze the samples, and the data will                 
              be augmented by nutrient and trace element results from other                  
              researchers working at the same stations.  The primary                         
              objectives of this research will be:  (1) to quantitatively                    
              describe the marine biogeochemical cycle of antimony; (2) to                   
              establish whether refractory organic arsenic compounds that                    
              have been found in coastal waters are present in oligotrophic                  
              waters, and if so, their role in the arsenic cycle; (3) to                     
              evaluate whether the chemical speciation of arsenic and                        
              antimony responds to suboxic conditions in the water column;                   
              and (4) to determine the fraction of dissolved selenium which                  
              is bound in soluble peptides and proteins.
