Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Metabolic Engineering of Anaerobes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1991 
File        : a9102201

Award Number: 9102201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40900              (Estimated)
Investigator: D J. Petersen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1982,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Metabolic Engineering of                          
              Anaerobes                                                                      
                                                                                             
              This award through the Program for Long & Medium-Term                          
              Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence, which enables                       
              U.S. postdoctoral researchers to conduct 3 to 12 months                        
              joint research abroad at centers of proven excellence, where                   
              researchers can profit from unique or complementary                            
              facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                      
                                                                                             
              This award will support a 12-month postdoctoral research                       
              visit by Dr. D.J. Petersen with Professor Jos Vanderleyden                     
              of the F.A. Janssenslaboratorium voor Genetics, Katholieke                     
              Universiteit Leuven ?Louvaine!, Belgium.  Thanks to biotech-                   
              nology, which now can dramatically change the metabolic                        
              character of microrganisms, the anaerobic organism                            
              Clostridium acetobutylicum is used commercially to produce                     
              important organic solvents because it can convert a wide                       
              variety of crude substrates to acids and alcohols in high                      
              yield.  New knowledge concerning the molecular genetics and                    
              cell regulation of C. acetobutylicum allows unprecedented                      
              genetic manipulation of fermentations of this organism.  Dr.                   
              Petersen proposes to produce beneficial genetic alterations                    
              of the cell metabolism by the introduction and amplification                   
              of modified genes to (1) elucidate the regulatory factor(s)                    
              controlling the metabolic switch from acid to solvent                          
              production; (2) produce specific alterations to place                          
              expression of genes involved in solvent production under                       
              regulatory controls independent of cell cycle, including                       
              site-specific mutagenesis and recombination with altered                       
              genes; (3) identify the solvent induction signal, facilitated                  
              by Tn916 mutants already achieved in his laboratory; 4)                        
              analyze transcription regulation with the newly developed                      
              ELISA system which increases sensitivity and reproductibility                  
              while circumventing problems inherent in anaerobic -                          
              galactosidase assays using C. acetobutylicum; 5) incorporate                   
              anti-sense RNA technology also developed by Dr. Vanderleyden                   
              in the bioreactor studies of gene regulations in genetically                   
              altered strains; 6) evaluate cells metabolically with                          
              altered enzymatic pathways to assess the effectiveness of                      
              recombinant proteins in biocatalysis and observe the effects                   
              on the levels of other enzymes; 7) study research developments                 
              at Leuven in gene transfer technology with other model                         
              systems such as Azospirillum and Rhizobia.                                     
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel and a dependent's allowance.
