Title       : U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research: Plasticity, Mineral Nutrient Acquisition and
               Mycorrhizae in Tropical Dry Forest Seedlings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1991 
File        : a9102120

Award Number: 9102120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12975              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Stuart Chapin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5922      MEXICO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1121,
Abstract    :
              This U.S.-Mexico award supports Professor F. Stuart                            
              Chapin of the University of California-Berkeley in                             
              collaboration with Professor Emmanuel Rincon of the                            
              Ecology Center of the Universidad Nacional Autonoma                            
              de Mexico (UNAM) in Mexico City, Mexico.  The major                            
              objective of the proposed research is to understand                            
              the effects of variation in resource supply on the                             
              growth of tree species from dry tropical forests.                              
              The researchers will combine glasshouse field and                              
              laboratory studies to test a series of hypotheses                              
              concerned with the role of plasticity and                                      
              mycorrhizae in resource capture and use.  They will                            
              determine whether the extent of plasticity that a                              
              species exhibits influences its capacity to exploit                            
              temporal pulses of light, water, and nutrients, and                            
              whether  differences in plasticity affect the                                  
              outcome of competition among species either in                                 
              simple experimental microcosms or in synthetic                                 
              communities.  Finally they will explore the role                               
              that mycorrhizae play in influencing competition                               
              and species interactions in communities.                                       
                                                                                             
              The proposed research provides an opportunity to                               
              combine the complementary research expertise of                                
              researchers with substantially different                                       
              backgrounds.  The Mexican PI has worked extensively                            
              on studies of relative growth rate and plasticity                              
              in plants while the U.S. PI's work has dealt more                              
              with mineral nutrition.  The project will also                                 
              involve Professor Edith Allen from San Diego State                             
              University and her expertise on mycorrhizal                                    
              techniques will add an essential component to the                              
              proposed research.
