Title       : Supervisory Control in Automated Manufacturing Processes: The Design of
               Human-Computer Interaction for "Lights-Out Factories"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1994        
File        : a9102370

Award Number: 9102370
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pius J. Egbelu                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120330             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thiruvenkatasa Govindaraj govind@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leon F. McGinnis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Loren K. Platzman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine M. Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1465,9146,
Abstract    :
                   Most research on manufacturing automation focuses on the                  
              derivation of fully automated control and scheduling techniques.               
              An alternative and more realistic paradigm to "lights out"                     
              automation is supervisory control; the design of manufacturing                 
              control and scheduling processes that explicitly integrate human               
              decision makers with underlying automation.  Supervisory control               
              designs the human-computer interaction in order to augment and to              
              extend the human's role and decision making effectiveness.  Neither            
              the goal nor the unintended side-effects of supervisory control are            
              to automate the human decision maker out of the system nor to                  
              reduce the human's role to a set of undesirable or ineffective                 
              tasks.  At the same time, supervisory control ameliorates the                  
              inherent limitations of flexibility in automated control.                      
                   This research offers supervisory control as an                            
              alternative to the goal of full automation in manufacturing                    
              processes.  With supervisory control, the goal is to design into               
              the control process human functions that utilize human skills and              
              that enhance human effectiveness and overall system performance.               
              The research offers a three part approach to explore supervisory               
              control in advanced manufacturing systems:  first, the development             
              of an interactive, real-time, object-oriented manufacturing                    
              simulator; second, the development of modeling methods to                      
              prescribe/describe operators who control and troubleshoot                      
              manufacturing processes; and third, to use the operator models and             
              the object-oriented manufacturing simulator to systematically                  
              explore, with realistic manufacturing system dynamics, the                     
              integration of analytical methods and knowledge-based techniques,              
              effective designs for an on-line decision support system.
