Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Adaptive Parameter Estima- tion and Detection of
               Correlated Signals in Noise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1991 
File        : a9102148

Award Number: 9102148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37450              (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Proakis proakis@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hamid Krim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 4715,
Abstract    :
              Krim                                                                           
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Adaptive Parameter Estimation                     
              and Detection of Correlated Signals in Noise                                   
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Program for Long-& Medium Term                         
              Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence, which enables                       
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve                       
              months of research abroad at research centers of proven                        
              excellence.  The program's awards provide opportunities for                    
              joint research, and the use of unique or complementary                         
              facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                      
                                                                                             
              This award for a proposal sponsored by Dr. John C. Proakis                     
              of Northeastern University will support a twelve-month                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Hamid Krim at the                           
              Laboratoire des Signaux & Systmes, Ecole Suprieure                           
              d'Electricit, Yvette, France.  Dr. Krim will study                            
              estimation/detection with emphasis on array-processing                         
              problems.  In subspace-based parameter estimation and                          
              detection techniques, in a turbulent dispersive medium,                        
              applications of high resolution methods for detecting                          
              transmitted signals (or estimating signal parameters) prove                    
              difficult.  Dr. Krim recently proposed a data-based algorithm                  
              to estimate the direction of arrival of correlated (coherent)                  
              signals impinging on a linear array and has developed a                        
              generalized performance analysis specialized to this                           
              algorithm.  He will extend this work thus: (1) To account                      
              for the nonstationarity of the transmitting medium (e.g.,                      
              seasonal turbulence of the atmosphere) and accommodate for                     
              it, he proposes to derive an adaptive scheme that can be                       
              easily integrated into his current algorithm; (2) He will use                  
              some insightful results of a recent performance analysis to                    
              formally derive analytical bounds on the probability of                        
              resolving two closely spaced signals impinging on a linear                     
              array antenna.  The stronger result of an exact probability                    
              will also be derived after some additional reasonable                          
              assumptions.  This research should be of relevance to many                     
              applications including radar and sonar.                                        
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel, dependent's allowance, and a flat administrative                       
              allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
