Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Genetic Engineering of Sterility in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1991 
File        : a9102397

Award Number: 9102397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven H. Strauss strauss@fsl.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5345,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Genetic Engineering of Sterility                  
              in Plants                                                                      
                                                                                             
              This award is made under the Program for Long- & Medium-Term                   
              Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence, which enables                       
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve                       
              months abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                   
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research,                     
              and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise                   
              and experimental conditions abroad.                                            
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research                   
              visit by Dr. Steven H. Strauss with Drs. W.J. Peacock and                      
              E.S. Dennis of the CSIRO Division of Plant Industry,                           
              Canberra, Australia, to study methods for genetically                          
              engineering sterility in plants, which would benefit                           
              agriculture and forestry by improving efficient production                     
              of hybrids, enhancing  vegetative growth, and preventing                       
              engineered genes from entering natural populations.  Dr.                       
              Strauss will focus on the isolation of reproductive-specific                   
              promoters from Brassica.  The collaborators will use                           
              techniques of subtractive and differential hybridization to                    
              isolate transcripts as cDNA clones that are expressed                          
              specifically during reproductive bud development.  They will                   
              also use reproductive-specific genes characterized in other                    
              species to facilitate screening of libraries.  Once they                       
              have cDNAs which show adequate levels of specificity in                        
              northern analyses, they will be used as probes to screen                       
              genomic libraries of Arabidopsis, and their sequences used                     
              to construct primers to enable isolation of ribozymes                          
              (developed by Plant Industry laboratories) that diminish                       
              expression of genes essential for reproduction, causing                        
              plant sterility.                                                               
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel, dependents' allowance, and a flat administrative                       
              allowance of $250 for the U.S. home institution.
