Title       : The Hydrodynamics of Phytoplankton Removal in Benthic Boundary Layers by
               Filter-Feeding Bivalves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1993      
File        : a9102882

Award Number: 9102882
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen G. Monismith monismith@ce.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey R. Koseff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will continue experimental studies of the fluid                   
              mechanics of particle removal in turbulent boundary layers by                  
              suspension-feeding bivalve mollusks.  During this award period,                
              extensive measurements of velocity and concentration (solutes not              
              particles) fields over two sets of model bivalves in a laboratory              
              flume will be examined.  The purpose of these experiments is to                
              quantify the effects of near-bed hydrodynamics, i.e., the effects              
              of both the excurrent jets and the turbulent boundary layer flow,              
              on the flux of phytoplankton biomass from the water column to                  
              filter-feeding bivalves.  The information obtained in the                      
              experiments will be used in formulating and operating numerical                
              models of phytoplankton biomass dynamics in shallow estuaries,                 
              like San Francisco Bay.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Experiments will also be conducted at the USGS flume facility to               
              determine the effect of near bed hydrodynamics on bivalve feeding              
              behavior.  In particular, the effect of cross flow velocities on               
              pumping rates, orientations, positions, and siphon heights of two              
              species of bivalves commonly found in San Francisco Bay will be                
              examined.  This information is crucial to understanding the                    
              effects of concentration boundary layers on feeding strategies of              
              bivalves and will be used to interpret the results of the                      
              physical measurements made in the new facility at Stanford.                    
                                                                                             
              In its broadest terms, this project is focussed on understanding               
              the effects of hydrodynamics processes on benthic-pelagic                      
              coupling in estuaries and shallow coastal waters.  A major goal                
              of the project is to translate that understanding into an ability              
              to predict how the flow environment in a given body of water                   
              might affect the nature of this coupling for whatever                          
              phytoplankton assemblages and communities of benthic suspension                
              feeders might be present.  This is an excellent problem for                    
              illustrating how physical and biological processes are                         
              intertwined and how modelling might be used to develop an                      
              understanding of this coupling.
