Title       : Population Regulation in a Temperate Reef Fish System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1992  
File        : a9102191

Award Number: 9102191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283955             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Schmitt schmitt@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sally J. Holbrook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A fundamental theme in biological oceanography and marine                 
              ecology is to understand how marine biological systems respond to              
              various environmental and biological processes and perturbations.              
              Much of the current research interest in these fields is on the                
              processes that affect the dynamics and regulation of component                 
              populations within marine ecosystems.  This continuation project               
              focuses on the essential issue of how populations of temperate                 
              reef fish are regulated.  In particular, Drs. Schmitt and                      
              Holbrook will address the extent to which populations of these                 
              fishes are governed by equilibrium or non-equilibrium dynamics,                
              together with the processes and mechanisms that result in their                
              regulation.  They will address whether and how density-                        
              dependence may (or may not) operate at different life stages of                
              the fishes.  The fishes investigated, striped surfperch                        
              (Embiotoca lateralis) and black surfperch (E. jacksoni),                       
              represent a class of marine organisms where local recruitment may              
              be coupled to some extent with production of new propagules.  As               
              such, information gained by this research will contribute to a                 
              broader understanding of how environmental and ecological                      
              processes can affect dynamics and regulation in biologically                   
              coupled systems.
