Title       : Application of a Cooled CCD Imaging System to the Study of Microorganisms and
               Non-Living Particles in the Picoplankton Size Range
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1992  
File        : a9102154

Award Number: 9102154
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189047             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Sieracki MSieracki@Bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Sub-Micrometer particles in marine plankton systems may play                   
              important roles in the basic chemistry and biology of the system,              
              in population and food web dynamics and in biogeochemical                      
              cycling.  Particles in the picoplankton size range include living              
              microorganisms, viruses and non-living detrital particles.  The                
              abundance, size spectra and fluorescent nature of these various                
              particles can be measured using image analyzed epifluorescence                 
              microscopy.  With funding from the "Long-Lead Time Development                 
              Program" of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux Study, a sensitive,                 
              accurate image analysis system, has been developed, based on a                 
              cooled CCD camera, to automate these measurements of natural                   
              samples.  This award which constitutes a renewal of the past                   
              award is to upgrade the spatial resolution of the system to                    
              increase the precision of the size measurements of these                       
              particles.  The instrument will than be used for the                           
              characterization of small particles in terms of population                     
              abundances, size spectra, and fluorochrome staining.  The system               
              will be calibrated using known virus concentrates to determine if              
              they can be distinguished from small bacteria based on their size              
              and fluorescence characteristics.  The instrument will be used to              
              characterize particle populations at the JGOFS Bermuda Time                    
              Series station and in local estuarine waters.  Samples will also               
              be analyzed by electron microscopy as well as for carbon and                   
              nitrogen composition, particularly some of the size-fractionated               
              samples.  This variety of measurements should lead to a better                 
              understanding of the nature of these particles and their                       
              potential roles in marine biogeochemical cycles.
