Title       : Research in Dynamical Systems (Mathematical Sciences): Visiting Professorships
               for Women
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1991  
File        : a9102717

Award Number: 9102717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa R. Goldberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1265,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The research proposed for this project consists of two sets of                 
              questions in the field of dynamical systems and complex analysis.              
              The first set of problems concerns polynomials in a single complex             
              variable.  They are an extension of the analysis begun earlier,                
              classifying polynomial dynamic systems in terms of their local                 
              behavior near the fixed points.  The second set of problems                    
              concerns dynamical systems on the 2-torus and the 2-disk.  Denjoy-             
              type theorms for homeomorphisms isotopic to the identity on the                
              torus are to be formulated.  A computerized method to search for a             
              counterexample to the conjucture that every periodic cycle for                 
              every disc homeomorphism is strongly linked with a fixed point is              
              to be outlined on the disk.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The investigator is working in the forefront of a very active                  
              methematical field--dynamics.  The project furthers VPW program                
              objectives to provide opportunities for women to advance their                 
              careers in science or engineering through research, and to                     
              encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas through the             
              investigators' enhanced visibility as role models on the host                  
              campuses.  In this project, the proposed activities which                      
              contribute to the second objective include:  teaching a graduate               
              course entitled Computer Experiments in One-Dimensional Dynamics;              
              and conducting twice-monthly seminars for female graduate and                  
              advanced undergraduate students interested in research careers in              
              mathematics, including outside and inside speakers, discussion, and            
              counselling.
