Title       : Artificial Light Harvesting Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1991     
File        : a9102657

Award Number: 9102657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony M. Harriman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In this research program, self-assembling arrays of molecules will             
              be constructed that are photoactive and will mimic some of the                 
              essential features of natural light harvesting complexes.                      
              Porphyrin chromophores will be assembled so as to form antennae                
              that facilitate energy migration between porphyrin molecules and               
              subsequent energy transfer to a trap, where a chemical reaction                
              can be initiated. Each antenna will be assembled by spontaneous                
              self-association, by multi-point hydrogen bonding of heterocycles              
              that are covalently bonded to the porphyrin ring. One, two, or                 
              four such heterocycles will be bonded to a single porphyrin ring               
              such that dimers, polymolecular ribbons, cyclomers, and three-                 
              dimensional supramolecular arrays will result. In this manner,                 
              highly oriented structures will be formed in solution, in a                    
              mesophoric phase, or in the solid state, each of which has                     
              discrete porphyrin chromophores positioned within the critical                 
              distance for excitation energy migration and transfer.                         
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the research             
              of Dr. Anthony M. Harriman at the University of Texas, Austin. The             
              harvesting of light energy for the synthesis of molecules by                   
              plants, whereby chlorophyll is the energy harvesting system, is of             
              obvious importance. This is a complex process in nature, where an              
              array of chlorophyll molecules are assembled for the task of light             
              harvesting.  The porphyrin ring portion of chlorophyll is the                  
              light absorbing unit. In this project, porphyrin rings will be                 
              self-assembled and the transfer of light energy from the porphyrin             
              ring to an appended energy trapping moiety will be studied. This               
              system will serve to mimic the natural light harvesting system.
