Title       : Algorithms for Large Scale Stochastic Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1995      
File        : a9102660

Award Number: 9102660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199420             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Mulvey mulvey@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project continues previous work on nonlinear and stochastic               
              networks.  The basic research involves the design of efficient                 
              algorithms for large-scale network optimization problems.  Attention           
              will be paid to the inclusion of uncertainty within the model -                
              stochastic networks - and to nonlinearities in the objective function.         
              Many problems in engineering and management can be represented as a            
              network in which some (or all) of the parameters are stochastic.               
              Examples include:  air-traffic control, hydroelectric power                    
              scheduling, financial investment strategies, transportation planning,          
              productions/distribution, and personnel planning systems.  Adding              
              uncertainty to an optimization model greatly complicates the search            
              for efficient algorithms.  This research will focus on a new                   
              decomposition method, called diagonal quadratic approximation (DQA),           
              that combines a penalty and an interior-point barrier approach.                
              Initial results indicate that the DQA method is competitive with the           
              leading stochastic programming algorithm - progressive hedging.  Both          
              methods are amenable to parallel implementation.  The DQA method can           
              be designed for a massively parallel computer.  Thus, DQA applies to           
              the multi-stage stochastic program, whereby large numbers of scenarios         
              are required.  The research will consider alternative versions of DQA          
              and will study the theoretical aspects of convergence.  Extensive              
              computational tests will be made on a variety of serial and parallel           
              computers, including a massively parallel SIMD machine.  The research          
              promises to make substantial progress in the handling of stochastic            
              programming problems with a very large number of scenarios.  The               
              significance of the project is indicated by the wide range of                  
              applications that can be solved as network optimization problems               
              under uncertainty.
