Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic and Geometric Toplogy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1993    
File        : a9102078

Award Number: 9102078
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $427800             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. James Milgram milgram@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph L. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   R.L. Cohen plans to pursue several projects involving                     
              algebraic topological questions arising in gauge theory.  One                  
              project, joint work with J.D.S. Jones, involves finding an                     
              explicit relationship between representations of braid groups and              
              families of elliptic operators coupled to SU(2) monopoles.                     
              Another project is to pursue joint work with Jones and G. Segal                
              on Morse theory.  Given a Morse function on a compact manifold,                
              they have described an explicit simplicial space decomposition of              
              the manifold using classifying space theory.  They plan to                     
              investigate the applicability and implications of these                        
              techniques to various infinite dimensional settings; for example,              
              the Chern-Simons functional and the Yang-Mills functional.                     
                   Milgram plans to study the geometry of moduli spaces of                   
              holomorphic bundles, concentrating on SU(2)-instantons over S4                 
              regarded as equivalence classes of based holomorphic bundles on                
              CP1 x CP1.  He also expects to continue his study of the geometry              
              and homology of sporadic groups and exceptional Lie groups.                    
              Finally, he hopes to work with R. Penner on the relations between              
              moduli spaces of Riemann surfaces and representations of                       
              symmetric groups.                                                              
                   Mrowka plans to pursue three projects.  The first is to                   
              prove there are 4-manifolds homotopic to a K3 surface which do                 
              not admit any complex structures.  The second is to study the                  
              effect on the Donaldson polynomial of the existence of embedded                
              S2's or T2's.  Finally, with K. Walker, he hopes to study gauge-               
              theoretic generalizations of the Casson invariant.                             
                   The connections between geometry and physics involved in                  
              this work are striking.  They work both ways.  While much of the               
              motivation for studying four-dimensional manifolds, Lie groups,                
              and group representations may once have come from the hope of                  
              calculating things of interest to physicists, in recent years                  
              notions inspired by quantum physics have given rise repeatedly to              
              constructions of new topological invariants that answered                      
              questions the topologists could not answer before.
