Title       : Scientific Reuse of Submarine Telecommunications Cables: Implementation on a
               Portion of Pacific Cable TPC-1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1994      
File        : a9102228

Award Number: 9102228
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $590190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rhett Butler rhett@iris.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inc Res Inst Seismology
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  20005    202/682-2220

NSF Program : 5414      INSTRUMENTATION DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 5414,
Abstract    :
              An international, collaborative project will be undertaken to                  
              investigate the potential multidisciplinary scientific use of                  
              undersea telecommunications cables that are being abandoned or                 
              retired by international telephone companies.  Digital fiber                   
              optic technology has matured to the point where new fiber optic                
              submarine telecommunications cables are replacing older analog                 
              coaxial types.  The older cables still have decades of useful                  
              life and they represent an opportunity for scientific re-use as a              
              tool for real-time, long-term oceanographic and geophysical                    
              observations on the deep seafloor.                                             
                                                                                             
              The study of global scale geophysical processes will increasingly              
              require improved world-wide long-term monitoring of the oceans                 
              and underlying Earth.  Having access to data in real-time will                 
              enhance many of these studies.  Achieving these goals of broad                 
              spatial coverage, over long time periods using conventional                    
              instrumentation deployed from ships will be costly.  Effective,                
              real-time data telemetry via satellites and other means also has               
              limitations.  One possible alternative would be to use portions                
              of ocean-spanning telecommunications cables scheduled to be                    
              retired in the next decade.  They could be instrumented with                   
              sensors capable of monitoring certain geophysical properties.                  
              The cable could provide a source of reliable power, a means to                 
              acquire high bandwidth data in real time and provide a way to                  
              control remote instrumentation.                                                
                                                                                             
              The project deals specifically with TCP-1, an AT&T/KDD-owned                   
              Hawaii-Guam-Japan cable -- a portion of which has been turned                  
              over to IRIS and the University of Tokyo for use by the                        
              international academic research community.  Plans are underway in              
              Japan to initially instrument the Guam-Japan portion with                      
              seismometers and magnetometers.  Work to be accomplished at the                
              U.S.-owned Guam termination site is necessary before significant               
              engineering efforts and installation of these instruments can be               
              started.   A small building for housing the electronics that                   
              power and control the seafloor repeaters will be constructed and               
              the cable will be re-terminated within this building.  A series                
              of small pilot studies will also explore: 1) the feasibility of                
              using academic research vessels rather than commercial cable                   
              ships to handle deep sea cables, 2) conceptual designs for a                   
              seafloor acoustic modem through which autonomous scientific                    
              instruments can be connected to a submarine cable, and 3) new,                 
              low-cost methods to couple data into a seafloor cable in situ.                 
              U.S. private industry is collaborating in that AT&T is                         
              transferring ownership of the TCP-1 cable to a consortium of                   
              academic research institutions, is making space and electrical                 
              power available at its Guam site, and is keeping the cable                     
              powered up during a one-year transition period.
