Title       : Heteroallyl and Alpha-Heterosubstituted Allyllithium Reagents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1994  
File        : a9102732

Award Number: 9102732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lloyd M. Jackman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With support from the Organic Dynamics Program, Dr. Jackman                    
              will study solution structures of lithium enolates. The                        
              following sutides will be performed in connection with this                    
              project: (i) determination of the structures of the mixed                      
              aggregates of three lithium enolates with lithium perchlorate                  
              and lithium tetraphenylboride, (ii) NMR studies of dynamic                     
              processes in mixed aggregates, (iii) studies of the solvation                  
              of a series of substituted lithium phenolates, (iv)                            
              comprehen-sive analysis of the initial rates of C- and                         
              O-alkylation of lithioisobutyrophenone and lithio                              
              2-isopropyl-alpha-tetralone by methyl tosylate in a variety of                 
              solvents with added lithium perchlorate and lithium                            
              tetraphenylboride, (v) studies of degenerate proton transfer                   
              with lithium phenolates, and (vi) design of enantioselective                   
              organolithium reagents.                                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              Organolithium compounds provide the synthetic organic chemist                  
              with some of the most effective methods for controlling stereo-                
              and regiochemistry in processes that involve formation of new                  
              carbon-carbon bonds. In the past, progress in this field has                   
              been severely hampered by lack of mechanistic understanding,                   
              which in turn is a consequence of lack of detailed knowledge of                
              the precise structures that organolithium species adopt in                     
              solution. The proposed studies address the elucidation of                      
              solution structures and then seek to develop useful mechanistic                
              concepts that are based upon these structures. The special                     
              effects of solvents and cosolvents upon the solution structure                 
              of organolithium species will be studied. In addition, new                     
              stereoselctive reagents that are based upon mixed aggregate                    
              formation will be explored.
