Title       : Advanced Computational Stochastic Dynamic Programming for Continuous Time
               Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1991    
File        : a9102343

Award Number: 9102343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Floyd B. Hanson hanson@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9251,9263,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to develop fast algorithms for               
              the optimal feedback control of general continuous time                        
              stochastic dynamical systems.  These stochastic dynamical systems              
              include perturbations by both Gaussian and Poisson white noise.                
              The computational treatment of the optimal feedback control of                 
              general, nonlinear, stochastic differential equations with Markov              
              noise in continuous time, including Poisson noise, is a                        
              particularly unique feature of this project.  The algorithms are               
              being tested on multi-state resource models, but are applicable                
              to a wide variety of applications.  The numerical approach                     
              directly treats the partial differential equation of stochastic                
              dynamic programming.  New data structures and algorithms, such as              
              finite element and multigrid methods, will be developed to                     
              alleviate both memory and computation intensive demands from the               
              "curse of dimensionality".  Purely parallel methods are being                  
              developed for scalable, massively parallel processors and massive              
              memory supercomputers.  Results give the optimal feedback control              
              variables and the expected optimal performance index in terms of               
              state variables and time.  Large scale scientific computing is                 
              essential for managing the computational and memory demands in                 
              the optimal control of large applications, such as aerospace                   
              dynamics, flexible structures, resources, economics and robotics.              
                                                                                             
              The implementation of advanced computational techniques, such as               
              parallelization, vectorization and optimal data structures, make               
              it possible to solve problems of larger dimension.
