Title       : Applications of Tellurium in Organic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1991        
File        : a9102998

Award Number: 9102998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald C. Dittmer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research involves the use of tellurium reagents for the                   
              production of enatiomerically pure organic compounds. By                       
              combining tellurium methodology with Sharpless kinetic                         
              resolutions or asymmetric epoxidations of allylic alcohols the                 
              following will be able to be achieved: (1) the synthesis of                    
              optically active secondary and tertiary allylic alcohols from                  
              achiral starting materials without resolution, (2) the                         
              synthesis of secondary cis allylic alcohols from trans                         
              compounds in high optical purity, (3) the conversion of                        
              racemic, secondary allylic alcohols to either enantiomer in                    
              high yield and high optical purity without the loss of material                
              sustained in a kinetic resolution, (4) the deoxygenation of                    
              acetates of glycidols with retention of the chirality at the                   
              carbinol center, and (5) the transposition of double bond and                  
              alcohol functionalities in both the free alcohol as well as in                 
              the sulfonate esters of the allylic alcohols. Also,                            
              2-substitued allylic alcohols whose accessibility by other                     
              methods is difficult will be prepared and studied.                             
                                                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
                                                                                             
              With this award the Synthetic Organic Program of the Chemistry                 
              Division will support the research of Dr. Donald C. Dittmer of                 
              the Department of Chemistry at Syracuse University. The                        
              research is in the area of synthetic methodology and will                      
              utilize tellurium reagents for the production of organic                       
              substrates in optically pure form. Using a variety of                          
              approaches the work will allow the preparation of these                        
              optically pure compounds from optically inactive starting                      
              materials. This process is extremely important in modern                       
              synthetic chemistry because many of the target molecules which                 
              have biological activity must be prepared optically active to                  
              study their properties.
