Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Evolution of Clonality in the European
               Scleractinian Family Agariciidae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1993      
File        : a9102569

Award Number: 9102569
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Stemann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1571,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research: Evolution of Clonality in                         
              the Scleractinian Family Agariciidae                                           
                                                                                             
              This award is made under the Program for Long- & Medium-                       
              Term Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence, which                          
              enables U.S. researchers to work 3 to 12 months abroad at                      
              research centers of proven excellence, and provide                             
              opportunities for joint research and the use of unique or                      
              complementary facilities, expertise and experimental                           
              conditions abroad.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award will support a 12 month postdoctoral research                       
              visit by Dr. Thomas Stemann of the University of Iowa                          
              with Dr. Jorn Geister at the Geologisches Institut,                            
              Universitat Bern, Switzerland.  During the Paleogene, a                        
              wide variety of colonial corals of the family Agariciidae                      
              appeared in Europe, apparently evolving from the solitary                      
              coral, Trochoseris.  The colonial agariciids persisted in                      
              Europe through the Middle Miocene and are the ancestors                        
              of modern Caribbean Agariciidae.  Wide modes of colony                         
              growth and developmental integration mark this group.                          
              Dr. Stemann will study the evolutionary consequences of                        
              this clonal integration by investigating the origin and                        
              evolution of the colonial habit in the European Agaricii-                      
              dae.  This work will combine with his dissertation                             
              research on the Caribbean Agariciidae to form a comprehen-                     
              sive view of clonality in the family Agariciidae.  The                         
              study will systematically revise agariciid species and                         
              genera using morphometric analyses of museum specimens                         
              and field collections from the Northern Italian Oligocene,                     
              distinguishing species using cluster and discriminant                          
              analysis, and reconstructing the phylogeny of the                              
              agariciids through a cladistic analysis of micro-skeletal                      
              characters derived from thin-sections and SEM investiga-                       
              tions.  To analyze clonal development, he will measure                         
              zooid distribution and budding type along colony surfaces.                     
              He hopes to determine if the varied astogenic programs                         
              present in the Agariciidae are derived from separate                           
              aclonal ancestors or from clonal ancestors through                             
              extensive modification of astrogeny during the later                           
              evolution of the clade.  This work will be essential to                        
              relating the evolution of agariciid clonality to the                           
              paleography and climate of the Western Tethys and to the                       
              paleontology of Tertiary European reefs.                                       
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover                               
              international travel, dependent's allowance, and a flat                        
              administrative allowance of $250 for the U.S. home                             
              institution.
