Title       : The Ecological Dynamics of the Mangrove Ecosystems in the Vicinity of the Indus
               River Delta, Pakistan: The PAKMER Project, A Supplement Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1993     
File        : a9102094

Award Number: 9102094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61776              (Estimated)
Investigator: Saiyed I. Ahmed ahmed@ocean.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1650,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description: Under this project support is provided for                        
              collaboration between Dr. S. Ahmed of the School of                            
              Oceanography, University of Washington, and Dr. G. S.                          
              Quraishee, Director Emeritus of the National Institute of                      
              Oceanography (NIO) in Karachi, Pakistan.  The research                         
              deals with the interaction of the elements of the web of                       
              mangrove systems, especially in the system at the mouth of                     
              the Indus river in Pakistan, to understand the impact of                       
              factors such as the decrease in fresh water flow and                           
              increase in ground water salinity on the growth of trees                       
              and the chain reaction on other marine life in the mangrove                    
              ecosystem.  In Pakistani mangrove ecosystems the result has                    
              been expressed in vastly decreased species diversity of the                    
              halophytes and in shorter shrubs.  The full understanding                      
              of the ecophysiology of the mangrove ecosystems and an                         
              order of importance of its elements is needed to affect a                      
              reversal of the loss in this natural resource.                                 
                                                                                             
              Scope: This research is being carried out by the U. of                         
              Washington team with the participation of the NIO staff                        
              which also provides the boats and other logistical                             
              support.  The participation in the data analysis and even                      
              in data acquisition will be enhanced through this project                      
              to the benefit of the U.S. team and also to the Pakistani                      
              team.  The latter will develop the necessary capabilities                      
              and expertise to continue the reserach beyond the                              
              involvement of the Americans.  The project fits the                            
              objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program.                     
              This project is being funded jointly by INT and OCE.
