Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Symmetry Groups in Dynamics and Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1993  
File        : a9102959

Award Number: 9102959
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91500              (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Wagoner wagoner@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project concerns the symmetry groups of shift dynamical              
              systems and smooth manifolds.  Ideas from algebraic K-theory are               
              applicable to each area and form a common theme between them.                  
              The investigator will continue to study the algebraic and                      
              homological properties of symmetries of one-dimensional sub-                   
              shifts of finite type (SFT's), sofic, and other shift dynamical                
              systems.  These systems arise in a number of contexts, including               
              dynamics, information theory, and statistical mechanics.  Their                
              symmetries are often called invertible or reversible cellular                  
              automata.  He will also study similar questions for higher                     
              dimensional Markov shifts and their symmetries.                                
                   The classic Alexander polynomial of a knot in three-                      
              dimensional space is closely linked to the algebraic K-theory                  
              group K1.  Recently, other polynomial invariants have been found               
              for these knots, starting with the work of Vaughan Jones.                      
              Pseudo-isotopies and diffeomorphisms of manifolds in a wide range              
              of cases (including knot complements) have invariants involving                
              the algebraic K-theory group K2.  The investigator will examine                
              whether it is possible to define new invariants of                             
              diffeomorphisms of knot complements and other 3-manifolds in                   
              analogy with the new knot polynomials.                                         
                   The commonality of method here is surprising.  A deep and                 
              highly evolved algebraic theory, K-theory, is to be brought to                 
              bear upon symmetry questions which are very far apart in                       
              appearance.  On the one hand are subtle topological questions                  
              about knots.  On the other hand are subtle combinatorial and                   
              statistical questions about infinite strings of symbols.  The                  
              latter application has already borne substantial fruit.
