Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Global Qualitative Analysis of Ecological Models with
               Time Delays and Diffusions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1991 
File        : a9102549

Award Number: 9102549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24134              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yang Kuang kuang@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigator undertakes studies aimed at gaining an                   
              understanding of the global qualitative behavior of solutions of               
              some ecological models with delays or diffusions.  These fall in               
              three parts: (1) finite-dimensional systems of ordinary                        
              differential equations, (2) delay differential equations, and (3)              
              diffusive systems with time delays.  The principal themes of the               
              research are the fundamental problems of finding various criteria              
              for the uniform persistence of these considered systems, the                   
              global stability of steady states, and the existence of periodic               
              solutions and spatial patterns.  In particular, the investigator               
              will study some mathematical models of populations dispersing                  
              among patches in heterogeneous environments, where various kind                
              of interactions will be considered. For systems with more than                 
              two populations, one of the main objectives is to find concrete                
              conditions under which all populations will coexist in the long                
              term.  For two-species interaction models, global stability of                 
              steady states, existence of periodic solutions or spatial                      
              patterns will be main concerns.      Time delays and space                     
              variations constitute integral components of most ecological,                  
              biological, physiological, chemical, physical, economic and                    
              atmospheric processes.  The planet as a habitat of mankind and                 
              other species has become too small to support an extravagant                   
              exploitation of its resources.  The damages are inevitable and                 
              usually occur with time delays in heterogeneous environments; no               
              experiments are possible to fully simulate these effects.  In                  
              order to better understand and control such processes, it is thus              
              necessary and important to study them mathematically.                          
              Unfortunately, current mathematical techniques are far from                    
              adequate to handle these numerous real problems.  The proposed                 
              research will lead to an improved understanding of the dynamical               
              interplay of the effects of time delays and diffusions.  In                    
              particular, the final results can be useful to a wide spectrum of              
              people like ecologists, engineers, system scientists and others                
              who plan for a better management of the planet and life.
