Title       : Japan STA Program: Research and Design Methods of Highway Bridges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1991 
File        : a9102326

Award Number: 9102326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice Cassidy                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7020               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohsen Sultan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CA Dept of Transportation
	      
	      Sacramento, CA  95814    /   -

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 5959,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will provide supplementary support to enable Dr.                    
              Mohsen Sultan of the California Department of Transportation                   
              (Caltrans) to conduct collaborative research with Dr. Kazuhiko                 
              Kawashima for 12 months at the Public Works Research Institute                 
              in Japan.  They will conduct research on seismic design                        
              methods of highway bridges, comparing the California and                       
              Japanese methods.                                                              
                                                                                             
              Since the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake, the importance of                       
              accurate prediction of structures' behavior during large                       
              magnitude earthquakes has been reemphasized.  An expert in                     
              bridge design and Project Manager of the  Division of                          
              Structures, Caltrans, Dr. Sultan investigated the structural                   
              damage caused by the 1989 earthquake as a member of the                        
              Caltrans Post Earthquake Investigation Team.  Dr. Sultan's                     
              expertise in the ductility method in seismic design will                       
              complement Dr. Kawashima's expertise in a seismic design                       
              method of rigid foundations as they compare designs of                         
              several bridges.  Yielding a much better understanding of the                  
              differences between the two systems, the research will help                    
              in retrofitting existing bridges, in designing new bridge                      
              projects, such as a long span bridge to cross the Carquinez                    
              Straight, and in evaluating the seismic safety of existing                     
              bridges such as the San Francisco Bay Bridge.
