Title       : The Importance of Pre- and Post Recruitment Processes to theStructure of a Fish
               Population
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1991     
File        : a9102027

Award Number: 9102027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38308              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter F. Sale   (Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip S. Levin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Processes which limit or modify population abundance are of                    
              general interest to ecologists.  In marine systems, two                        
              alternative hypotheses are currently the focus of attention.  The              
              recruitment limitation hypothesis suggests that recruitment form               
              the larval phase sets the upper limit in population size, or the               
              variation in recruitment is subsequently reflected as variation                
              in population abundance.  Another view suggests that post-                     
              recruitment processes, particularly competition for space or                   
              food, predation or migration are most important in limiting or                 
              regulating sizes of demersal populations.  Dr. Sale and                        
              collaborators suggest a more pluralistic approach is required to               
              adequately explain variability in population structure.  They                  
              will examine this by testing the relative importance of pre- and               
              post-recruitment processes to a Gulf of Maine fish population at               
              different spatial scales and in different habitats.                            
              Specifically they will examine:                                                
                                                                                             
                   1) the importance of larval supply, settlement and post-                  
                   settlement mortality to recruitment variability at a range                
                   of spatial scales and in different habitats                               
                                                                                             
                   2) the importance of recruitment and post-recruitment                     
                   processes to the limitation or determination of population                
                   size in different habitats                                                
                                                                                             
              This approach will simultaneously be investigating both pre- and               
              post-recruitment processes at different spatial scales and in                  
              very different habitats.  Additionally, this research will allow               
              for comparison of the factors affecting fish populations between               
              temperate and tropical latitudes.
