Title       : Constraint Imperative Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1996       
File        : a9402551

Award Number: 9402551
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan H. Borning borning@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9148,9216,9251,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This project continues work on Constraint  Imperative Programming (CIP)
              languages. A constraint  represents a relation that  should be maintained by a 
              computer program. Constraints have a number of  desirable  properties that make
              them useful in building systems such as  interactive graphical applications.
              They are declarative  statements, rather  than imperative statement; a
              programmer  need only to state ``what'' rather than  ``how''. Additional 
              advantages result from embedding support for constraints in  the programming
              language itself. First, it becomes  convenient for programmers  to use
              constraints. Second, the  language implementation can ensure that the 
              constraints are  checked automatically. Third, a more uniform and elegant 
              language can result from expressing standard constructs as  constraints. 
              Finally, more opportunities for optimization  are opened to the compiler.    In
               this project, the activities include  investigating techniques for  compiling
              object-oriented  constraint imperative languages, such as  Kaleidoscope, to 
              produce efficient code. To accomplish this, the system   does as much compile
              time analysis of the constraints  as possible.  Other  activities include
              developing tools for  writing, browsing, and debugging  constraint imperative 
              programs, investigating the compilation of Kaleidoscope  programs to run on
              shared memory MIMD machines, and testing  the utility of this  class of
              languages by programming a set  of representative applications. Another 
              important focus is the development of a more efficient and powerful  constraint
              satisfaction algorithm. A final activity is work on debugging  support for
              constraint systems. The work on constraint satisfaction algorithms  and
              debugging is useful both to support constraint imperative languages,  as  well
              as other kinds of constraint-based systems.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
