Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows: The In Vivo Mapping of Alternative DNA
               Slippage Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1994  
File        : a9402828

Award Number: 9402828
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84905              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne M. Coco   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9402828  Coco    This award is under the International Junior Investigator  and
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S.  scientists and engineers to
              conduct three to twelve months  of research abroad at research centers of
              proven excellence.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint 
              research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities,  expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.    This award will support a twelve month
              postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Wayne M. Coco to work with Dr. Hans-Joachim
               Knackmuss at the University of Stuttgart on  the in-vivo  mapping of
              alternative DNA slippage structures.  The program  will also support a year of
              re-entry so Dr. Coco can  continue his research at Yale University with Dr. L.
              N.  Ornston.    In some of the most complex structures now predicted, one  can
              assign hybridization pairings to nearly every stretch of  DNA looped away from
              its normal Watson and Crick pairing  strand position.  Such structures are
              thought to act by  simultaneously bringing into proximity a large number of 
              motifs.  This either allows simultaneous repair at several  loci or stabilizes
              the slippage structure, which increases  the time repair mechanisms have to act
              on any given motif  pair.    The aim of this research is to map in vivo the DNA
              slippage  structures in pcaD.  If successful, the planned experiments  would
              give the first in vivo mapping of DNA strand slippage  and increase current
              understanding of the evolution and  maintenance of pcaD, catD and of other
              genes predicted to  undergo slippage events.  ***
