Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Dynamics in Almost Periodic Parabolic Equations and
               Coupled Map Lattices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1994      
File        : a9402945

Award Number: 9402945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57269              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wenxian Shen ws@math.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9402945  Shen    Shen proposes research in two areas:  time almost periodic
              parabolic  equations and lattice dynamical systems. Both areas are frequently 
              encountered in applications, for example, time almost periodic  parabolic
              equations often occur in the theory of nerve pulse  propagation and population
              genetics, coupled map lattices serve as  useful models to describe various
              spatio-temporal structures in fluid  dynamics, chemically reacting systems,
              biological networks, etc.  Though much research has already been devoted to
              these two areas,  many important and fundamental issues are still far from
              being well  understood. In doing research on time almost periodic equations,
              Shen  will focus on the long term behavior of general bounded solutions, the 
              existence of specific  solution types and their stability and  bifurcations,
              the existence of global attractors and their structures.  Meanwhile, Shen will
              pay particular attention to those properties of  almost periodic equations
              which do not arise in the  periodic case  (there is strong evidence in her
              recent work and the work by many  other researchers that time almost periodic
              equations are  distinctively different from periodic ones). In doing research
              on  lattice dynamical systems, Shen plans to develop general ways to study  the
              existence of chaotic solution structures and to establish  stability criteria
              and bifurcation scenarios for these classes of  solutions. Moreover, Shen
              intends to give a detailed  description of  the dynamical behaviors for
              discrete versions of certain differential  equations related to nerve pulse
              propagation, fluid dynamics,  chemically reacting systems, etc.    Shen
              proposes  research in two areas: time almost periodic parabolic  equations and
              lattice dynamical systems. Both areas are frequently  encountered in various
              fields of sciences, such as the theory of nerve  pulse propagation and
              population genetics, the theory of chaotic  patterns in fluid dynamics,
              chemically reacting systems, biological  networks, e tc. Though much research
              has already been devoted to these  two areas, many important and fundamental
              issues are still far from  being well understood. In this research, Shen will
              focus on the long  term behavior of general bounded solutions, the existence of
              specific  solution types, and the structure of global attractors for time
              almost  periodic equations. Moreover, Shen plans to study chaotic solution 
              patterns in general lattice dynamical systems and intends to give a 
              comprehensive description of dynamical behaviors for discrete versions  of
              certain differential equations related to nerve pulse propagation,  fluid
              dynamics, chemically reacting systems, etc.
