Title       : Synthesis, Characterization and Physical Properties of Alkalides and Electrides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1996  
File        : a9402016

Award Number: 9402016
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Dye dye@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Pratt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John L. McCracken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    9402016    Dye     This research involves the synthesis and
              characterization of crystalline salts and vapor-deposited thin films that
              contain alkali metal anions (alkalides) or trapped electrons (electrides) and
              cations that are complexed by cyclic or bicyclic poly-oxa molecules. Particular
              emphasis will be given to the study of the optical, magnetic and electrical
              properties of single crystals using a variety of techniques. Because different
              electrides have widely different properties, and since their behavior often is
              dependent on the thermal history of the sample, new complexants will be
              synthesized to provide a wider assortment of crystalline electrides. Recent
              theoretical treatments have pointed out the importance of anionic cavities and
              empty channels in electrides and the extended nature of the unpaired electron
              wavefunction in molecular electrides. To relate experiment to theory, simple
              complexants for Li+, such as 9-crown-3, 12-crown-3 and cryptand  1.1.1  will be
              synthesized and used to prepare electrides for study. The use of alkalides and
              electrides to prepare nanoscale transition metal and intermetallic particles,
              both free and in zeolite cages will be studied.  %%%  This research is
              concerned with the synthesis and characterization of crystalline salts and
              vapor-deposited thin films that contain alkali metal anions (alkalides) or
              trapped electrons (electrides) and cations. Alkalides and electrides are two
              new, interesting classes of materials. Electrides, in particular,  provide the
              unique opportunity to examine the behavior of electrons that do not "belong" to
              a particular atom or molecule, but rather, occupy the holes and channels
              between close-packed large complexed cations. They provide the opportunity to
              study such phenomena as non-metal to metal transitions in systems that approach
              a lattice of nearly free electrons, and magnetic interactions and electronic
              conductivity in 1, 2, and 3 dimensions. Emphasis will be given to the study of
              the optical, magnetic and ele ctrical properties of single crystals using many
              characterization methods.
