Title       : Symbiotic Association of Aphids: Biochemical Role of the Prokaryotic
               Endosymbiont
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1997      
File        : a9402813

Award Number: 9402813
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Baumann pabaumann@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9402813  Baumann  Aphids are dependent for survival on an association with a
              prokaryotic endosymbiont housed within specialized cells in the aphid body
              cavity.  Using the aphid Schizaphis graminum ( greenbud) we have found that its
              endosymbiont (Buchnera aphidicola) has all of the genes of the tryptophan
              biosynthetic pathway and the trpEG (genes for anthranilate synthase, the first
              enzyme of the pathway) is amplified on a plasmid. These results are consistent
              with past observations indicating that the endosymbiont synthesizes tryptophan
              which is utilized by the aphid host.  Preliminary results have indicated that,
              in the distantly related endosymbiont of the aphid Schlectendalia chinensis,
              tryEG has a chromosomal location.  We intend to continue this research by
              examining the  gene organization of the tryptophan biosynthetic pathway in the
              endosymbiont of this aphid species and making a survey to determine the
              distribution of gene amplification of chromosomal location of trpEG in the
              endosymbionts of other aphid species.  The first reaction which initiates the
              biosynthesis of aromatic amino acids (tryptophan, phenylalanine, tyrosine) as
              well as folic acid is catalyzed by 3-deoxy-D-arabino-heptulosonate-7-phosphate
              (DAHP) synthase.  We intend to determine if this gene is located on a plasmid,
              on the chromosome or if there are isofunctional DAHP synthases.  This will be
              accomplished by restriction enzyme and Southern blot analysis as well as the
              cloning and sequencing of the gene(s) for the enzyme(s).  Comparisons will be
              made with the gene organization in E. coli and other organisms.  In most
              prokaryotes the genes for ribosomal RNA are arranged as a single transcription
              unit in the order 16S, and 5S rRNAs.  We have shown that B.  aphidicola has
              only one copy of the 16S 23s rRNA gene and is unusual in that it is unlinked to
              the other rRNA genes.  We will continue this study by examining the
              organization of the 23S and 5S rRNA genes in B. aphidicola.  The genes will be
              cloned, sequenced, and the up stream and downstream regions compared to the
              putative promoter and terminator of the B.aphidicola 16S rRNA transcription
              unit. In their most active stage of growth aphids reproduce by parthenogenesis
              giving birth to live yound.  Nothing is known concerning the number of
              endosymbionts during the growth cycle of the aphid.  Using the quantitative
              polymerase chain reaction we will determine the number of copies of 16S and 23S
              rRNA genes in the B. aphidicola-aphid DNA preparations during the aphid growth
              cycle.  The results will be an indication of the number of endosymbionts.  
              Using immunological methods we will determine the amount of several essential
              endosymbiont consitutents.  This includes ribosomes (ribosomal protein S1), RNA
              polymerase (beta-subunit), sigma factor and GroEL.   %%%  The results obtained
              from these studies may be of use for the eventual control of aphid populations
              by manipulation of the endosymbionts which are essential for their survival. 
              ***
