Title       : Studies in Computational Algebra and Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1995      
File        : a9402819

Award Number: 9402819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74780              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Ierardi ierardi@cs.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Ideas from algebraic and arithmetic geometry have   to  recent advances in
              symbolic algebraic computation,   computational  number  theory, and in the
              effective geometry of real semi-algebraic   sets.  In  motion-planning and
              modeling, the  reintroduction of   classical methods of  elimination theory 
              including multivariate resultants, u-  resultants and Chow  forms  have aided
              in the design of efficient parallelizable   algorithms.  In  number theory,
              rational points on abelian varieties defined    over finite fields  have
              provided a rich new source of groups with  arithmetic   properties that can  be
              exploited in the design of new  algorithms.    This study   computational
              problems for which algebraic  and algebro-  geometric methods have  had
              significant impact.  The research further explores the  applications of 
              multivariate resultants to problems   involving algebraic curves  over finite
              fields and their Jacobians.  These methods have   been  successfully  applied
              in designing factorization-free algorithms  which   have achieved 
              order-of-magnitude improvements performance  in computing   arithmetic
              properties  of curves.  Methods of  elimination theory that have been   used to
              explore the  structure  of semi-algebraic sets and to construct solutions   to
              systems of  polynomial inequalities are also studied.  Such methods have   been
               successfully  applied to the design of theoretically efficient  solutions   to
              very general  problems in solid modeling and  algorithmic motion-planning.   
              This research  focuses these  methods on somewhat more constrained problems   
              manufacturing and from molecular modeling involving   topological  polyhedra
              with  low degree surfaces in low dimensional spaces  where   algebraic tools,
              together  with the basic paradigms of  computational geometry, provide   a
              framework for the  design of  both theoretically efficient and potentially  
              practical  algorithms.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
