Title       : Fiber Optic Sensor for Real Time and Continuous Monitoring of pH and Dissolved
               Oxygen in Sea Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9402540

Award Number: 9402540
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Norman Caplan                           
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269107             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mahmoud R. Shahriari   (Principal Investigator current)
              Clare E. Reimers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sam C. Wainright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9402540  Shahriari  The research aims to develop and test a fiber optic sensor
              for pH  and dissolved oxygen monitoring simultaneously in sea water.  This
              sensor will utilize a porous glass optical fiber immobilized  with pH and
              oxygen sensitive photochemical compounds via a sol-  gel coating technique. 
              The microporous nature of the non-  densified sol-gel coatings, in which
              photochemical dyes are  immobilized, provides a unique local environment that
              is  environmentally stable and immune to photochemical bleaching and  chemical
              leaching due to decomposition or degradation of the  immobilized photochemical
              compounds.  The research for the  proposed fiber optic sensor consists of three
              parts: (i)  development of an optical coating material which is 
              photochemically sensitive to both pH and dissolved oxygen, and 
              characterization of its optical and photochemical properties;  (ii) preparation
              of a fiber optic pH/dissolved oxygen sensor  based upon this coating, and
              determination of its photochemical  stability and optical quality; (iii)
              evaluation of the sensor in  simulated sea water environments in an effort to
              optimize the  sensor parameters under a range of chemical and physical 
              conditions.  Such a development offers potential applications for  marine
              environmental monitoring.    In this proposed reseach the combined resources of
              Rutgers' Fiber  Optic Materials Research Program (FOMRP) and those of its 
              Institute for Marine and Coastal Sciences will be devoted to  development and
              implementation of optical fiber pH/DO sensor for  monitoring of sea water.
