Title       : Algebraic Methods in Multivariate Statistical Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1994      
File        : a9402398

Award Number: 9402398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Perlman michael@ms.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                It is proposed to continue the study of the statistical  properties of
              multivariate normal models determined by lattice  conditional independence
              (LCI) assumptions and/or group symmetry  assumptions on the covariance matrix,
              augmented by compatible  linear restrictions on the mean. LCI models have been
              shown to be  applicable to the analysis of multivariate normal data sets with 
              nonnested missing data patterns. A new application of LCI models  will be
              emphasized here: their application to the analysis of a  collection of
              nonnested dependent linear regression models, known  in econometrics as a
              seemingly unrelated regression (SUR) model.  A SUR model may be thought of as a
              finite nonnested collection of  linear regression subspaces with correlated
              errors across  regressions. For a given SUR model, the least restrictive LCI 
              covariance model compatible with the mean structure can be  determined, leading
              to explicit maximum likelihood estimates for  the SUR model. To date, LCI
              models have been studied only for  multivariate normal distributions. Another
              new aspect of this  proposal is the application of LCI models to categorical
              data in  multiway contingency tables. As in the case of normal data, such  LCI
              models should allow explicit maximum likelihood estimates for  contingency
              tables with nonnested missing categories.   Many familiar statistical models
              occurring in classical  multivariate analysis (the study of correlated data)
              can be  viewed as special cases of models defined in terms of natural 
              algebraic conditions on the means and/or covariances. This  viewpoint will (a)
              lead to a unified and explicit (non-iterative)  analysis of these models, and
              (b) expand the scope of  multivariate analysis by allowing the application of
              classical  methods to many new models, as well as allowing the possibilities 
              of missing data occurring in nonnested patterns and of nonnested  regression
              subspaces.
