Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Studies on 3- and 4-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1996   
File        : a9402988

Award Number: 9402988
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425100             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Morgan jm@math.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zlil Sela  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joan S. Birman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9402988  Morgan       Professor Morgan continues to study Donaldson polynomial 
              invariants of smooth 4-manifolds M.  This includes searching for  explicit
              computations.  One is a blow-up formula that would  express the invariants for
              the connected sum of M with a complex  projective plane in terms of those for
              M.  Such a formula should  prove essential for understanding general relations
              among the  invariants.  Another part of the project, continuing work begun 
              with Tomasz Mrowka of Cal Tech, studies the invariants of a  4-manifold split
              into two pieces by a 3-torus.  These invariants  should be related by a
              generalized product formula to the  invariants of the two pieces.  In a more
              qualitative vein,  Professor Morgan intends to look for other contexts in which
               these invariants may be defined, hoping that other points of view  will
              illuminate the theory and will explain some of the  surprisingly simple and
              coherent numerical results now being  obtained.  Professor Birman's project
              centers on the theory of  knots and links in 3-space.  She is approaching this
              problem from  two points of view.  The first is joint work with W. Menasco (now
               in its 8th year, with much of the preliminary work completed).   Its goal is
              an algorithmic solution to the link problem, via the  theory of braids.  Her
              second project is closely related to the  first, and involves
              Vassiliev-Kontsevich invariants of knots and  links in 3-space.  These
              numerical invariants include all the  information which is contained in the
              Jones polynomial and its  generalizations, and possibly more.  A central
              question is  whether Vassiliev invariants contain more information than Jones 
              invariants, and, in particular,  whether they detect orientation.  The
              asymptotics of the dimension of the Vassiliev algebra, as the  order of the
              invariants goes to infinity, also involves some very  interesting problems in
              combinatorics, which Professor Birman is  studying.       Professor Morgan's
              research concerns invariants of four-  dimensional man ifolds, while Professor
              Birman's centers on  computers and knots.  Each is an effort to tame geometric 
              complexity by rendering it susceptible to numerical or algebraic  computation. 
              Consider the latter, for example.  While knots are  among the most familiar of
              everyday objects (as every fisherman  knows), their classification turns out to
              be a deep and difficult  problem in 3-manifold topology.  Roughly speaking,
              given two  knots, one would like to be able to decide (with the help of a 
              computer) if one can be twisted and deformed, keeping its ends  fixed and
              without cutting the string) until it looks like the  other.  Precisely
              describing a method for doing this is an  unsolved problem on which Professor
              Birman is working (with W.  Menasco, of SUNY Buffalo).  A different aspect of
              the same  question concerns a vast collection of computable invariants 
              (discoverd by V. Vassiliev) which give a partial answer to the  knot question. 
              With regard to the algebraic invariants, the  central question is exactly what
              information is 'missed' by the  Vassiliev invariants.  While the motivation for
              this work is a  wish to understand the underlying mathematical structure, one 
              would expect that answers to questions such as the ones being  asked would have
              applications wherever knots (or 4-manifolds)  occur, i.e. to biology,
              chemistry, and physics.  ***
