Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Ideas, Problems, and Methods at the Interface between
               Biology and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1994     
File        : a9402623

Award Number: 9402623
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Cooke   (Principal Investigator current)
              Courtney S. Coleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvey Mudd College
	      301 E. 12th Street
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9402623  Cooke       The investigator and his colleagues organize an 
              internationalconference that brings together applied  mathematicians
              andmathematical and theoretical biologists to  discuss research at theinterface
              between mathematics and biology.   Mathematical modelsare presented to lend
              insight into a wide  variety of biologicaland biomedical areas, including
              population  and community dynamics,cell and tumor dynamics, epidemiology, 
              immunology, and physiology.Advances in mathematical methods that  are useful in
              analyzingbiological data and models are explored  via lectures ondifferential
              equations, dynamical systems,  functional analysis,control theory, and
              probability and  statistics.  The program forthe meeting includes eight
              principal  survey lectures;approximately 80 shorter lectures and 20 posters  by
              otherparticipants present recent research results.         The purpose of the
              Conference is to provide a forum  forexposition of new research in the field of
              mathematical  biologymathematics applied in biology), and to promote 
              interactionbetween mathematical and biological scientists.   Interactionbetween
              mathematics and other sciences has always  played animportant role in the
              advancement of scientific  knowledge.Recently, as biological knowledge has
              exploded,  interactionbetween biologists and mathematicians has increased.  
              Theseinteractions have improved understanding of theoretical  andpractical
              questions in biology, and have stimulated  mathematiciansto develop new methods
              appropriate for these  questions.  In thisConference, research papers are given
              on  mathematical analysis ofthe spread and possibilities for control  of AIDS
              and otherepidemics, on questions about scales of  measurement in ecology
              andenvironmental science, on radiotherapy  and chemotherapy, onseveral
              physiological medical problems, and  on other problems.  Newbasic research on
              mathematical methodology  is also reported.  Aspecial effort has been made to
              attract a mix  of established andnew researchers, includin g women and 
              minorities.  The format ofthe meeting includes plenary survey  lectures,
              individual researchpapers, and poster sessions, thus  encouraging exchange of
              ideasamong established and new  researchers in this interdisciplinaryfield.
