Title       : Demand Driven Computation of Partial Data Flow and its Application in Software
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9402226

Award Number: 9402226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary L. Soffa soffa@cs.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rajiv Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Although data flow analysis was first developed for use in  compilers, its
              usefulness is now recognized in many software  engineering tools.  Because of
              the origin of global data flow  analysis, that is, compilers, the  computation
              of data flow for  software tools is based on the traditional data  flow
              framework.  However, this framework for computing data flow is not  producing 
              the efficiency, the preciseness, or the type of data flow problem  needed for
              software tools. These problems are due to the  requirements of  exhaustive data
              flow that information is  computed for all possible executions,  at all points,
              and all  information is computed at each program point.    This  work
              investigates the definition of data flow problems  when the properties of  all
              executions, all program points  and all information at each program  point of
              exhaustive data  flow are relaxed, producing partial data flow  information 
              computed on demand. The goal is to define a formal framework, in  the vein of
              the traditional framework, where partial data flow  problems can be  defined
              and computed. Because the number  of problems will grow with partial  data
              flow, and the data flow  problems will not be known in many cases until run 
              time, this  project investigates the implementation of partial data flow 
              analysis by defining a specification technique to express the  demand driven 
              problem and automatically generating the algorithm  that computes the 
              information.  In order to define partial data  flow, information has to be 
              provided that reduces the scope of  data flow analysis.  This information can 
              either be static  information, provided before execution, or dynamic
              information  that is used to either further refine static data flow or to 
              drive its  computation.  This work first focuses on debugging and  testing
              tools and then  explores other applications in software  engineering.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
