Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Species Assemblages of Leptocephali
               in the South Pacific
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1994       
File        : a9402394

Award Number: 9402394
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26220              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9402394  Miller    This award is under the International Junior Investigator 
              and Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S.  scientists and engineers
              to conduct three to twelve months  of research abroad at research centers of
              proven excellence.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint 
              research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities,  expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.    This award will support a twelve month
              postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Michael J. Miller to work with Dr. Peter H.
              J.  Castle at Victoria University of Wellington in New Zealand  on species
              assemblages of leptocephali in the South Pacific  Ocean.      The purpose of
              their research, is to learn about the  distributional ecology and zoogeography
              of leptocephali, the  larval form of eels.  This will lead to better
              understanding  of the reproductive ecology, migration and recruitment 
              mechanisms of adult marine eels.  The focus of the  collaboration will be the
              analysis of catch data of  leptocephali collected during a  series of cruises
              made in  the south Pacific.  They will concentrate on analysis of  species
              assemblage structure and individual life histories  in relation to major
              current systems and the many islands  and atolls in the region.  Further
              research may find that  long-lived leptocephali can be used as indicator
              species to  examine patterns of circulation on a variety of time scales  and
              may provide valuable information about ecological  disruptions caused by global
              climate change or direct human  impacts on marine communities.      ***
