Title       : U.S.-Argentina Visit to Plan Research on Andean Tectonics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1995       
File        : a9402968

Award Number: 9402968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4862               (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Booker booker@ess.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9402968  Booker    This U.S.-Argentina Program award will support a visit by 
              Dr. John R. Booker, of the University of Washington, to go  to Buenos Aires,
              Argentina to work with Dr. Maria C.  Pomposiello, of CIRGEO-CONICET, to
              finalize a project on  Andean tectonics and to assess feasibility of 
              magnetotellurics (MT) surveys in field areas.  Recently  there have been major
              advances using MT to image  conductivity structure, making it an important tool
              for  solving  geological problems where interconnection of water,  other
              fluids, or conductive grain boundary phases such as  graphite or metallic
              sulfides are important.   Experiments  considered for collaborative research
              are: detailed imaging  of an important geothermal resource in the context of an
               experiment to investigate the thermal state of the deep  crust of the
              Altiplano, investigating deformation mechanisms  associated with the high
              seismicity and extremely rapid  vertical uplift in the region around the city
              of Mendoza, or  the potential for oil and gas reservoirs associated with  large
              scale overthrusting in the pre-Cordillera.  These  experiments, while of global
              significance, will also meet  clear Argentine priorities.     The Andes
              mountain range has many parallels to the geologic  history of the U.S.  Using
              them as a field site allows the  time required to study  tectonic processes to
              be accelerated  from decades to years or less, because of their extremely  high
              deformation rate.  In addition to the merit of this  site, a member of the
              research team has been able to modify  the use of MT that will allow its use
              during field campaigns  in remote areas, permitting interpretation of data
              collected  in early stages to guide deployment at additional sites.  This new
              technique is expected to be learned quickly by  members of the  Argentine
              group, allowing them to become  equal partners with U.S. colleagues in the near
              future.      ***
