Title       : How To Measure Dissolved Organic Matter In Seawater
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1995     
File        : a9402859

Award Number: 9402859
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger W. Baier                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308154             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan H. Sharp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9402859  SHARP    The measurement of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) has garnered
               renewed importance recently. This parameter is used by geochemists, 
              biological oceanographers, and physical oceanographers in studies  of global
              elemental fluxes and studies of ecosystem elemental  cycling.  In the past, DOC
              distributions were thought to show  little variation in the ocean and to
              represent refractory remnants  of biological activity.  They were considered
              poorly measured  parameters of little importance.  Demonstrations in the past
              10  years of apparently much higher concentrations in the ocean and  large
              variations with depth caused considerable interest and  excitement in the
              importance of DOC, especially in relation to  ocean-atmosphere carbon
              interactions.      With many analysts trying to measure DOC, controversy arose
              because  of differences in reported concentrations as large as an order of 
              magnitude. The principal investigator of this renewal proposal has  been
              involved for the past two years with an attempted solution of  the controversy;
              working closely with a steering committee and with  a number of experienced
              analysts funded for routine DOC  measurements in the Joint Global Ocean Flux
              Study.  In a  coordinator and referee role, he has been able to get agreement 
              among analysts and variations are more on the order of +7.5%  instead of the
              previous +100% or more.  This agreement on analysis  has come from careful
              attention to analytical blanks, method  standardization, and carbon dioxide
              peak measurement, not from  preconceived ideas of concentrations and
              distribution.  A broad  community DOC analytical comparison is now underway
              with  participation by about 70 analysts from the United States and 17  other
              countries.  The effort of the renewal proposal will: 1.)  Complete the DOC
              community comparison; 2.) Make available reference  materials to keep broad
              community standardization for DOC analyses;  and 3.) Carry out research on
              collection and preservation of  samples to avoid sporadic  rapid changes in DOC
              concentrations from  microbial activity.  The large number of analysts
              interested and  willing to participate in the methods comparisons plus a larger
               number who are not directly involved but who have been in contact  with the
              principal investigator, indicates the interest in the  international
              oceanographic and limnological communities and the  urgency to complete the
              proposed project.
