Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Conference on Computation and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1994        
File        : a9402953

Award Number: 9402953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Lagnese                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Lund   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth L. Bowers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9300805  Lund/Bowers       The Fourth Conference on Computation and Control will
              be  organized with the assistance provided by this grant. In recent  years
              considerable effort has been devoted to developing and  enhancing rigorous
              numerical and analytical methodologies for  control design and analysis.
              Although computational problems in  control are extremely complex, these
              problems often have special  structure that  can be exploited to obtain both
              theoretical and  computational results. Moreover, problems that arise from 
              applications are best addressed by interdisciplinary approaches  where experts
              in various disciplines (numerical analysis, control  theory, fluid dynamics)
              come together in an open exchange of  dialogue on recent research and current
              open problems. This type  of communication provides an important forum in which
              researchers  become aware of new mathematical tools from other areas and in 
              which new research problems are spawned in the individual  disciplines. This
              conference will bring together leading experts  from the areas of systems
              theory and control, numerical methods,  and a variety of other application
              areas to discuss recent  developments in interdisciplinary approaches to
              computational  control. In addition to standard presentations, many
              participants  will demonstrate and share recently developed software packages. 
                    The main objectives of this conference are to provide  exposure to recent
              research as well as currents trends in  computational control, afford young
              postdoctoral researchers and  more established investigators an informal arena
              in which to  discuss problems, and to encourage graduate students toward a 
              career in research in interdisciplinary applied mathematics. Most  of the funds
              provided by this grant will be used to support young  researchers and graduate
              students.  ***
