Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Generalized MLE and Redistribution-to-the-Center
               Estimator of a Survival Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1994      
File        : a9402561

Award Number: 9402561
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sallie Keller-McNulty                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Qiqing Yu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator proposes to study nonparametric estimation of an  unknown
              survival function S (=1-F) with interval-censored data.   Suppose the survival
              time X has a distribution function F.  Let  (Y,Z) be the random censoring
              interval.  The observations are  (L1,R1),...,(Ln,Rn), which are i.i.d. random
              vectors from a  population (L,R), where L=R=X if X is not inside the interval 
              (Y,Z) and (L,R)=(Y,Z) otherwise.  Interval-censored data arise  quite naturally
              in medical follow-up studies or in industrial  life-testing.  To date, there is
              no closed form expression for  the generalized maximum likelihood estimator
              (GMLE).  The  investigator, jointly with Wong, is proposing an estimator 
              obtained by a redistribution-to-the-center method, called the  RTCE.  The RTCE
              has an explicit expression and is a GMLE in many  cases.  The funding of this
              proposal would lead to an explicit  expression of a GMLE in a more general
              interval censorship model  rather than these special cases, and a better
              understanding of  the properties of the GMLE and the RTCE.  These results then
              lead  to a more convenient and useful estimator than the current  procedure
              derived from a self-consistent algorithm.                Interval-censored data
              arise naturally in medical follow-up  studies or in industrial life-testing,
              for example, in a breast  cancer chemoprevention study in which the effect of a
               chemopreventive agent is investigated.  An important question in  such a study
              is how long a woman can go without taking the agent  before the protective
              effect of the agent wears off.  Let X  denote the time interval from cessation
              of use of the agent to  the loss of its protective effect qualified as a return
              to  baseline level of an intermediate biomarker.  When the biomarker  levels
              are monitored in scheduled intervals, the exact value of X  is usually not
              known except that it lies in an interval.  The  overall technical objective in
              this proposal is to carry out  nonparametric estimation of the survival
              function, i.e., the   probability of X>t for any given time t.
