Title       : A Comprehensive Approach to Chemical Process Scheduling Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1994  
File        : a9402948

Award Number: 9402948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233146             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph F. Pekny   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gintaras V. Reklaitis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Pekny - 9402948    Industrial chemical processing success requires
              efficient management of capacity and the ability to quickly adapt to changes in
              the marketplace.  A large number of constraints, the increasing scope of
              operations, time and efficiency pressures, and the combinatorial complexity
              implied by discrete decisions make scheduling and planning problems difficult
              to solve.  This research will lay the foundation for developing process
              scheduling tools that are based on rigorous optimization methods, are robust to
              failure, easy to use in an industrial environment, can be quickly integrated
              with corporate databases, and can address very large and highly constrained
              scheduling and planning problems.      Rigorous optimization methods provide an
              estimate of the best achievable performance available and, in the best case,
              they produce a schedule that is provably optimal for a given industrial
              scenario.  The focus for this project is to provide the methodology and
              information necessary for understanding and controlling the critical components
              of process performance in a system that is sufficiently flexible to incorporate
              technological advances and that is designed to account for the fact that the
              scheduling and planning function will continue to evolve over time.    The
              prototype system to be used is based on the premise that all such systems can
              be viewed in a modular fashion.  The objectives of the research are: (1)
              development of a formulation specifically tuned to sequencing considerations
              that will complement existing formulations and be able to address a range of
              processes in considerable detail, (2) development of an efficient means to
              strengthen the formulation of scheduling problems through the introduction of
              strong inequalities derived from problem physics, (3) development of large
              scale integer programming solutions capability specific to scheduling and
              planning problems and sufficient to address long time scales, and (4)
              integration of symbolic reasoning and mathematical  programming methods to
              reduce the training required to use a sophisticated system and mitigate the
              robustness problems inherent with exclusive use of optimization methods on
              combinatorial optimization problems.
