Title       : Acquisition of an Electrochemical Scanning Tunneling Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1994      
File        : a9402744

Award Number: 9402744
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Searson searson@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Funds are provided for the purchase of a scanning tunneling  microscope (STM)
              with electrochemical STM and atomic force  microscopic (AFM) capabilities. The
              primary use of the  instrument will be for STM and AFM measurements at 
              semiconductor/liquid interfaces, although other groups at  the University will
              use the AFM for topological  characterization of nanostructured materials such
              as  nanoclusters. Scanning tunneling microscopy at metal/liquid  interfaces has
              resulted in significant advances in the  understanding of surfaces in processes
              ranging from  electrodeposition to catalysis. In contrast, very little 
              attention has been given to semiconductor/liquid junctions.  In this work, the
              semiconductor/electrolyte interface will  be used as a means to both
              characterize and modify silicon  surfaces. The ability to resolve and
              manipulate  semiconductor surfaces on an atomistic scale offers a number  of
              unique opportunities for both the fundamental study of  semiconductor surfaces
              and for surface processing and  microfabrication at atmospheric pressure and
              ambient  temperatures. Specific areas of fundamental interest  include:
              characterization of the surface structure of  chemically etched silicon
              surfaces in an electrolyte, the  chemistry of hydrogen passivation layers, and
              the initiation  of porous layers in silicon. Areas of technological interest 
              include: in situ microfabrication at the silicon/liquid  interface and
              electrochemical deposition of epitaxial layers  onto semiconductor surfaces.
              This work will complement  existing work at the University on silicon surfaces 
              supported by NSF. The instrument will provide unique  measurement capabilities
              previously unavailable to the  investigators involved in the above projects.
