Title       : SBIR PHASE II: Using Muliplexed Luminescence to Extend Bioassay Capabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1997     
File        : a9402762

Award Number: 9402762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299328             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith V. Wood   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Promega Corporation
	      2800 Woods Hollow Road
	      Madison, WI  537115300    608/274-4330

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9402762  Wood  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
              develop ways to increase the amount of information available in luminescence
              assays by concurrently using different colors of luminescence.  Current
              luminescent bioassays rely on measurement of light intensity only to transmit
              information, thus providing only one information channel.  Greater information
              could be gained through a multiplexing strategy using different colors for
              channel separation.  The only bioluminescent system capable of emitting a range
              of wavelength, without requiring intermolecular energy transfer, are the beetle
              luciferases.  Previous research by the company shows that individual amino acid
              substitutions in these enzymes control the color of light emitted.  From
              empirical and theoretical evidence, luminescent colors ranging from green to
              red should be possible.  The objectives of this research is to create a
              red-emitting enzyme by engineering specific substitutions into a green-emitting
              enzyme.  When completed, the two enzymes should differ by only 3-10 amino
              acids, and thus their physical and enzymological properties should by nearly
              equivalent.  The development process will use data and methods gained from
              Phase I to search for the optimal combination of amino acid substitutions. 
              Newly created isozymes will be analyzed for spectral, physical, and
              enzymotogical characteristics.  After development, both enzymes will be used
              together to demonstrate the feasibility of luminescence multiplexing in
              quantifying cellular physiology.  The technology will advance quantitative
              measurements in complex biological systems for many commercial and basic
              research applications.  The multiplexing system has novel and important
              applications in several markets, including "real time" detection of toxins in
              environmental samples, new drug discovery and food industry quality assurance. 
              Advantages of this technology versus current "rapid" diagnostics include
              sensitivity, specificity, and the potential to develop tests  for defined
              groups of contaminants in a single biosensor kit.
