Title       : Mesoscale Auroral Plasma Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1998  
File        : a9402310

Award Number: 9402310
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Horwitz horwitzj@cspar.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The proposed work is to study the mesoscale transport and  energization of
              ionospheric plasmas on auroral flux tubes primarily  with the Generalized
              SemiKinetic (GSK) techniques developed in  recent years at UAH.  This hybrid
              ion-incell/generalized electron  fluid approach has demonstrated unique
              capabilities for treating,  over mesoscale (several RE), the transport of
              ionospheric plasma  under the influence of such effects as instability-driven 
              microprocesses and the combination of magnetospheric plasma-  supported
              potentials and wave heating.  This approach incorporates  the self-consistency
              of processes normally found in "fluid" models  while allowing the detailed
              study of ion distribution formation  normally restricted to test-particle
              studies.  Using the newly-  developed techniques together with previously
              developed methods the  areas of investigation will include:  the reaction of an
              auroral  flux tube and plasma transport to auroral electron beams; energetic 
              plasma sheet plasmas and electric currents with self-consistent  ionization;
              time-dependent wave-driven conic generation; and  synergistic effects of hot
              plasma-driven potentials and wave  fields, including the development of the
              potentials themselves.   New technical advances in this research will include: 
              (1)  Incorporation of auroral electron beams into the electrodynamics of  the
              transport description; (2) Development of techniques for  coupling the GSK
              approach into the lower F and E-region ionosphere,  with specific allowance for
              self-consistent ionization and outflow  generated by these electron beams; (3)
              Improved approaches for  treating the general electrodynamic interaction of hot
               magnetospheric plasmas with the ionospheric outflow; and (4)  Development of
              improved algorithms for the incorporation of effects  of the Current-Driven Ion
              Cyclotron Instability (CDICI) into  kinetic and generalized transport models. 
              Finally, interactive  comparisons of the results with auroral ion distribution
              function  measurements from D E-1, Polar, Viking, Akebono, Freja and other 
              spacecraft are proposed.
