Title       : Unreliable Failure Detectors for Reliable Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1997      
File        : a9402896

Award Number: 9402896
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anand R. Tripathi                       
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sam Toueg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  The starting point for this research is a fundamental problem  in 
              fault-tolerant distributed computing:  reaching agreement among  processes  in
              a system that is subject to failures.  It is well-known that this problem, 
              called Consensus, has no deterministic  solution in asynchronous systems, even 
              if it is assumed that  communication is reliable and no more than one process
              may  fail.  The impossibility of solving Consensus ( and other related 
              problems such  as Atomic Broadcast) is one of the most severe  obstacles to
              implementing  fault-tolerant applications in  asynchronous systems.    In
              recent work the PI  has introduced a novel approach to  circumvent such
              impossibility results:  he  showed that unreliable  failure detectors can be
              used to solve Consensus (and  Atomic  Broadcast), even if the information that
              they provide about  failures is  highly inaccurate, e.g., even if they make an 
              infinite number of mistakes.  Since such failure detectors can be  implemented
              in realistic distributed  systems, and since various  considerations make the
              asynchronous models  especially  attractive, this work suggests an approach to
              fault-tolerance  that  is viable in practice.    The objectives of this
              research are to broaden the  applicability  of this approach by removing the
              limitations of the earlier work,  and to explore in more concrete terms its
              practicability.  Specific goals  include:  (1) tolerating communication
              failures,  including network partitions (the  earlier work assumed reliable 
              links);   (2) tolerating process failures of various  types (the earlier  work
              dealt with crash failures only);   (3) considering shared-memory  systems (the
              earlier work dealt with   message-passing systems); and (4) solving other
              problems that are   central to fault-tolerant  distributed  computing,
              including Group Membership and Group  Multicasts (the earlier work  solved
              Consensus and Atomic  Broadcast).  In order to assess the cost and  benefit of
              using  unreliable failure detectors complexity questions are also  explored. 
              Finally, the practicality of this approach is validated by  implementation on
              an experimental platform.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
