Title       : Interdisciplinary Curriculum, and Laboratory Development for Chemical Process
               Operator Technology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9950887

Award Number: 9950887
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen S. Hauer hauer@college.dtcc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank C. Getz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Boykin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles S. Twardowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Del Tech&CC Stanton-Newark
	      400 Stanton Christiana Rd
	      Newark, DE  197021659    302/368-6900

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Delaware's chemical industries are critical to the state's economic viability,
              and have played a key role in the design of Delaware Tech's new Chemical
              Process Operator Technology curriculum. This Associate Degree program includes
              broad preparation in chemistry, physics and mathematics and a range of courses
              with direct applicability to the operation of several different types of
              chemical plants. The Chemistry Department is developing this program in
              cooperation with faculty in other A.A.S. programs, including mechanical
              engineer technology, industrial plant maintenance technology and process
              instrumentation technology. 

This project enables the College to implement
              its new Chemical Process Operator Technology curriculum. The curriculum is
              adapted from the American Chemical Society's National Voluntary Standards for
              Chemical Process technical  workers.  The adaptation involves consideration of
              local industry needs.  The project also helps to equip four state-of-the-art
              laboratories for integrated use in Chemical Process Operator Technology,
              Mechanical Engineering Technology, Industrial Plant Maintenance Technology and
              Process Instrumentation Technology.  Project goals are to implement an A.A.S.
              Degree program in Chemical Process Operator Technology, to enhance related
              A.A.S. Degree courses and to work with an Industry Advisory Committee of
              chemical industries to ensure that associate degree curricula and the new
              laboratories meet industry, American Chemical Society, and TAC-ABET standards. 
              
