Title       : Development of GIS Laboratory and Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1999      
File        : a9950903

Award Number: 9950903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16052              (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Montgomery wmontgomery@njcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Jersey City University
	      2039 Kennedy Boulevard
	      Jersey City, NJ  073051527    201/547-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We have dedicated a new GIS Laboratory and developed an introductory Geographic
              Information Systems (GIS) course at New Jersey City University by adapting
              concepts, data, materials, and equipment from New Mexico State, San Antonio
              Community College, UC Santa Barbara, and UC San Diego; software manufacturers
              including ESRI;  agencies such as the USGS, New Jersey State and Jersey City;
              and from industry.  This has allowed us to successfully train and provide
              "hands-on" lab experiences for our students in state-of-the-art GIS technology.
               Mike DeMers of New Mexico State has provided lab exercises and data with
              environmental themes.  Jeff Wenger of the Jersey City Planning Department has
              provided an exercise that allows students to merge spreadsheet data developed
              outside GIS with that in GIS.  Ilya Zaslavsky of UC San Diego has introduced
              independent projects as a means of providing realistic problems associated with
              GIS data collection, formatting and analysis. We have adapted and implemented
              existing equipment resources by utilizing Windows NT-equipped with Dell
              Optiplex GX1 computers as instructional platforms in the Electronic Learning
              Lab (ELL).  Our laboratory and course provides immediate training and
              "hands-on" lab experience for our students in state-of-the-art GIS technology. 
              This experience provides our students with marketable skills that are leading
              to professional technical employment in a variety of disciplines and increasing
              their opportunities in graduate school.  We have taken the lead role in
              developing the pedagogy and are working with several other departments in
              creating an interdisciplinary course that has received broadbased support.  We
              are also in contact with institutions in the greater New York City metropolitan
              area in collaboration to increase our learning strategies and outcomes.  
