Title       : Modern Analytical Chemistry in the Quantitative Analysis Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9950818

Award Number: 9950818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24999              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Schaumloffel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass, Dartmouth
	      285 Old Westport Road
	      North Dartmouth, MA  02747    508/999-8953

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The curriculum at our institution provides a foundation for the traditional
              chemistry degree and a fundamental physical science background for students in
              a wide array of majors.  This work focuses on increasing student exposure to
              modern analytical instrumentation via the quantitative analysis laboratory, an
              entry-level course in applied chemistry for non-chemistry scientists, and
              through outreach activities involving students in grades 4-12.  Using
              experiments in gas chromatography (GC) and atomic absorption spectrophotometry
              (AAS), students gain experience in hands-on instrument operation and data
              analysis. Experiments are designed as problem based or discovery investigations
              into applications students encounter, based on their academic interests.  As
              modern instrumental methods are introduced, fundamental analytical principals
              are continually stressed.  Of particular interest is the exposure of
              pre-service teachers to modern analytical instrumentation.  This exposure
              enhances their ability to answer complex questions from students in discussing
              current events in which chemical analyses are reported.  Additional benefits
              for chemistry majors occurs in subsequent semesters when students undertake
              senior-level research projects.  Non-chemistry majors gain experience that
              allows them to evaluate and make decisions based on the interpretation of
              analytical data.  Integration of experiments demonstrating the contributions of
              female scientists is used to enhance the learning experiences for all students.
               
