Title       : Instrumentation for Environment Quality Assessment by Non-Science Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2001   
File        : a9950616

Award Number: 9950616
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11747              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Tarutis tarutisw@ljc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lackawanna Junior College
	      501 Vine Street
	      Scranton, PA  18509    717/961-7812

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Due to increased demand for science-based curricula, this Junior College has
              instituted a Natural Science program and is developing science courses for
              serving nonscience majors. A new interdisciplinary course entitled
              Environmental Quality is being developed to satisfy new science core
              requirements for majors in the Liberal Arts and Education Transfer programs.
              This project seeks matching funds for the acquisition of equipment for
              student-based environmental quality assessments of the Lackawanna River, its
              tributaries, and other water sources which are contaminated with acid mine
              drainage and combined sewer overflows. Assessment strategies will be based on
              examining actual and potential impacts on water quality and biota, specifically
              metals, nutrients, dissolved oxygen, and benthic macroinvertebrates. Portable
              field analytical instrumentation, in addition to a new laboratory spectro
              -photometer, will be used to estimate pollutant loads and to evaluate levels of
              chemical constituents in areas of suspected impact and non-impacted control
              (reference) sites. Students will become familiar with the scientific
              methodologies involved in sample collection and analysis, as well as the
              interrelationships between the biological, chemical, and hydrological
              components of the environment. Results of the project will be evaluated in
              terms of scientific validity, contributions to environmental databases, and its
              impact on student learning. Dissemination of results will occur through
              research publications and conference presentations.
