Title       : A hands-on learning approach to understanding magnetic materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1999     
File        : a9950606

Award Number: 9950606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75880              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yumi Ijiri yumi.ijiri@oberlin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah L. Stoll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Scofield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oberlin College
	      
	      Oberlin, OH  44074    440/775-8461

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The synthesis, characterization, and understanding of novel magnetic materials
              are a subject of much interest in science, with important applications in the
              computer industry. However, at the undergraduate level, few students are
              introduced to these magnetic materials or the experimental methods used to
              study them. This proposal will address this need through the acquisition of a
              modem vibrating sample magnetometer and the adaptation of relevant experiments.
              The magnetometer will be used with undergraduate students at several levels-in
              an introductory course on the chemistry and physics of computer materials, in
              intermediate and advanced chemistry and physics laboratory classes, as well as
              in student research projects. In the introductory class, students will examine
              the magnetic hysteresis behavior in samples taken from computer hard disk
              drives and floppy disks. In the laboratory classes, the nature of anisotropy,
              magnetic ordering, and superconductivity effects will be investigated in
              magnetic wires and rare earth oxides. Students in undergraduate research
              experiments will study new intermetallics, nanocrystalline semiconductors, and
              magnetic films in a variety of temperature and magnetic field conditions. These
              hands-on experiences will aid our students' understanding of magnetism and its
              importance in technology and will aid an ongoing effort to incorporate
              materials science into the curriculum. Since few undergraduate institutions
              have modem magnetometry equipment, this facility will serve as a model of
              interdisciplinary teaching and research in magnetism. Results will be shared
              through journal publications and through affiliations with the Great Lakes
              College Association and Project Kaleidoscope.
