Title       : Integrated Laboratory for Design and Testing of Digital Circuits Based on
               Reconfigurable Hardware
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1999       
File        : a9950577

Award Number: 9950577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew P. Bernat                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59675              (Estimated)
Investigator: Krzysztof Gaj kgaj@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth J. Hintz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernd-Peter Paris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project implements a lab for the design and testing of digital circuits to
              be the cornerstone for a new computer engineering curriculum. The lab is based
              upon reconfigurable hardware, Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA),  Complex
              Programmable Logic Devices (CPLD), and a complete suite of Computer-Aided
              Design (CAD) tools.   The choice of this set of elements for the lab and the
              related courses is based upon the adaptation of innovative and successful
              programs developed at other institutions as reflected in recent literature
              about computer engineering education.

Reprogrammable logic is chosen because
              of its short design cycle, reusability of components, and cost effectiveness. 
              It allows students to focus on the design process itself, avoid or easily
              correct design errors, handle relatively large and complex circuits, and learn
              skills and tools they will use as professionals.  It is also relatively easy
              for an instructor to manage such a learning environment and permits the same
              circuitry and equipment to be used in several laboratory and project based
              courses.   

The important pedagogical aspects of this project are an early
              exposure of students to digital design, the comprehensive integration of
              digital design throughout the curriculum, and an integrated treatment of
              testing and design. The expected outcome of this project is the production of
              well-qualified computer engineers prepared to enter the local industry.  This
              outcome is being evaluated by an advisory committee with representatives from
              the local semi-conductor industry, based upon student retention and graduation
              rates, alumni feedback, and feedback from local industry managers. 
