Title       : Manufacturing Simulation Technology Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1999     
File        : a9950052

Award Number: 9950052
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500738             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Crampton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Randy Seidel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Hofer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Degnan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mott Community College
	      1401 E Court Street
	      Flint, MI  485036208    810/762-0527

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A major challenge facing today's manufacturing industry is the timely delivery
              of quality products to consumers. What is required is the use of technology
              tools and simulations to shorten the design and delivery cycle of new products.
              While this emerging technology holds great promise, no  curriculum exists at
              the community college level that integrates manufacturing and simulation skills
              to prepare technicians for the 21st century workforce.

This project supports
              systemic reform in response to industry need through industry mapping,
              curriculum development, professional development and dissemination.  It also
              provides a forum for industry to work with faculty to develop curriculum.  This
              curriculum provides model solutions to technical problems in real life settings
              to meet the requirements of the 21st century manufacturing workforce, and
              incorporates advanced math and science components throughout newly developed
              manufacturing simulation technology curriculum (MST). The project is creating
              avenues through workplace experiences for manufacturers to hire MST graduates
              from diverse backgrounds. 

The program architecture to be used was developed
              at Sinclair's NSF-funded AIM Center and features a competency-based modularized
              curriculum to develop a "systems-level" MST associate degree program.  The
              focus for this project is robotic simulation.  A Tech Prep (TPAD) curriculum,
              and support materials for MST graduates are being identified and specialty
              modules developed. Subject matter experts from industry, education and the
              federal sector identify industry needs and develop curriculum in MST. 
              Instructional materials are being delivered through distance learning so that
              high schools, community colleges and four year universities have access to
              curricula.  In order to carry out these plans, a partnership has been formed
              with other community and four-year colleges, public school districts, industry
              and government.

This project is identifying TPAD curriculum for Grades 11
              through 14 and adults re-entering the workforce. It is supplying skilled
              workers to support emerging manufacturing simulation technology industry, and
              is providing new career opportunities for women, Hispanics, African-Americans,
              and disabled persons. Faculty are being trained on the use of simulation
              technology/integrating technology into curriculum/and pedagogy.  A virtual
              electronic library supports and distributes MST curricula including a
              repository of simulation applications.




