Title       : Educational Materials for a Mechanical Engineering Systems Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1999      
File        : a9950153

Award Number: 9950153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70044              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jed S. Lyons lyons@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward F. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeff Morehouse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The practice of mechanical engineering requires the ability to investigate and
              analyze complex thermal and mechanical systems.  An effective way for the
              students to develop their understanding of mechanical engineering systems is
              for them to get hands-on experience by working in small groups in a laboratory
              environment.  To provide these opportunities, a required mechanical engineering
              capstone laboratory course is being revised in this project.  The new
              Engineering Systems Laboratory course is based upon an integrated sequence of
              laboratory experiments on an automobile and its subsystems.  The automobile is
              chosen as the system to study because it is compact, relatively inexpensive and
              in the direct realm of experience of most students.  More importantly, its many
              complex subsystems provide opportunities for the students to apply the spectrum
              of their mechanical engineering knowledge, including the principles of
              mechanics, dynamics, thermodynamics, heat transfer, and controls.  This project
              is developing a laboratory manual, a series of library/internet research
              exercises, and an instructor's guide for the course, evaluating the
              effectiveness of the developed course materials and appropriateness of the
              course contents, and identifying the appropriate commercial dissemination
              mechanisms for the materials developed.   The materials are grouped into
              learning modules, and four modules will be produced in this proof-of-concept
              project.

The approach taken in this revised laboratory course is to have the
              students investigate the same system through a sequence of complex experiments
              and analyses.  The course culminates with the students performing an integrated
              analysis of the semester's results and recommending changes in the experimental
              design, the vehicle design, or both.  The Engineering Systems Laboratory helps
              students to develop a systems perspective and also gives the students
              experience in designing experiments, applying computer-based instrumentation to
              study system performance, documenting their results in writing, and making oral
              presentations.
