Title       : FTIR, Thermal Analysis and Molecular Modeling Systems for Materials Science
               Enhancement of the Undergraduate Physical Chemistry Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9950768

Award Number: 9950768
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55186              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph L. Amey amey@oxy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Phoebe K. Dea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chris L. Craney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eileen M. Spain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Occidental College
	      1600 Campus Road
	      Los Angeles, CA  900413384    213/259-2500

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Molecular biology is a unifying theme in the biological sciences and its first
              principles should be understood by all students of biology. Not surprisingly,
              an effective way to learn about molecular biology is to do molecular biology.
              However, the equipment infrastructure (not to mention reagents and disposable)
              needed to offer an authentic hands-on molecular biology teaching laboratory is
              staggering. Consequently, the theme of this proposal is to integrate the
              technology used in molecular biology into an undergraduate teaching laboratory
              that will be accessible to students in both "molecularly" oriented and
              "non-molecularly" oriented majors. Our current curriculum does not offer such a
              course.


Prop 9950768

FTIR, Thermal Analysis and Molecular Modeling
              Systems for Materials Science Enhancement of the Undergraduate Physical
              Chemistry Laboratories

Chemistry (12)
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR),
              differential scanning calorimetry (DSC)/thermogravimetric analysis (TGA)
              instrumentation and improved computer/molecular modeling facilities are being
              used as a basis for modernizing our undergraduate chemistry laboratories and
              focusing increased attention on developments in materials science. These
              state-of-the-art instruments are being used to collect, analyze and display
              data. A number of experiments from the Journal of Chemical Education and from
              the research literature are being adapted to form a series of innovative,
              multidisciplinary physicochemical experiments in several advanced laboratories.
              The FTIR spectrometers, computers and molecular modeling software also are
              being used in the general chemistry labs for a unique environmental pollution
              experiment, as well as in a variety of undergraduate research projects. We
              intend through these experiences to further inspire and motivate Occidental's
              diverse student population by illustrating the wide range in which physical
              chemistry principles apply, especially in the under-represented but
              increasingly significant arena of materials science. We anticipate that the
              increased efficiency in data collection provided by this equipment will permit
              more time for student-student and student-mentor interactive learning to occur.
              Through discussion and course questionnaires, information will be collected and
              used to evaluate the program's ability to improve student laboratory
              confidence, as well as data-gathering and analysis skills. It is planned to
              share this experience through publication of a laboratory manual, presentations
              at chemical education meetings and through a Web site.




