Title       : A Gas Chromatograph-Mass Spectrometer for Curricular Improvement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9950226

Award Number: 9950226
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46300              (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Richardson david.p.richardson@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Thoman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS) is an indispensable analytical tool
              used widely in scientific research. Teaching this technique provides essential
              exposure to two central elements of chemical analysis: separation of mixtures
              and component identification through molecular weight determination and
              fragmentation analysis. This project uses a Hewlett-Packard 6890 bench top
              GC-MS system to enhance our curriculum at all levels, by implementing
              experiments demonstrating the power of GC-MS applications to general, organic,
              enzymological, environmental, and forensic chemistry.  Experiments from the
              educational and research literature, as well as standard EPA methods, are being
              adapted to meet the needs of our undergraduates, including both science majors
              and nonmajors.  Central to our curriculum revision are experiments that
              highlight now standard analytical techniques, such as positive ion chemical
              ionization analysis, negative ion chemical ionization analysis for trace level
              electrophilic analytes, and compound identification/structural hypothesis
              testing through spectrum library searches. Our major objective is to expand the
              quality of our existing laboratory program, and of our research experiences for
              undergraduate students, in order to enhance the overall level of preparation of
              our chemistry students, and to contribute towards faculty development in the
              areas of both teaching and research. We are sharing the curricular developments
              from this project with others through lab manual exchanges, faculty
              interactions, publications in refereed journals, scientific meeting
              presentations, and through our Department's WebPages. Our active membership in
              the New England Consortium for Undergraduate Science Education also provides an
              effective mechanism for dissemination of innovations to our sister
              institutions.



