Title       : An Interactive Learning Environment in Statistics : Integrating Multimedia
               Laboratory Exercises and Courseware into the Statistics Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1999      
File        : a9950161

Award Number: 9950161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99238              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah A. Nolan nolan@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Bickel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project adapts and implements newly developed interactive courseware that
              significantly utilizes multimedia into its undergraduate statistics program.
              The materials are designed to improve students' understanding of basic
              statistical concepts and their quantitative literacy while providing a
              flexible, helpful and individualized learning environment.  The materials to be
              adapted and implemented were developed by Bell Laboratories in collaboration
              with the Department and have already been tested in the Department's basic
              non-calculus-based introductory statistics course. 

Students who take
              courses in the Department come from over 60 different departments, and include
              science, mathematics, engineering and technology (SMET) students as well as
              non-SMET students. The courses offered range from introductory courses for
              students wishing to fulfill the University's quantitative reasoning requirement
              to more specialized courses for students with interests in applications to
              engineering or the life sciences. The statistical training offered in these
              courses provides students a rare opportunity to learn how to think critically
              about quantitative problems that are and will be important to them. We believe
              that providing these students with laboratory exercises in an interactive and
              dynamic environment can be a very effective educational device. 

This
              project creates a laboratory environment where instructors can easily integrate
              these materials into the curriculum, and where students can work using the
              computer both in a classroom environment and on their own outside of the
              classroom.  Along with integrating the new materials into the statistics
              program, project activities include preparing guides and conducting training
              sessions for faculty on the use of these materials, and studying the impact of
              this software on student learning.





