Title       : Burd Run Interdisciplinary Watershed Research Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1999    
File        : a9950652

Award Number: 9950652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84162              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Woltemade cjwolt@ark.ship.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Blewett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Shippensburg U of PA
	      
	      Shippensburg, PA  17257    717/532-9121

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

9950652:
We recently recognized four areas for improvement in undergraduate
              education: greater use of technology, increased student-faculty research,
              emphasis on innovative teaching strategies, and enhanced interdisciplinary
              study. Accordingly, the Departments of Geography-Earth Science, Biology, and
              Teacher Education at SU are developing the "Burd Run Interdisciplinary
              Watershed Research Laboratory" to improve undergraduate science education. Some
              existing courses are being improved through new field and laboratory exercises
              based on state-of-the-art equipment. Perhaps more importantly, learning is
              being linked across courses and disciplines, allowing students to build and
              integrate scientific skills throughout their education using the watershed as a
              common case study.  

The watershed laboratory is expected to: (1) provide
              intensive undergraduate field training through collection and analysis of
              related environmental data from a single watershed, (2) establish a
              comprehensive watershed database and digital map library using a geographic
              information system (GIS), (3) provide access to the database through enhanced
              computer laboratories and a project internet site supporting interdisciplinary
              student studies in a wide variety of environmentally related courses, and (4)
              facilitate similar approaches at other institutions through conference
              presentations, publications, and internet access to the database and
              instructional/curricular materials.

This project is improving earth-space
              science and biology education curricula by providing pre-service teachers with
              intensive training in scientific methods as applied in a field and laboratory
              learning environment.  The watershed laboratory is being made available for use
              by public school classes, giving pre-service teachers opportunities to observe
              their intended careers in action.  This project is also promoting faculty
              development through campus-wide instructional innovation workshops providing
              instruction on project equipment and GIS skills, and increasing field
              opportunities for women through related university programs.



