Title       : Mechanical Engineering Laboratory Automation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2001  
File        : a9950805

Award Number: 9950805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117536             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose B. Davila-Acaron   (Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Withington  (Principal Investigator former)
              Luis Abud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Juan Badillo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Javier Resto  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Hector Andino  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Ricardo Mediavilla  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Int Amer U PR San Juan
	      Central Office Systems
	      San Juan, PR  009363255    /   -

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project, Mechanical Engineering Laboratory Automation, focuses on the  
              integration of computer data acquisition and virtual instruments into the 
              laboratory environment.  The laboratory automation project is an adaptation of
              the computer-supported problem solving environment implemented at the
              University of North Texas in support of their computer science curriculum.  The
              Mechanical Engineering Laboratory Automation is adapted to address the specific
              needs of mechanical engineering in the data collection and analyses area.  In
              this laboratory, students use collaborative learning  techniques in the virtual
              environment and are exposed to the highly motivational learning methodologies
              of cooperative, problem-based learning.     A  guide for mechanical engineering
              laboratory design and automation using personal computers, data acquisition and
              control plug-in cards, including a customized software platform is under
              development.   Data recording and display capabilities are automated in support
              of the enhancement  of the problem based learning approach in the laboratories.
              Faculty development through the participation in interdisciplinary projects and
              the application of new pedagogical techniques is an integral part of this
              project.  
