Title       : Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology Learning Modules for an
               Electronics Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9950356

Award Number: 9950356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don L. Millard millard@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald O. Burnham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth A. Connor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Jennings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to improve electronics-related science, mathematics,
              engineering and technology education through the development, implementation,
              evaluation and dissemination of coupling engaging multimedia web-based
              technologies with interactive learning modules (ILMs). It develops,
              demonstrates, and implements three web-based multimedia technologies that
              operate within a browser environment and include: a means to capture, review
              and process a student's actions while using a interactive learning module
              (Scribe); a technology that allows for interactive, collaborative exploration,
              design and testing across the Internet (WebTeam); and the ability to provide
              Internet access to instrumented experimentation and data gathering using an
              inexpensive micro-controller board (LongLab). The new multimedia-based
              functionality that these technologies (developed using Macromedia's Director
              Team and Java) offer are to be demonstrated using specifically designed
              Interactive Learning Modules ILMs). The modular interactive learning software
              materials provide a vehicle to investigate and track how individual students
              access the information, how students learn collaboratively by working in teams
              across the Internet; and how access to laboratory experiments from a distance
              can impact the understanding of key concepts. Three faculty members and five
              research assistants from this institution, one faculty member and one research
              assistant from UT Dallas, are collaborating with this University's Academy of
              Electronic Media staff to develop, test and implement the project's materials
              and technologies over a period of two years. Consultants from the Evaluation
              Consortium at the University of Albany are advising and evaluating the overall
              effectiveness resulting from each of the project activities.
