Title       : Geographic Information Technology Laboratory and Certificate Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9950852

Award Number: 9950852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68122              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Patterson mpatters@kennesaw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alisa Sposato  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Garrett C. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald J. McGarey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold R. Trendell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kennesaw State University
	      1000 Chastain Road
	      Kennesaw, GA  301445591    404/429-2700

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is adapting, implementing, and refining a GIS curriculum modeled on
              existing successful GIS programs across the country; and 2) constructing a more
              complete GIS computer laboratory for instruction in GIS and remote sensing
              technologies and applied undergraduate research. The primary users of the lab
              are undergraduates enrolled in the University's GIS certificate program.

The
              objectives of this GIS certificate program include offering a course of study
              in applied technology designed for SMET and non-SMET students.  Participating
              students are learning introductory spatial analysis techniques. They also have
              opportunities to collaborate with faculty conducting research in using GIS.  
              The scientific method of inquiry is reinforced throughout the program to help
              students refine their critical thinking and problem-solving skills.

This
              program was adapted and modified from several NSF-funded GIS programs at other
              universities, notably Northern Alabama University, SUNY-Albany and the
              University of Georgia, and guided by the recommendations from NSF's "Shaping
              the Future" report (NSF 96-139, 1996). By capitalizing on the strengths of
              other GIS programs, and incorporating recommendations from "Shaping the
              Future," KSU is building a strong foundation and developing an innovative
              program tailored specifically for its student body. Although this program has
              moved beyond the pilot project stage, there is still a need to continually keep
              the curriculum current, especially in a rapidly changing technological field as
              GIS. 

This project is refining the existing curriculum and expanding the
              curriculum to serve students from other departments, including chemistry,
              biology and marketing. This developing program is intended to serve as a local,
              regional and national model for other institutions planning GIS Technology
              programs.  


