Title       : Implementation of an Environmental Focus in an Undergraduate Chemistry
               Curriculum Using Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission and Ion
               Chromatography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9950221

Award Number: 9950221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76048              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Butcher butcher@email.wcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Roger Bacon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia A. Atterholt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Carolina Univ
	      
	      Cullowhee, NC  28723    704/227-7211

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Chemistry faculty at Western Carolina University (WCU), a primarily
              undergraduate institution in the Southern Appalachians, are developing an
              environmental focus to the curriculum.  This focus, previously developed at
              Arkansas State University and WCU with NSF support, is a natural fit based on
              the ecologically diverse location of WCU and the students' employment record in
              the environmental sciences.  Novel, environmental experiments are being
              implemented to promote student learning in (1) monitoring elements and ions in
              environmental samples, such as soil, water, and air; (2) the treatment and
              monitoring of chemical waste from freshman chemistry laboratories; (3) using
              natural water systems to demonstrate the fundamental principles of solubility
              and complex-ion formation; (4) analytical method development; and (5)
              undergraduate research.  Inductively coupled plasma - optical emission
              spectrometry (ICP-OES) and ion chromatography (IC) are powerful techniques to
              facilitate the learning discussed above and are widely used in environmental
              analysis.  Using environmental applications, ICP-OES and IC instruments are
              being integrated into the curriculum to achieve the student learning described
              above.  Novel experiments involving this instrumentation include the evaluation
              of soil fertility in our general chemistry course, the characterization of the
              effects of waste from trout hatching and rearing facilities on water quality in
              a junior-level Aquatic Chemistry course, and the measurement of air quality at
              high elevation sites in our region in a senior-level Environmental Chemistry
              course.  An Instrumental Analysis class is treating chemical waste from a
              freshman chemistry laboratory, and monitoring the levels of metals by ICP-OES.
              The senior-level Instrumental Analysis II students are employing project-based
              laboratories for learning method development, as developed at Bates College
              with NSF support.  The instrumentation is finding applications in a vigorous
              undergraduate research program.  Our findings using this novel approach are to
              be disseminated through pedagogical journals (Journal of Chemical Education)
              and a web site.

