Title       : A Modular Power Electronics Based Systems Laboratory for Undergraduate Power
               Engineering Curriculum Enhancement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9950777

Award Number: 9950777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Pekarek pekarek@ece.umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman R. Cox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mariesa L. Crow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Drewniak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Badrul H. Chowdhury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is to construct courses at University of Missouri-Rolla, by
              adapting best practices of other institutions in modular engineering curricula
              development.  Each module consists of background material and technical
              information on a particular engineering-related topic. The modules also contain
              related simulations and visual effects for graphically observing basic concepts
              related to the technical information.  Using a modular approach, courses are
              rapidly updated to include new topics, incorporate research findings, and
              introduce information from industry or other universities. 

In this project,
              a modular-based approach is adapted to develop hardware experiments to educate
              undergraduate students in the design of power electronic based systems (PEBS).
              The hardware-based modules are to be used in the undergraduate power
              electronics and machines/drives laboratories to introduce students to the
              fundamental semiconductor devices, converter topologies, electric machines, and
              control techniques used in PEBS design. In addition, they are to be used in a
              senior-level elective machines and drives course and an introductory
              electromagnetic compatibility course to introduce topics in system stability,
              power quality, high frequency parasitic characterization of machines and power
              electronics, and EMI/EMC mitigation techniques. 

The objectives of the
              hardware-based modules are to: 
1.  provide experiments and an environment for
              students to develop the knowledge and skills required to design and implement
              power electronics based systems,
2.  provide a means of transferring faculty
              research into the undergraduate curriculum, and 
3.  increase interest in
              power engineering by exposing students from other areas of electrical
              engineering to the multi-faceted area of power electronics based system
              design.

To achieve these goals, innovative hardware and software that has
              been designed by faculty and graduate students are built by undergraduate
              students and incorporated into the instructional modules. Results are to be
              disseminated to other institutions through on-line module manuals, circuit
              schematics, and models.  

