Title       : Undergraduate Chemistry Enrichment in Contemporary Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9950718

Award Number: 9950718
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71245              (Estimated)
Investigator: Muriel C. Maurer mcmaur01@homer.louisville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George R. Pack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Wittebort  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing a new biochemistry laboratory course and is
              introducing a set of structural biology laboratories into an existing physical
              chemistry course. The University lacks a Biochemistry Department with an
              undergraduate degree program, and the Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
              Department at the Medical School is devoted to graduate and medical education.
              There is a clear need for increasing the opportunities for undergraduates to
              study biochemistry at the University. In addition, the implementation of the
              new laboratories enables the Chemistry Department to complete the final
              curriculum step required for introducing a B.S. in Biochemistry. Experiments
              from the research literature and from advanced biochemistry texts have been
              carefully selected and are being adapted to create the new laboratory courses
              which focus on the interdisciplinary nature of biochemistry and its roots in
              analytical, organic, and physical chemistry. The biochemistry laboratory course
              utilizes modern techniques involving proteins, lipids, and recombinant DNA. The
              structural biology unit in the revised physical chemistry laboratory course
              applies x-ray diffraction and nuclear magnetic resonance methods. For both
              courses, emphasis is on a discovery-based approach that provides practical
              experience in a variety of important techniques used in industrial and academic
              biochemical laboratories.  Enriching the undergraduate chemistry curriculum
              with contemporary methods in biochemistry and structural biology is having an
              important and broad impact on the education of the students.  Complete
              protocols for selected experiments and their impact on the student's academic
              development will be submitted for publication and described at appropriate
              education meetings. 
