Title       : Development of Job-based Problems for Technical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2002 
File        : a9950080

Award Number: 9950080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52064              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali R. Yazdi ayazdi@jscc.cc.al.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jefferson St Cmty College
	      2601 Carson Road
	      Birmingham, AL  352153007    205/853-1200

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Job-based problems similar to those technology students are likely to
              encounter when they begin work in industrial settings are not widely available
              for technical physics courses. Consequently, students frequently fail to see
              the relevance of physics to their studies and may not recognize physics-based
              applications when they encounter them on the job. The objective of this project
              is to develop 40 job-based problem sets for technical physics. These problems
              will be developed by physics and technology instructors jointly,
              representatives from the Metropolitan Manufacturing Technology Center and
              employeesfrom small industries in the Birmingham area.  A variety of light  and
              heavy manufacturing settings to be visited by the instructors will provide the
              foundation for the actual work place, job-based problems from these industries.
               These authentic problems will be adapted for use in the algebra-based
              technical physics course.  Photographs, videos and scale drawings from the
              industrial setting will be included. Each problem will be developed so that
              multiple variables can be solved for to make the problems adaptable to a
              variety of student needs.   Problems from the areas of motion, force, torque,
              and electricity will be developed from several different work places. The
              problems will be field-tested by instructors and students from at least three
              other colleges before being distributed to other technical physics teachers at
              national and regional meetings. Completed problems will be made  available via
              links to Jefferson State's web page and in a CD ROM format. An outside
              evaluator will determine whether including job-based problems in the course
              affects the attitude of technology students toward physics and makes them
              better prepared for the workforce. 
