Title       : Physics Analysis Workbench : A Web-Based Computer Environment for developing
               Analytic Reasoning and Thinking Skills
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9950323

Award Number: 9950323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Gerace wjgerace@physics.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Dufresne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics is a pivotal course for those wishing to pursue any science or
              engineering career.  To do well in physics requires proficiency at solving
              problems, and problem-solving proficiency in turn requires that one possess a
              rich arsenal of conceptual and procedural knowledge as well as the ability to
              reason analytically.  Yet, studies indicate that the problem-solving habits of
              students are not effective for developing the analysis skills needed for
              integrating conceptual knowledge into the problem-solving process.  Despite
              many recent efforts to emphasize the importance of concepts, most students
              finish introductory courses with the view that problem solving in physics
              consists of finding and manipulating equations.  These formulaic
              problem-solving approaches are inefficient because: 1) without a conceptual
              knowledge structure to which they can be tied, equations are quickly forgotten
              after the course; 2) memorizing equations does not develop the analysis skills
              that are needed to decide when or how particular equations apply to specific
              physical situations; and 3) students fail to appreciate how a few powerful
              principles can be used to solve a wide range of problems. We are engaged in a
              proof-of-concept project to design and pilot test a platform-independent,
              web-based environment called the Physics Analysis Workbench (PAW) aimed at
              engaging students in a range of analysis processes to help them actively
              integrate conceptual knowledge into the problem-solving process.  PAW
              constrains students to perform conceptual, strategic, and quantitative analyses
              of problem situations using the representations, principles, concepts and
              procedures that are used by skilled problem solvers.  The goal of this
              proof-of-concept phase is to accumulate evidence of the effectiveness of the
              pedagogic approach underlying the design of PAW.  We are developing a delivery
              shell and a prototype set of problems with tutorial support materials.  This
              system and materials are pilot tested in our introductory courses with
              engineering and physics majors.  Exam performance, as well as other standard
              measures, of students using PAW are compared to course norms to determine the
              impact of the system. 
