Title       : Beyond Mapping and Reporting: Improving Students' Skills in Science and Analysis
               for Geography, Environmental Studies, and Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9950628

Award Number: 9950628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Werner rjwerner@stthomas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Lorah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Simon K. Emms  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. DeJong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy Loesch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of St. Thomas
	      2115 Summit Avenue
	      St. Paul, MN  551051096    651/962-6720

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In Shaping the Future (NSF96-139), the Review Committee describes a
              research-rich, inquiry-based process, where students work on real problems with
              each other and their faculty, as the underpinning of effective undergraduate
              education.  In many institutions and disciplines, projects have undertaken to
              implement this approach with some evident success.  

Following the lead of
              these earlier innovators, this project is working to infuse research into the
              curriculum, thereby increasing students' understanding of science.  Students
              are engaging in sustained, involved examples of scientific investigation. The
              project uses an equipment-based approach, and a curricular design that supports
              quantitative, inquiry-based investigations as the core of six undergraduate
              courses at the introductory, intermediate, and advanced levels.  In these
              courses, students tackle fewer real-world problems, in greater depth.
              

Beyond mapping and reporting, students are now engaged in quantitative
              measurement and analysis, enabling them to see whole links between posing a
              problem, making accurate measurements, and exploring and analyzing data.
              Students in these courses are engaging in several realistic research
              experiences, starting with a general investigation of a problem, then moving on
              to forming hypotheses, "seeing" the need for data, learning to treat phenomena
              in the world as measured quantities, learning how to portray that data, and
              beyond that, understanding how to model the results and apply statistical
              tests. Students will develop thinking skills that are not cookbook,
              follow-the-directions exercises, but real think-it-out investigation. They will
              see statistics as more of a useful tool and less of an academic hurdle. 

At
              least three earlier projects have clearly influenced his current proposal. 
              These are: 
->  A project at Pennsylvania State University that targeted
              sophomores in biology.  These students now experience the whole research
              process in sophomore level biology, from initial observations and hypothesis
              formation, to data acquisition, analysis, and presentation of results (The
              Scientific Method and Computer Literacy: A New Biology Lab Curriculum at PSU,
              C. L. Devlin, grant # 9451683).  
-> Introductory zoology courses at Idaho
              State University.   The first year of zoology used to be "an uninspiring
              experience of rote or passive learning and formula 'cookbook' experiments." It
              has been replaced with "open-ended labs and investigations in which students
              hypothesize, interpret data, communicate and defend their results." (Improving
              General Zoology Students' Understanding of the Nature and Process of Science
              Through Inquiry and Investigation, S. J. Belzer, grant number # 981264). 
->
              Intermediate level geography at Salisbury State.  The goal in this project is
              to institute effective instruction, with an emphasis on project-oriented
              teaching and learning, so students better understand the holistic aspect of
              geographic problems.  In this project the goal for student learning is "better
              grasp the coherent links between content-based courses and technique-oriented
              courses" (Geography Computing Laboratory, S. Mara Chen, grant # 9851009). 
              



