Title       : Improving Instruction in Geochemistry Using Project-Based Learning and Modern
               Analytical Techniques.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2001   
File        : a9950262

Award Number: 9950262
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87045              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Yuretich yuretich@geo.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The effectiveness of using complex instrumentation in undergraduate teaching in
              tasks approaching real scientific research with challenging or open-ended
              problems has been demonstrated by the success of  NSF-funded projects at
              Hampshire College, Alfred University, and Rutgers University. Advanced
              instrumentation is an integral part of modern geochemistry. and this project
              will use new analytical instrumentation, principally ICP-AES and ion
              chromatography (IC) to implement changes in the teaching and learning of
              geochemistry.  The use of similar NSF-funded equipment has been successfully
              applied to teaching courses at Eastern Idaho Technical College; Minot State
              University; California State University, Fullerton; and the University of
              Houston. At the University of Massachusetts we have adapted our ICP-AES and ion
              chromatography (IC) instrumentation to implement project-based learning in the
              teaching and learning of geochemistry in courses in the Geosciences curriculum.
               The changes effected  include:  1) incorporating environmental investigation
              and analysis as a laboratory exercise in introductory geology; 2) using short
              investigations in introductory geochemistry to give students experience in
              analytical techniques; 3) re-designing upper-level courses in geochemistry
              (Aqueous and Environmental Geochemistry; Sedimentary Geochemistry) to focus on
              large, semester-long projects involving research design, implementation and
              analysis; 4) using of advanced analytical techniques in undergraduate honors
              programs and independent projects; and 5) adding a geochemical component to
              projects in courses concerned with hydrogeology and environmental geology.
              These adaptations have the added benefit of better preparing undergraduate
              geoscience majors for employment in the environmental industry or for
              developing their skills for research careers.  
