Title       : Industrial Biotechnology Instruction: A Modular Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9950099

Award Number: 9950099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339538             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen T. Harrigan harrigan@moorpark.cc.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marie T. Panec  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Bettis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Moorpark College
	      7075 Campus Road
	      Moorpark, CA  930211600    805/529-2321

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
	This project addresses the critical need within the biotechnology industry
              for a skilled workforce in biomanufacturing. Industry, a community college and
              four-year universities have partnered and worked together to develop a model
              curriculum in biomanufacturing focusing on eight modules designed after the
              departments of a manufacturing facility. This project will utilize the
              expertise of this consortium and the recently developed curriculum to
              accomplish the following five goals. 1) Students will be trained in
              biomanufacturing technologies using the recently developed curriculum which
              focuses on workplace skills with an option for a Certificate of Achievement or
              an A.S. degree in Biotechnology. Strategies to increase the participation of
              underrepresented groups in biotechnology will be addressed. 2) The pedagogical
              approach to such training, and the second goal of this project, is to set up an
              instructional manufacturing laboratory which mimics the industrial environment.
              Using this manufacturing training facility, scientists from industry will be
              instructors for the modules,  guaranteeing that the technical training of
              students directly matches industry needs. 3) The dearth of instructional
              materials for training in the manufacturing component of the biotechnology
              industry will be addressed. A training manual based on the manufacturing
              modules will be developed and disseminated nationwide. 4) The fourth goal of
              this project is to provide a prototype program in biomanufacturing to
              educational institutions engaging in curriculum development. Adaptation of the
              biomanufacturing curriculum will be facilitated by sponsoring workshops and
              providing resources for faculty 
undertaking curriculum development in
              biotechnology. 5) The final goal of this project will focus on articulation
              with secondary schools and four-year universities to delineate a career path in
              biotechnology and ensure academic preparedness of students.










