Title       : X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrometry :Inter-and Intra-Applications as Applied to the
               Geosciences and Social Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1999      
File        : a9950820

Award Number: 9950820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93594              (Estimated)
Investigator: Warner J. Cribb cribb@frank.mtsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Doug J. Heffington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middle Tennessee St Univ
	      1500 Greenland Drive
	      Murfreesboro, TN  37132    615/898-5005

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Geography and Geology has adapted a multi-dispersive x-ray
              fluorescence (MDXRF) spectrometer to teach laboratory-based courses. Adapting
              this spectrometer to courses in geosciences and social sciences has increased
              quality control analysis (Price and Ellis, 1996).  The application of
              geochemical techniques in modifying undergraduate earth science curriculum has
              provided students with the opportunity to explore relationships between
              physical earth processes and important human elements of geography,
              anthropology and archeology.   These geochemical techniques are designed and
              applied to investigatory problem-solving exercises in the students' own
              academic fields of interest in such areas as cultural diffusion, cultural
              integration, and cultural ecology.   The MDXRF also is used to enhance
              laboratory instruction for geology majors and enhances opportunities for
              student research requiring geochemical data.  We have implemented these
              learning techniques using geochemical instrumentation to introduce
              inquiry-based problem solving experiences. The students are able to develop an
              understanding about the affect of physical earth processes on human development
              and the necessity of scientific investigation in understanding physical
              earth-human relationships.
The MDX 1000 uses both energy dispersive (ED) and
              wavelength dispersive (WD) techniques combining classical WD and ED techniques
              with low-cost analyses that can be conducted on a variety of sample mediums,
              including liquids, glasses, granules, metals, papers and powders.  Students
              prepare samples and conduct XRF analyses of ore composition, refinement and
              metal extraction techniques; of bedrock and soil types; and conduct research in
              geochemistry, petrology, and soil science. 
