Title       : A Comprehensive Introductory Biology Curriculum Centered Around Student
               Participation in Research Experiences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9950874

Award Number: 9950874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Derek J. Girman girman@sonoma.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nathan E. Rank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judy A. Sakanari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Hall Cushman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sonoma State University
	      1801 East Cotati Avenue
	      Rohnert Park, CA  949283609    707/664-2156

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We are expanding the accessibility of active learning opportunities in the
              sciences by providing all Sonoma State University (SSU) biology students with
              experiences in scientific investigations early in their biology program.  To
              accomplish this, we are adapting activities developed in three successful
              undergraduate programs:  "Evaluating the divergence with gene flow model in
              natural populations:  morphological and molecular analyses of African ecotone
              and rainforest birds" (T. Smith, PI-NSF); "Molecular genetic analysis applied
              to evolution, ecology, and systematic biology" (F. Bayliss, PI-NSF); and
              "Genetic diversity in natural populations" (T. Smith, PI--NIH).  A common theme
              in these programs is the use of molecular genetic data to understand patterns
              and processes in evolution, ecology, and conservation biology.  We have adapted
              these activities to provide a series of introductory level "research
              experiences" that emphasize hypothesis testing, the use of modern equipment and
              investigative methods, and the development of critical thinking skills.    
              Educators and policy makers have recognized the need to stimulate student
              interest in the sciences.  However, most undergraduate biology curricula do not
              adequately prepare students for careers in science.  In the Department of
              Biology at SSU, we have begun the process of reshaping and updating our
              curriculum.  The goals of the proposed curricula are:  1) to create an
              environment of active learning that inspires students' interest in biology (and
              other sciences) by directly involving them in the scientific process from the
              beginning: 2) to provide students with an introduction to scientific approaches
              and critical thinking skills that will be applicable throughout their lives; 3)
              to create a learning community where lower-division students, upper-division
              students, and faculty work together, and 4) to provide qualified advanced
              students with opportunities to gain teaching experience and high-level training
              in modern investigative and laboratory techniques.  
