Title       : Investigating Biochemical Structure/Function Relationships in an Undergraduate
               Biochemistry Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9950343

Award Number: 9950343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42586              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline R. Roberts jroberts@depauw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DePauw University
	      313 South Locust Street
	      Greencastle, IN  461350037    765/658-4800

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal seeks to transform the biochemistry laboratory into a dynamic
              interactive learning environment utilizing the recent advances in the area of
              structure function relationships. Recognizing the value of hands-on experiences
              in making women and male students active participants in their own education,
              the goal of this project is threefold: to have students experience the
              structural function relationship of biomolecules through innovative
              laboratories and class work, to expose students to modem biochemical laboratory
              equipment and technology in order to better prepare the info post-graduate
              endeavors, and to provide the students with a well-founded knowledge of
              experimentation in biochemistry. Specifically, an interactive biochemistry
              laboratory will be designed around structure based learning activities that
              will ultimately lead to an understanding of biochemical function. Each group of
              experiments will be mimic a research setting in which the experiments may take
              many weeks to fully develop. Upon completion of a section, the students will be
              required to write a paper in the format of a biochemical journal. The first
              section will focus on over expression, purification and partial
              characterization of an enzyme utilizing fundamental techniques in biochemistry.
              The next section will explore more sophisticated structure function
              relationships of proteins. Students will be exposed to a high technology
              UV-Visible spectrophotorneter to gather primary kinetic data to be compared to
              the conceptual data they will gather using two Silicon Graphic workstations.
              The final section will focus on the structure function relationship of nucleic
              acids. Though this proposal is not targeting women or minorities, a number of
              studies have suggested that hands on experiences in a realistic setting have
              aided in the retention of women in science programs. Since biochemistry is the
              most popular elective among chemistry students, and is becoming more necessary
              for pre-professional students, revisions of this course will influence a broad
              variety of students.




