Title       : Data Acquisition Interfaces for Chemistry Labs at Seven Regional Community
               Colleges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9950846

Award Number: 9950846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65761              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Hamlet phamlet@pittstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald Caple  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard A. Kivett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pittsburg State University
	      1701 South Broadway
	      Pittsburg, KS  667625856    316/231-7000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University is assisting seven regional community colleges, Allen County
              Community College, Coffeyville Community College, Fort Scott Community College,
              Independence Community College, Labette Community College, Neosho County
              Community College, and N.E. Oklahoma A&M College, in adding data acquisition
              equipment and adapting related experiments to their chemistry laboratory
              programs. The instructions to students for the new equipment include computer
              analysis and display of the data collected. The equipment for four of the
              community colleges is Vernier calculator based laboratory (CBL) packages, the
              type used at the University. Pre-existing circumstances caused the other three
              schools to select sensors interfaced directly to computers. The community
              college chemistry instructors also are bringing organic chemistry laboratory
              classes to the University to get hands-on experience with existing major
              instruments including NMR spectrometers (60 and 300 MHz), a GC/Mass
              spectrometer, and an FT-IR spectrophotometer.  During the first year of the
              project, institutions adapt existing laboratory instructions to the new
              equipment and data analysis software. A workshop at the University assists the
              community college chemistry instructors in the adaptation process and trains
              them to operate the major instruments to which they bring students. During the
              second year of the project, faculty add new experiments that increase the use
              of the sensors. The new experiments are written in guided-inquiry format,
              adapting methods used by the New Traditions chemistry initiative.  During the
              second year, the community college instructors become self-sufficient at
              operating the major instruments at Pittsburgh State and teaching students to
              analyze the spectra taken. During the third year, the participants disseminate
              the results of the project by publications and presentations. The equipment at
              the community colleges and Pittsburgh State is capable of serving all the
              chemistry students in the region for many years.


