Title       : Adventure Engineering: A Creativity-Based, Design-Centered Approach to Secondary
               School & Introductory Level Undergraduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a9950660

Award Number: 9950660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75134              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Mooney mooney@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Davis M. Egle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Monte P. Tull  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edmund A. Marek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lance L. Lobban  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              There is a clear need to attract, engage and retain the most creative, talented
              and intelligent young scholars for careers in engineering, however, a closer
              look at the baptism of students into engineering education reveals major
              problems. The lack of formal engineering presence in primary and secondary
              school education coupled with high freshman attrition in college reveals that
              many bright students are not realizing engineering careers. 

Adventure
              Engineering provides a framework wherein all disciplines of engineering are
              incorporated into design solutions to adventure-based scenarios and obstacles.
              Adventure Engineering is proposed to immerse future teachers of primary- and
              secondary-levels of education with undergraduate students in the broad arena of
              multidisciplinary engineering through exciting, carefully developed,
              engineering challenges. By fostering a motivating, non-threatening,
              teamwork-based environment, Adventure Engineering aims to attract and retain
              quality students to engineering, including women and minorities.
	
This
              proof-of-concept proposal involves Adventure Engineering development by a
              working group of College of Engineering and College of Education faculty, with
              special participation from the NSF-funded Oklahoma Teacher Enhancement Center.
              A series of adventure obstacles requiring multidisciplinary engineering
              solutions through the application of science and mathematical principles are
              carefully threaded into existing secondary school and undergraduate freshman
              level curriculum. Development involves the synergism of engineering, education,
              and secondary school faculty and students. Preservice secondary school teachers
              will be trained to adopt Adventure Engineering. To explore its effectiveness on
              students, Adventure Engineering is implemented and assessed in both secondary
              school and undergraduate education during the proof-of-concept phase.

