Title       : Physical Chemistry On-line, Establishment of Multi-Institutional Learning
               Environment for Physical Chemistry Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9950809

Award Number: 9950809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307418             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theresa J. Zielinski tzielins@monmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Monmouth University
	      
	      West Long Branch, NJ  07764    732/571-3502

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Although many physical chemists may be interested in revitalizing and improving
              the physical chemistry curriculum, they often are either isolated in a small
              department or alone with no departmental or institutional support to implement
              such changes. In small physical chemistry classes, the number of students may
              not be large enough to take full advantage of dynamic student centered group
              activities. Collaboration with distant colleges through Internet technology can
              partially overcome such isolation problems, but a lack of appropriate
              instructional materials in this innovative approach presents a large barrier
              towards curriculum reform.

During the past two years, a group of physical
              chemistry faculty from several colleges and universities have been examining
              the feasibility of on-line collaborative modules by developing and testing the
              use of these student-centered, active-learning materials which are specifically
              designed for on-line activities. Using the Internet as a communication tool,
              students first respond to questions that bring out their prior knowledge of
              topics and guide them towards a laboratory investigation. They perform
              experiments in-groups at their local campus and then share their results with
              partner groups at other campuses. One faculty member serves as facilitator to
              provide guided inquiry directions. Pooling results and interpretations of data
              permits students to do more than is possible in a single three-week laboratory
              segment on each campus. Students share ideas and reach closure by writing
              papers that are peer reviewed by partner groups.

Ongoing formative
              assessment shows that students thrive when modern tools and progressive
              pedagogical techniques are implemented in this manner. Thus, it is proposed to
              expand this approach by creating, testing, and accessing the use of on-line
              modules to cover a range of physical chemistry topics. In order to share our
              experience with other physical chemistry faculty, the resulting peer reviewed
              on-line modules, assessment data and tools, and a faculty handbook describing
              the details of how to set up an online learning community will be placed on a
              commercially distributed CD.


