Title       : North Carolina Consortium for Logistics Education (NCCLE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2000       
File        : a9950073

Award Number: 9950073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399969             (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel Greis noel_greis@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randy Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lonnie H. Blizzard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karin Pettit  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Patricia Noble  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Celestine A. Ntuen  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project is establishing the North Carolina Consortium for Logistics
              Education (NCCLE), a consortium of educational institutions across the State of
              North Carolina, for the purposes of developing curricula in global logistics to
              be administered through the North Carolina Logistics Education Training Center
              at the North Carolina Global TransPark (GTP/ETC). The North Carolina Global
              TransPark is an innovative new complex that enables just-in-time global
              operations by integrating multiple modes of transportation, information
              systems, and the knowledge and commercial support necessary to manage the
              increasingly complex flow of goods and information on a global basis. The NCCLE
              curriculum will be modular, deliverable via a wide range of media, and will
              lead seamlessly to both 2-year and 4-year degrees in global logistics. Project
              objectives are focused in broad areas including faculty development, diversity
              and curriculum development/integration of technology in education. The
              NCCLE-developed curriculum will broaden technical education in logistics across
              the State in response to the emerging demands of competitive business strategy
              that is based on speed in product manufacture and delivery. Faculty development
              will center on the collaboration between multidisciplinary/multicampus
              education partners for designing and implementing the curriculum. Diversity
              issues will focus on the aggressive  recruitment and retention of the
              traditionally under-represented populations. The primary target audience for
              the curriculum is the post-secondary student enrolled in, or desiring to enroll
              in, applied global logistics programs.  A variety of delivery and schedule
              formats will also be offered to accommodate today's diverse adult learner. With
              respect to curriculum delivery vehicles and formats, NCCLE will support a
              myriad of electronic distribution methods ranging from simple e-mail to CD-ROM
              to simultaneous high-resolution ideoteleconferencing deliverable via a range of
              media.

