Title       : Internet and Multimedia Technology (I/MMT): Curriculum, Faculty, and Workforce
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9950056

Award Number: 9950056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvia Sorkin ssorkin@ccbc.cc.md.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donna H. Tupper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Mento  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine Caplan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen M. Harmeyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Comm Coll of Baltimore Cnt
	      7201 Roseville Boulevard
	      Essex, MD  212373855    410/682-6000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Internet and multimedia technologies are at the core of radical changes in
              many fields, including communications, business, entertainment, education, and
              art. To address the shortage of well-educated workers in this field, the
              Community College of Baltimore County is implementing new Certificate and
              Associate degree programs with Internet and Multimedia Technology tracks.  The
              programs prepares students for entry-level employment, provides opportunities
              for workers to upgrade or acquire technical skills, and prepares students for
              further education in articulated four-year programs. Project faculty obtain
              professional development through further graduate studies in this field.
              Students in the new program are immersed in a rich information technology
              environment for general education courses as well as for their major field.  To
              this end, a multimedia laboratory is being created and laboratory manuals are
              being developed for courses in the new program. 

Partnerships with business
              and educational institutions, including Skyline Network Technologies, GR8
              Integrated Marketing Communications and Design, and Science Applications
              International Corporation, provide internships and cooperative-education
              opportunities for students and faculty. Annually, an Internet and Multimedia
              Conference brings together secondary teachers and faculty from two- and
              four-year colleges educating students for this field. An articulated curriculum
              to prepare highly-skilled Internet and multimedia technicians with the
              necessary foundation in mathematics, science, and written and oral
              communications is being developed over a two-year period with Baltimore area
              high schools.  Local four-year institutions, including some with predominantly
              female or minority populations, are participating in cooperative arrangements
              to facilitate the transfer of students from this innovative program. The
              University of Baltimore, College of Notre Dame of Maryland, Towson University,
              and Bowie State University are among the institutions developing these unique
              articulation agreements.


