Title       : Project CLEA: Contemporary Laboratory Experiences in Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1999    
File        : a9950566

Award Number: 9950566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246868             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence A. Marschall marschal@gettysburg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn A. Snyder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael B. Hayden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gettysburg College
	      North Washington Street
	      Gettysburg, PA  17325    717/337-6000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1253,7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project CLEA (Contemporary Laboratory Experiences in Astronomy) develops
              laboratory exercises in astronomy. The  project focuses on the development of
              laboratory exercises to complement the existing suite of materials for Project
              CLEA .  The new exercises are  (1) Radial velocities of binary stars and the
              search for Extrasolar Planets, and (2) Cepheid Variables and the Cosmic
              Distance Scale. These exercises consist of PC-based simulations of astronomical
              observing techniques, using real astrophysical data, along with student
              workbooks and technical manuals for teachers. In addition a third exercise,
              from those already developed for the PC by Project CLEA, is adapted for
              delivery via an interactive Web-based application.Evaluation of the curricular
              impact and pedagogical effectiveness of these materials is conducted at a
              diverse group of institutions (Universities, 4-year colleges, Two Year
              Colleges, and High Schools), by observations by an external evaluator and 
              through the analysis of on-line questionnaires. Project CLEA materials are
              available on a dedicated  website (http://www.gettysburg.edu/academics
              /physics/clea/lam.html), and are disseminated further at workshops at national
              and regional teachers' meetings.The materials, including an entire suite of a
              dozen exercises developed over the past 8 years, are available as a  package as
              an end-product of this project, distributed either by a commercial publisher or
              by a non-profit educational organization.  
