Title       : Mesolore: A Model for Multicultural and Bi-lingual Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a9950883

Award Number: 9950883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156864             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Bakewell Liza_Bakewell@Brown.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              "Mesolore" is a multimedia educational project currently under development at
              the Center for Latin American Studies at Brown University.  Mesolore uses the
              pictorial and hieroglyphic writing systems of two pre-Columbian Mesoamerican
              cultures, Mixtec and Maya, to shed new light on the study of human
              communication. It will operate on both DOS Windows and Apple OS machines and
              appear in Spanish and English.

As a teaching tool, Mesolore aims to
              introduce undergraduates to the development and purposes of Mesoamerican
              writing and culture. As a research tool, Mesolore aims to contribute to
              Mesoamerican scholarship by providing senior scholars with a readily accessible
              laboratory of primary and secondary materials.

Mesolore's educational
              objectives center on the following questions:  What can be learned about human
              communication by studying Mesoamerican writing systems? What can be learned
              about people, history, and culture?  Can these writing systems reveal to us
              information on health, nutrition, social organization, gender diversification
              and other social factors?  How--and in what social and spatial contexts--was
              Mesoamerican writing used?  How effective is writing that makes prominent use
              of "'pictures"?  Should we continue to categorize pictorial writing exclusively
              in evolutionary terms as preceding ideographic, syllabic and alphabetic
              systems?  

Mesolore Beta '98 is available on CD-ROM.  The CD-ROM materials
              are themselves quite extensive, and include lectures, debates and discussions,
              tutorials, laboratories, guest speakers and published articles.  These are
              interconnected in a multimedia database, which has been developed to the point
              where it is relatively easy to use and of high quality.  The CD-ROM contains 4
              laboratories that are analogues of being in the field examining Mixtec and
              Mayan artifacts.  

The Mesoamerican project materials have been tested in
              classrooms on two college campuses.  They are now slated for beta-testing in 10
              college and 20 high school classes during the 1999-2000 academic year.  The
              content materials support different levels of learning - from introductory,
              high school level to upper division undergraduate seminars, and also scholarly
              research.  
 

