Title       : NMR Project-Based Laboratories in the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9950438

Award Number: 9950438
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30938              (Estimated)
Investigator: Houston Byrd byrdh@um.montevallo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. O'Donnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Montevallo
	      Station 43
	      Montevallo, AL  35115    205/665-2521

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project uses an FT-NMR, upgraded from a CW-NMR, in general chemistry,
              organic chemistry, and instrumental analysis courses within the undergraduate
              chemistry curriculum.  Laboratories designed for the FT-NMR enable our students
              to expand their knowledge base from learning concepts to solving problems
              through the application of modem instrumentation. We develop our students'
              analytical and instrumentation skills by the introduction of project-based
              laboratories into the curriculum. The project-based laboratories are developed
              by adapting well-known reactions from the undergraduate education literature or
              from the primary research literature.  These laboratories are designed to
              introduce students to the scientific method and the means by which it is
              developed. In these labs, students construct their own hypotheses and testable
              experiments, collect and interpret data and disseminate the information through
              discussions and presentations. The upgrade to the FT-NMR enables our students
              to follow kinetic reactions, investigate equilibrium reactions and obtain
              integrated spectra necessary in the project-based labs. A secondary goal is to
              modernize the undergraduate curriculum and to produce graduates who are
              competent in the use of modern instrumentation.  The NMR is also used in
              undergraduate research projects. 
