Title       : A New Undergraduate Program in Freshwater Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a9950799

Award Number: 9950799
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Naiman naiman@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frieda B. Taub  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Quinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael T. Brett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel E. Schindler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Washington is creating a unique program in Freshwater Sciences
              for undergraduates. The program is coordinated among different units across
              campus, places a greater emphasis on hands-on research through increased
              laboratory and field opportunities for students, and offers new and modified
              courses that place greater emphasis on communication skills. Our goal is to
              develop a program that reflects national leadership in freshwater science and
              becomes a model for other institutions as called for in the Freshwater
              Imperative and the NRC Committee on Limnology.  Both of these committees
              stressed the need for coordinated, multidisciplinary teaching programs in
              freshwater sciences and for programs with experimental learning focused on
              undergraduates.  In addition, the project is adapted from the report of the
              ASLO "Challenges for Limnology Committee (Lewis, 1995) entitled "Challenges for
              Limnology in the United States and Canada:  an assessment of the discipline in
              the 1990's," which indicated that the current focus and course offerings in
              freshwater sciences in the United States are aimed primarily at graduate
              students.  This project is adapting elements of a model graduate program into a
              curriculum suitable for undergraduate majors.  Already this program is unifying
              existing courses across campus and increasing the visibility of freshwater
              science opportunities for undergraduates.  Our program enables us to adapt and
              implement reforms called for by several national reviews of undergraduate
              education which have stressed the need for increased laboratory and field
              experiences.  The program also is establishing a greater sense of community
              among undergraduates studying freshwater science, enabling them to identify
              relevant coursework and receive guidance earlier in their undergraduate
              careers, and producing "work-ready" graduates.  It is expected that program
              graduates will have the ability to: identify critical aquatic resource issues,
              evaluate and separate fact from opinion, coordinate disparate viewpoints,
              explain issues and educate others, collect and analyze data, and write clearly
              and effectively. 
