Title       : Research Enhanced Active Learning in Chemistry (REAL Chem)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9950715

Award Number: 9950715
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113085             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy E. Carpenter carpenne@mrs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Olson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Our traditional curriculum is being replaced with a new, more interdisciplinary
              curriculum which more concretely embraces open-ended inquiry. The outcome is
              expected to be chemistry majors that are prepared to be problem solvers in a
              wide variety of fields and in a wide spectrum of careers.

Although our
              previous curriculum was very successful in preparing our graduates in a
              traditional sense, it was compartmentalized, with little emphasis on the value
              of a broad approach to indeterminate scientific problems. We are redesigning
              the curriculum so that our majors are involved early in their undergraduate
              careers in open-ended learning activities which span the boundaries of
              analytical, organic, inorganic and physical chemistry. The new "Introduction to
              Research" course at the sophomore level, and subsequent offerings at the upper
              level, model the interdisciplinary nature of chemistry and emphasize guided
              inquiry. In addition, the introduction of a new "major in chemistry with
              concentration in biochemistry" interweaves coursework in the disciplines of
              chemistry and biology, and amplifies the importance of chemistry in the
              solution of biological problems. 

In designing this new curriculum, aspects
              of successful programs at California State University-Chico, DePaul University,
              the University of San Francisco, James Madison University, the University of
              Central Arkansas, and Willamette University have been modified and adapted to
              create our programmed introduction to research, the use of peer mentors, early
              introduction to research, group work, the interdisciplinary approach, and
              improved communication skills.

Integral to this curriculum revision is the
              incorporation of an FT-NMR spectrometer and a GC-MS which enhance our students'
              hands-on, discovery-oriented learning.  A number of experiments from the
              Journal of Chemical Education are adapted so that the use of FT-NMR and GC-MS
              is woven throughout the curriculum.

