Title       : Improving the Chemistry Curriculum Through NMR Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9950416

Award Number: 9950416
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. R. Brook brookd@udmercy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian P. Buffin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Lou Caspers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shulamith Schlick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth S. Roberts-Kirchhoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Detroit
	      4001 West McNichols Road
	      Detroit, MI  482190900    313/927-1000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University is developing a
              project-based curriculum in chemistry. Such an approach to chemical education
              better prepares students for industry, graduate and professional schools by
              developing independent reasoning and problem solving skills in a chemical
              environment. To enhance this program, students are using a 300 MHz FTNMR
              spectrometer alone and in conjunction with the other instrumentation within the
              department to complete projects ranging from characterization of natural
              products and the analysis of syntheses in sophomore organic laboratories, to
              the determination of polymer phase equilibria in physical chemistry, the
              determination of complex structures in instrumental analysis and the
              investigation of tertiary peptide structure in biochemistry.  Experiments are
              adapted from the research literature and from the Journal of Chemical Education
              to create these projects that are designed to promote independent thinking and
              problem solving by the students, and to illustrate the full power of NMR
              techniques in a broad spectrum of chemical fields while remaining feasible for
              a one-semester course. Many of our students choose to complete their chemical
              education with a research project. Here the spectrometer is especially useful
              in the characterization of intermediates and the proof of results.

The
              University has a commitment to the education of minorities and women. Currently
              approximately 65% of our undergraduate science majors are female, and 20% are
              members of minority groups. We expect the implementation of this program to
              continue to improve the education of our minority undergraduates and to
              continue to attract minorities and women into the chemical sciences.

