Title       : Development of a Remote Access Internet Based Mechatronics/Process Control
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1999      
File        : a9950782

Award Number: 9950782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony Tzes tzes@poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vikram Kapila  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The highly complex and interdisciplinary nature of modern engineering systems
              necessitates synergies among the different engineering and science disciplines.
              An integral part of such systems is the design of advanced control strategies.
              This project focuses on the development of a Control Design Laboratory
              involving multidisciplinary robotic, chemical process, electric, machine, and
              energy conversion systems. A unique feature of the laboratory is the adaptation
              from the NSF funded workshop "New Directions in Control Engineering Education"
              of an Internet-based remote access system (RAS) for the laboratory testbeds . 
              These modular and multidisciplinary testbeds allow laboratory experiences in
              the integration of sensors, actuators, electronics, computer interfaces,
              networking, and software.  Laboratory manuals for each testbed are under
              development.  In addition to engineering students , the project targets include
              pre-college students and teachers through their participation in pilot-testing
              and implementation of experimental test-beds.  Cross-disciplinary interactions
              are promoted utilizing a team oriented approach to the pedagogy of design and
              control of the multi-disciplinary experimental test-beds.  The project impacts
              the curricula of mechanical, aerospace, manufacturing, electrical, and chemical
              engineering departments as well as that of the computer science department.   
