Title       : Communication Laboratory Enhancement for an Undergraduate ECE Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a9950347

Award Number: 9950347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55237              (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Stensby stensby@ece.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurie L. Joiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Berinato  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the proposed CCLI-A&I project is to supply equipment for a
              communication laboratory at the University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH).  The
              equipment supports the startup of two new, one-credit-hour, undergraduate
              laboratory courses in communication technology and data networks.  The new
              laboratory courses are tightly coupled to existing communication-system lecture
              courses offered by the department.
	
A number of experiments that are
              currently in use at the University of Michigan, the University of Hartford, the
              University of Denver and elsewhere will be implemented at UAH.  These
              experiments deal with modulation/demodulation, phase-locked loops (PLLs),
              filters, oscillators, RF design and analog/digital/computer communication, and
              they are documented completely on the Educator's Corner web site maintained by
              Hewlett-Packard (also, a compact disc version is distributed freely by HP).  In
              addition, original material generated by the principal and co-principal
              investigators will be used in laboratory experiments.  Finally, in the areas of
              PLLs, oscillators, analog/digital communication and related topics, "turn key"
              experiments from Lab Volt, Inc. will be implemented at UAH.
	For the
              laboratories, manuals are to be compiled and disseminated widely.  By using
              the.pdf file-format standard, this information is placed on the world wide web.
               In addition, original material developed at UAH will be submitted to corporate
              programs, such as Educator's Corner. Finally, key personnel at Adtran and
              Dynetics, local technology companies, will serve as independent project
              reviewers/evaluators.
	The proposed project addresses several DUE themes,
              including diversity, faculty development and the integration of technology in
              education.  Its importance follows from the fact that it directly addresses the
              nation's critical need for engineers trained in the science and technology of
              communication systems, a major engine for economic growth in the 21st
              century.

