Title       : Adapting Watershed Research and Instrumentation to the Undergraduate Curriculum
               at SUNY, Binghamton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1999       
File        : a9950491

Award Number: 9950491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42117              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen M. Salvage ksalvage@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph R. Graney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In order to implement field experiences into three undergraduate courses on the
              SUNY, Binghamton University campus, we have adapted and installed industry
              standard hydrological and environmental data gathering equipment within the
              Fuller Hollow Creek Watershed as a laboratory component since students will
              encounter this equipment and these methods in their professional work after
              graduation.  This adaptation concept of use of a small well field was
              implemented at several universities in recent years (e.g. Fletcher, 1994; Rahn
              and Davis, 1996; Hluchy, 1997; Hluchy, 1998).  The work done by Hluchy at
              Alfred University was funded in part through the NSF and served as the model
              for our field hydrogeology program.  We are expanding on the well field concept
              by incorporating water quality sampling and adding the capability for
              monitoring meteorological and atmospheric data using sampling protocol and
              equipment in use at the University of Michigan's Air Quality Laboratory.
These
              instrumented sites and the data collected are used in several disciplines
              enhancing students' lecture related learning.  This experience allows students
              to develop and conduct scientific research projects at the undergraduate level.
               Within the confines of the campus, the watershed contains areas with varying
              degrees of anthropogenic development.  Installing instruments at several
              locations maximizes the potential for measuring differences in environmental
              parameters within the same watershed.  A well field, stream and surface water
              runoff weirs, precipitation gage, and evaporation pan are placed within the
              perturbed portion of the watershed.  Shallow observation wells and a rain gage
              are placed in the University's Nature Preserve within the relatively
              unperturbed portion of the watershed.  A meteorological and atmospheric
              monitoring station is located on the roof of the Science I building allowing
              students to monitor and explore differences in physical and chemical processes
              between and within the atmosphere, hydrosphere and lithosphere on real time
              scales in portions of a watershed with variable anthropogenic impacts.
