Title       : The Great Salt Lake Project: Inquiry-Based Education of Preserivce Teachers
               Using a Unique Regional Ecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9950624

Award Number: 9950624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72855              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bonnie Baxter b-baxter@wcslc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn Kuehne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A.Tyrone Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Westminster College
	      1840 South 13th East
	      Salt Lake City, UT  841053617    801/484-7651

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In May 1998, the science faculty developed a new mission statement which commits
              us to an inquiry-based approach throughout our curriculum. The objective of
              this proposal is to align our science education courses with this mission. We
              will directly address problems that are ubiquitous at similar institutions: a
              lack of collaboration between science and education faculty, a deficiency in
              inquiry-based science instruction for pre-service teachers, and absence of a
              proper space for such methodology.

To achieve this aim, we will create a
              classroom/laboratory, housed in the sciences building, to allow for
              inquiry-based learning for pre-service teachers. Adapting national and local
              curricula, pre-service teachers will design experimental modules centered
              around a unique ecosystem, Great Salt Lake, and create a web-based
              dissemination program for the curriculum. A resource center, with equipment for
              checkout by pre-service and practicing teachers, will be created. Ownership of
              the experiments and access to equipment will ensure that the teachers we
              certify, who largely remain in the vicinity, can implement the curriculum
              modules they design.

In addition to web-based dissemination, we propose
              collaboration with the education division of the Utah Museum of Natural
              History. Elementary pre-service teachers will implement their modules by
              instructing in the Museum's long-standing 4' grade educational programs. Both
              elementary and secondary pre-service teachers will also implement their modules
              in field placements for their science methods courses.

This curriculum
              change will cement the relationship of the science programs and the School of
              Education, affecting not only the elementary and secondary education science
              methods courses, but also significantly connecting the faculty of both
              disciplines. The long-term impact will be a population of teachers who have a
              deep understanding of the scientific process.

