Title       : National Dissemination Project for Improving Undergraduate Science, Mathematics,
               Engineering, and Technology (SMET) Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9950636

Award Number: 9950636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149222             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne L. Narum pkal@pkal.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Independent Coll Off
	      1730 Rhode Island Avenue
	      Washington, DC  200363101    202/232-1300

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is exploring the effectiveness of designing faculty and
              administrator development workshops to improve undergraduate education around a
              coherent reform agenda for undergraduate education in SMET, rather than
              focusing on single topics such as the teaching of an introductory science.   
              Workshops and supporting materials are being designed to cover four themes of
              the reform movement in undergraduate SMET education:  (1) ensuring that
              advances in science and technology are incorporated into undergraduate courses,
              (2) taking advantage of improvements in educational technology, (3)
              establishing strong K-16 connections, and (4) adapting undergraduate curricula
              to accommodate new workforce needs and the needs of an increasing diverse
              student body.  

Two one-week institutes titled "Keystone Summer Institutes"
              are planned.  One institute will be an umbrella for two workshops focused on
              the reform of undergraduate SMET education from the departmental and
              disciplinary perspective.  The second institute will deal with issues of reform
              from an institutional perspective.  It plans to build on the themes addressed
              at the forthcoming Project Kaleidoscope 10th Anniversary Workshop in October,
              1999. The institutes are designed to accommodate relatively large institutional
              teams and will be examined for effectiveness in supporting reform of
              undergraduate SMET education in large universities.   

This project is also
              examining the needs of faculty, departments, and institutions after completing
              participation in a reform workshop.  In the past, workshop participants have
              largely been on their own after a workshop has ended, and further discussions
              of (and planning for) reform on a given campus have largely depended on the
              enthusiasm and energy of the faculty and administrator teams that attended. 
              This project will produce a coherent set of print materials and electronic
              materials for use before, during, and after a workshop on institutional reform
              of undergraduate education.  This is possible because experience has
              demonstrated that reform follows the same general path no matter what the
              specific education focus, fueled by similar perceptions of opportunities and
              value, and facing similar barriers.  

