Title       : C-Fern (Ceratopteris) Educational Materials Development: Sporophytic and Genetic
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1999      
File        : a9950522

Award Number: 9950522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie G. Hickok lhickok@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Warne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project significantly expands the utility of educational materials based on
              the C-Fem (Ceratopteris) system. Much needed enhancements of the components and
              capabilities of CFem, especially in the saprophytic phase of the life cycle,
              will increase its accessibility and functionality in a wide range of
              educational settings. At the end of the requested funding period, C-Fem will be
              a mature and substantially self-generating system that will provide a unique
              and significant component to the biological curriculum. C-Fem is user-friendly,
              inexpensive and broadly applicable in a number of different educational
              settings. Rather than being just another life cycle, this system can illustrate
              in vivid ways a variety of biological principles. The distinctive sporophytic
              and gametophytic generations along with swimming sperm, pheromonal control of
              distinct sexual types, a short life cycle, development from a single cell and a
              wide variety of mutant stocks will combine to make this a versatile tool in the
              classroom or for independent research. It is especially well suited for inquiry
              applications and provides unique opportunities for adaptation in the genetics
              laboratory. There are two major materials development initiatives associated
              with this proposal: 1) Large-scale mutagenesis and selection in the sporophyte
              generation in order to obtain mutations that show significant time reductions
              in the sporophytic phase of the life cycle. 2) Expansion of the genetic
              applications of C-Fem through the generation of mono- and dihybrid mutant lines
              and the incorporation of sporophytic improvements from the first initiative.
              With these improvements, C-Fem is poised to become a principal organism in the
              biology classroom.
