Title       : Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry in Undergraduate Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1999    
File        : a9950463

Award Number: 9950463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48844              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Jenkins jdjenkins@gsvms2.cc.gasou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia Southern Univ
	      P.O. Box 8005
	      Statesboro, GA  304608005    912/681-5465

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to increase the quality of the education experience
              for all of our undergraduate chemistry students. Exposure to modern chemical
              techniques not only adds to the students' chemical knowledge base, it also
              allows the students to more accurately understand what "real" chemists do. This
              aspect is important for all chemistry students, not just our majors, Students
              who develop an understanding of modern chemical techniques should be able to
              act as informed, responsible citizens which is increasingly important as
              environmental issues continue to be of concern. In this project we are
              introducing students at all levels to a Hewlett Packard Gas Chromatography/Mass
              Spectrometry system and are having them use this powerful technique for
              separation and identification of organic molecules.

This project adapts a
              series of experiments, mainly from the Journal of Chemical Education, using
              these experiments as the basis of a project-based laboratory for instrumental
              analysis, an open-ended format for the organic chemistry laboratories, and an
              open-ended and expanded laboratory in environmental analysis. Non-majors taking
              Chemistry and the Environment, a four credit hour course with a lab, see how
              chemists use the GC-MS to analyze water samples and soil samples for organic
              pollutants. All chemistry majors use GC-MS in multiple courses during their
              academic careers. A typical student's exposure, at a minimum, occurs in four
              different laboratory courses. In addition, most chemistry majors participate in
              independent research and many opt for the environmental chemistry elective.


