Title       : Polymer Processing Equipment for an Innovative Undergraduate Materials
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9950328

Award Number: 9950328
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan P. Gosink                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66088              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elliott B. Slamovich elliotts@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin P. Trumble  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project employs the unifying approach of the new materials synthesis and
              processing curriculum in the Materials Science and Engineering (MSE) Program to
              the laboratory setting.  The curriculum is based on the innovations in the
              content and pedagogy of materials science instruction as reported by The
              Materials Research Society, the American Society of Engineering Education, the
              NSF Undergraduate Materials Education Workshop, and The Metallurgical Society. 
              The new curriculum provides a core for the study of all classes of engineered
              materials.  The four elements of this core - microstructure, properties,
              processing and performance - comprise the adaptation of the holistic approach
              to the study of materials science and engineering.   Strong emphasis on
              materials synthesis and processing is a special feature of the new curriculum,
              a key component of which is the intensive junior-level laboratory course.  The
              adaptation of the holistic approach to materials processing is completed by the
              inclusion of polymer processing equipment in the laboratory which, heretofore,
              had limited capabilities.  This laboratory now includes the  examination of
              processing induced orientation effects on polymer properties.  The high degree
              of molecular alignment that can be achieved in polymers and the associated
              limitations in shaping capabilities are typical of the
              microstructure-processing interactions at the core of the new curriculum.  The
              hands-on lab course cuts across the materials classes, stressing central
              microstructural phenomena and their interactions with shaping and treating
              operations.    The project  enhances undergraduate materials design experiences
              throughout the engineering curriculum and reinforces the educational goal of
              connecting course material with industrial practice.    
