Title       : Advancing Careers in Technology and Science (ACTS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a9950025

Award Number: 9950025
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $847785             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann Beheler abeheler@ccccd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Baltzer  (Principal Investigator former)
              Roy E. Renfro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mitty C. Plummer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janet Jaworski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maurice Robeson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Perry R. McNeill  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Robert Entrekin  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Rusty Waller  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Ron Bost  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Rod Minatra  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Collin County Cmty Col
	      2200 West University
	      McKinney, TX  75071    972/881-5611

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
North Central Texas College (NCTC), Grayson County College (GCC), and the
              University of North Texas (UNT), and Collin County Community College (CCCC) are
              implementing the Advancing Careers in Technology and Science (ACTS) Project. In
              addition, area tech-prep consortia serving over 40 high school districts are
              partners. These institutions represent a combined student body of over 80,000
              students.  ACTS emphasizes the changing role of the 20th century skilled
              "blue-collared" technician to reflect the vital new role that the high-tech
              21st century technician (identified as "gold-collared") is playing in
              influencing educational requirements in mathematics and science. Thus, the
              primary goals of ACTS are: 1) to initiate community based campaigns that
              promote a new mind-set that recognizes the value of 21st Century high-tech
              technicians and 2) to revitalize mathematics and science curriculum by
              interlocking practical applications of technologies in secondary and
              post-secondary education. Increasing both students' interest and success in
              technology and science education and careers are the intended outcomes.
              Processes, curriculum, and program materials are being disseminated through
              state presentations, regional workshops, and interfaces with national
              partners.

Unique practices of the ACTS Project that maximize its
              effectiveness include:

1) A Vertical marketing initiative is promoting the
              new era of "gold-collared" technicians. Designed by and for all partners
              including secondary schools, community colleges, universities and industry
              partners, this is expanding student awareness and opportunities.

2)
              Multi-level curriculum design teams composed of high school teachers, faculty
              from community colleges and universities, and representatives from various
              industries are important in reducing duplication of subject materials and in
              developing tech-prep programs with true multi-exit career paths.

3)
              Non-traditional faculty/teacher exchanges provide the vital connection for
              tech-prep programs and college courses integration into the high school level. 
              One week mini-exchanges between secondary teachers and post-secondary faculty
              and between faculty at different institutions promote understanding.  Teachers
              see more clearly what their students must be prepared to do.  

4) 
              Non-traditional faculty externships with faculty not only working in industry,
              but also teaching in corporate training environments, exposes the externs to
              current advances in the industry and different curriculum delivery and
              instructional methods.






