Title       : An Educational Software Initiative in Aerospace Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9950953

Award Number: 9950953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth G. Powell powell@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is an initiative in the development of Internet-based educational
              software for aerospace engineering: The Michigan Aero Instructional Software
              (MAIS) project. The Java programming language is used to develop "applets" -
              programs that can be accessed via browsers such as Netscape Navigator or
              Internet Explorer from anywhere on the world-wide web (WWW). Each applet is a
              laboratory-like module, in which students learn by doing. 

For example: An
              astrodynamics module, of which a preliminary version has already been
              developed, allows students to choose origination and destination planets for an
              interplanetary space mission between chosen take-off and final dates.  The
              student can then plot the orbits of the two planets and the spacecraft, print
              out the parameters that define the orbits, and animate the planet and
              spacecraft orbits.

A potential-flow module, a preliminary version of which
              has already been developed, allows students to build up flows by combining
              basic singular solutions to Laplace's equation. Students can then visualize the
              resulting flow by plotting streamlines, releasing and tracking fluid particles,
              etc.

The use of the Java/WWW paradigm makes maintenance and distribution of
              the software much easier than has been the case in many past
              educational-software efforts. It also makes a much broader distribution of the
              software, to other colleges and even to high schools ultimately a goal of this
              initiative - extremely easy.

Further work is being done on the modules that
              have been developed to date, and several new modules. Instructors' guides for
              use of the modules are being written. The modules and the writeups are
              evaluated by means of small student focus groups, direct feedback from college
              and high school teachers, and web-based feedback from users of the software. In
              addition, a plan and proposal for full development, including identification of
              test sites at universities and high schools, will be an outcome of this
              proof-of-concept phase of the work.



