Title       : A Course in Laser and Optical Physics at Western Michigan University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9950802

Award Number: 9950802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57736              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alvin S. Rosenthal alvin.rosenthal@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clement Burns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7348,7428,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project adapts the laboratory based course "Physics of Lasers and Modern
              Optics"  (PLMO), developed for engineering majors at the University of
              Nebraska-Lincoln, to a student audience composed physics/engineering majors,
              one third of whom plan to teach at the secondary level.   Adaptation of the
              University of Nebraska laboratory manual (published, University of Nebraska) in
              a junior level optics course is organized around the laser optics. The
              implementation plan includes a revision of PLMO modules (laser safety ,
              polarization, and holography) to embed discovery based learning activities and
              strategies.  In addition, experiments in related areas (optical fibers, diode
              lasers) and experiments based on ideas suggested but not included in PLMO
              (interference, coherence) are developed in this project to expand the suite of
              materials available in optics.  Interferometry, not covered in the PLMO manual,
              is treated as an important tool and is introduced early in the proposed course
              and used frequently later in the discussion of such topics as spatial and
              temporal coherence, thin film interference, and spectroscopic methods.  The
              proposed course is taught in a discovery based manner, allowing for the open
              ended inquiry which has been demonstrated as effective for the training of
              science teachers.  The course takes place entirely in the laboratory and is
              designed to facilitate a student's ability to answer questions about optical
              phenomena using both simple equipment and contemporary instruments and
              software.  Special mechanisms are in place to address the needs of the physics
              majors who are preservice teachers.  Seminar meetings provide the opportunity
              to discuss and critique materials suitable for use in the precollege classroom
              in the area of optics. The proposed program involves the use, wherever
              possible, of inexpensive equipment suitable for the secondary classroom as
              recommended in physics education literature [Kallard, Exploring Laser Light;
              Shenoy, American Journal of Physics, 1994 and others].  Each  instructional
              unit is introduced using inexpensive equipment and the more expensive
              commercial and home built instrumentation is introduced as needed.  Commercial
              optical simulation software is available for student use throughout the course.
              
