Title       : Industrial Systems Design and Analysis: High-Fidelity Learning Environments for
               Engineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1999      
File        : a9950301

Award Number: 9950301
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon F. McGinnis lmcginnis@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chen Zhou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jane C. Ammons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gunter P. Sharp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul M. Griffin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark L. Spearman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas A. Bodner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marc Goetschalckx  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Spiridon A. Reveliotis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Today, engineering education addresses industrial systems (factories,
              warehouses, and logistics systems) by focusing on engineering methods and tools
              used in solving associated design, planning, and control problems. The
              corresponding body of knowledge is very broad, but without a common, unifying
              theoretical base. Compounding this problem, students rarely see more than
              unrealistically simplified illustrations of "real" industrial systems problems.
              Without a unifying theoretical foundation, and without a comprehensive exposure
              to the domain, students are left with a poorly integrated set of technical
              skills, and largely without insight into the complexities of applying those
              skills in practice.

This project radically reshapes the teaching of
              industrial systems by shifting focus from the disparate collection of
              engineering methods and tools to the domain in which those methods and tools
              find application. We are creating a new pedagogical platform that we call
              "virtual industrial systems," or VIS. A VIS is an integrated computing
              environment that includes a rich, complex data repository describing a
              particular industrial system (a case study, only much richer in detail), a set
              of specific computational tools for description, visualization, analysis and
              synthesis, and a common user interface that minimizes time to learn to use the
              tools in the context of the case. A VIS may incorporate simulation, interactive
              decision making, 2D and 3D representations, video recordings, or any other
              information source in digital form.  This project is developing at least one
              complete implementation of a VIS.

As envisioned, a VIS is a platform not
              just for learning about industrial systems, but also for learning the basics of
              specific methods, such as statistics, optimization, and economic analysis.
              Using a VIS, a student may practice specific engineering methods and tools, but
              also may explore a wide range of "what happens if?" questions. We believe that
              access to a VIS dramatically improves motivation, content mastery, and
              context-specific insight.

