Title       : Southeast Consortium for Advanced Network Technology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a9950085

Award Number: 9950085
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1758163            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy Graves jeremy.graves@jcjc.cc.ms.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine P. Cotten  (Principal Investigator former)
              Bobby Hinton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diane T. Warren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Herman Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Landrum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jones County Junior Colleg
	      900 South Court Street
	      Ellisville, MS  39437    601/477-4115

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project embraces and encompasses existing and emerging network
              technologies  beneficial to two-year college, secondary education, four-year
              colleges, and university environments. In this project a "beneficial
              technology" is defined as one that enables the student to successfully enter
              and keep pace with the current and future network technology workforce trends
              and that prepares the educator to enter the classroom and laboratory settings
              prepared to be the future education workforce and to teach the future
              workforce. The network technologies considered as emerging or future
              technologies have the following characteristics: (1) the education entities
              (secondary, two-year college, universities) targeted in this project lack
              sufficient knowledge of and experience in the technology, or (2) a current
              technology is in a constant state of change, thereby affecting information
              technology education and training within the education entities, or (3) new
              technologies that are on the "leading edge." Technologies that are being
              targeted as emerging technologies in this project are Client/Server,
              Internet/Intranet, and Multimedia utilizing computer networks. The mission of
              the project are being accomplished by the following goals and objectives:
              

Goal I.      Identify and evaluate emerging network technology trends,
              applications, innovations, and curricula.
Goal II.	Disseminate to educators
              and their students emerging network technology trends, applications,
              innovations, and curricula. 
 Goal III.	Develop career education information
              and strategies to strongly promote interest by secondary and post-secondary
              students in computer network technology careers and the mathematics and
              sciences necessary for success in these careers.  
Goal IV.	 Ensure the
              participation by females and minorities in all career education components of
              the proposed Center thereby increasing their participation in the degree
              components.  
Goal V.	Provide for the continued educational competency of
              secondary and post-secondary faculties and administrators who teach, implement,
              or administer curricula in emerging network technologies.  
Goal VI.	Establish
              and facilitate an infrastructure to provide teacher internships and student
              work-based learning opportunities in emerging network technologies.  
Goal
              VII.	Establish and facilitate an infrastructure to build a network of
              education,  government and business entities that will support the development
              of quality programs that educate not only the future information technology
              workforce, but re-educates the present information technology workforce.

