Title       : Parallel Programming on Workstation Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a9950309

Award Number: 9950309
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew P. Bernat                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100194             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony B. Wilkinson abw@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project impacts upon how parallel programming is taught using workstation
              clusters, the most common computing platform for undergraduate institutions. 
              It utilizes the recent introduction of inexpensive multiprocessor workstations
              and clusters of such multiprocessor systems. Conventionally, parallel
              programming on workstation clusters has been done using the message-passing
              paradigm. However, the message-passing paradigm has serious disadvantages from
              a programming perspective, including requiring message passing to be specified
              explicitly in the program, and having to take into account very significant
              communication delays. It is widely accepted that a preferred programming
              paradigm is the shared memory paradigm.  This is especially so for
              undergraduate students who have already been taught and understand sequential
              programming. 

This  project explores the use of shared memory programming on
              workstation clusters, concentrating upon thread-based parallel programming. 
              New educational materials for undergraduate teaching, including necessary
              software tools for distributed shared memory, are being developed to support
              this approach.  This work is intended to make a change from purely message
              passing programming on workstation clusters to shared memory and hybrid shared
              memory/message-passing programming.

In addition to developing new courses
              for the local students,  the courses are being offered on  the NC-REN, a
              teleclass network for several North Carolina universities.   Another test site
              for the course will be a local historically black university.  A professor from
              that university will be involved in course development and training to enable
              him to teach and assess the course at his own institution.     

If the
              proof-of-concept of this approach is successful, teaching materials will be
              published in a textbook and made available through a web site. 



