Title       : Adaptation of Workshop Physics for an Integrated Lecture/Laboratory Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1999     
File        : a9950305

Award Number: 9950305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16523              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane D. Flood flood@muhlenberg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert F. Milligan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russel P. Kauffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Muhlenberg College
	      24th and Chew Streets
	      Allentown, PA  18104    215/433-3191

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The physics teaching community is focused on redesigning course content and
              pedagogy so that students leave their physics course with good conceptual
              understanding, problem solving skills, comfort with technology and an awareness
              of how physics is relevant to issues in their own lives. These objectives have
              not always been met with traditional physics curricula and teaching strategies.
              The physics department at Muhlenberg College shares these goals and is engaged
              in reforming the entire physics curriculum, beginning with the introductory
              courses.

The physics department is adopting the Workshop Physics curriculum,
              developed at Dickinson College, and adapting it to the existing traditional
              large-lecture/lab format. Students meet twice a week in two-hour lab periods to
              do real-time microcomputer based experiments, spreadsheet modeling and
              kinesthetic experiments from the Workshop Physics curriculum.  

Using the
              new technologies in the science lecture hall at Muhlenberg College, 
              computer-based tools used in the laboratory are used to do the other Workshop
              Physics activities as interactive lecture demonstrations or cooperative-group
              student activities.  By using the same tools and curriculum in both lecture and
              lab, obstacles to learning in the lecture are removed. Students,  having
              already developed an understanding of the tools used in lab, focus on the
              physical principles under discussion. The same technology is fully integrated
              into all aspects of the course (lecture and lab) as well as the inquiry-driven
              approach. We envision these two parts of the course working together, avoiding
              the synchronization problems and redundancy that so often limit the
              effectiveness of more traditional courses. 




