Title       : Wireless Industry and Education Collaboration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9950039

Award Number: 9950039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248616             (Estimated)
Investigator: Misty Baker mbaker@gwec.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Global Wireless Education
	      PO Box 443
	      Avon, MN  56310    320/267-8418

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Explosive growth in the wireless areas of cellular and digital personal
              communications services over the past few years has been shadowed by a decrease
              in the availability of educated workers. At the heart of a wireless
              technician's and engineer's education is basic radio frequency (RF) knowledge,
              With educational budget constraints, these were exactly the lower attendance
              courses that were cut during the escalation of computer science courses. The
              mission of Global Wireless Education Consortium (GWEC (pronounced Gee Wec) is
              to develop a 2-year technician educational platform that graduates technical
              specialists for the wireless industry.  GWEC was founded by Motorola, Lucent
              Technologies, Ericsson, AT&T Wireless, Northern Telecom, and AirTouch
              Communications with the University of Texas at Dallas, Minnesota State
              University, and South Central Technical College (N. Mankato, MN). Current
              members include: the University of Massachusetts at Lowell; the University of
              Oklahoma; Seattle Central Community College; California Polytechnic University;
              Ridgewater Community College (Willmar, MN); Michigan Technological University;
              Connecticut Community Colleges; and Washington State University. 

GWEC
              initiatives apply to the DUE themes of faculty development and the integration
              of technology into education. This project is conducting curriculum and
              resource development and dissemination including the development and provision
              of wireless curriculum, online education, and industry resource
              guides.

































