Title       : Enrichment of Student Understanding of Acoustics through the Modernization of a
               Physics of Music Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9950165

Award Number: 9950165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10485              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Askill jaskill@mail.millikin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millikin University
	      1184 West Main Street
	      Decatur, IL  625222039    217/424-6211

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics of Music is a course especially designed for music, music  education,
              and music theater majors, as part of their general education in science. This
              project adapts current sound experiments to include  elements of physics of
              music courses from other institutions, implementing these ideas through the use
              of modern instrumentation. Students use computers in the visualization and
              analysis of sounds emphasizing quantitative measurement of the quality or
              timbre of musical sounds.  These experiments enable students to learn "what
              makes different musical instruments sound differently". The key to
              understanding this is to advance student understanding of overtones and
              harmonic spectra.  New experiments are developed to promote the students'
              critical thinking, problem-solving abilities and creativity by studying and
              measuring harmonic spectra of musical sounds from a variety of musical
              instruments. The experiments use computers as spectrum analyzers for real-time
              analysis of sounds from various musical instruments and the human voice.   In
              addition, resonance and the spatial distribution of loudness around musical
              instruments is studied while they are being played.  Using this equipment, a
              stand-alone Physics of Sound module is developed as part of our new integrated
              science course of student learning for other majors especially liberal arts
              majors and teachers. Details of these experiments are available in a course
              laboratory manual,  disseminated at professional meetings, and  accessible on
              the web.  A clearing-house website on Physics of Music courses and laboratories
              is made available through this project.
