Title       : Introducing Fourier Transform Nuclear Magnetic Resonance into the Undergraduate
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9950927

Award Number: 9950927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97576              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Lavallee rlavallee@stcloudstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Melinda Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jack McKenna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nathan S. Winter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tamara L. Leenay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alison Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Jeannot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Cloud State University
	      740 Fourth Avenue South
	      St. Cloud, MN  56301    320/255-2122

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Use of a 200-MHz NMR spectrometer is being implemented into most of the
              laboratory courses within the department. The practical uses of NMR
              spectrometers are being introduced incrementally throughout the curriculum by
              adapting carefully chosen experiments from the research and educational
              literature.  Students first encounter NMR spectroscopy in general chemistry and
              each subsequent course increases their experience with this technique. By
              graduation, chemistry majors at this institution are skilled in many of the
              modern NMR practices. In addition, many biology majors are being introduced to
              the fundamental aspects of NMR spectroscopy. A new course incorporating the
              advanced theory and practice of NMR spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography is
              being implemented, allowing students an opportunity to explore these techniques
              in greater depth than is typical in undergraduate departments. This instrument
              also is playing a central role in several undergraduate research projects.
              Finally, a workshop in spectroscopic techniques for high school chemistry
              teachers is being offered. Thus, this project integrates technology into the
              undergraduate curriculum, advances student research, and aids in the continuing
              education of pre-college teachers.




