Title       : A Prototype Database of Course Materials about Computer Architecture on the
               World-Wide Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a9950318

Award Number: 9950318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89869              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward F. Gehringer efg@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proof-of-concept project implements a database of course materials on the
              World Wide Web. The prototype database is specific to the field of computer
              architecture, but the software for building the database can be used to
              construct databases in any academic field. The database contains homework and
              test questions, lecture notes, laboratory exercises, and multimedia teaching
              materials developed by instructors and assistants at a large number of
              universities. Instructors are able to reuse materials from the database in
              their classes, giving their students the benefit of more and better
              instructional materials. The ability to reuse and adapt instructional materials
              instead of creating them anew saves faculty time and promotes multi-campus
              collaboration in designing new courses.

Materials are being gathered for the
              database by seeking permission from instructors to include materials from their
              course Web sites. Scripts are being developed to fetch the material over the
              Web and to store them in the database. The format of the material is adjusted
              where necessary, and descriptive metadata is being added  to facilitate
              searching. This project is working in conjunction with the Web Assign project
              for on-line homework submission and grading. Homework and test problems in the
              database are available for on-line administration, and, where the format
              permits, automatic grading. 

Deliverables include a database of computer
              architecture materials, and software to construct a similar database in other
              fields. By harnessing materials already on the Web to improve teaching and
              learning, this project addresses the themes of organizing knowledge from
              distributed intelligence and integrating technology into education.


