Title       : Teaching Scientific Inquiry Through Inter-disciplinary Problem-based Modules:
               Students as Partners in Ongoing Applied Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1999      
File        : a9950316

Award Number: 9950316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74948              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne Worcester suzanne_worcester@monterey.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Renee R. Perry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Swarup E. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St U Monterey Bay Fdn
	      100 Campus Drive, Bldg. 86C
	      Seaside, CA  939558001    /   -

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Our goal is to enhance lower division undergraduate learning of science inquiry
              skills and retention of science content.  Our specific challenge is that
              students are not gaining scientific inquiry skills through their coursework. 
              Furthermore, few students retain important scientific concepts because they
              don't relate these concepts to their lives. We are meeting these challenges by
              developing problem-based modules to monitor the restoration of a degraded salt
              marsh in our area. Through active learning students are being guided to create
              their own questions and propose experiments. They are developing and applying
              their scientific knowledge to problems of local interest, with the aim of
              increasing both their knowledge of scientific process and their understanding
              of science content. The modules are being used in a non-majors integrated
              science course and in introductory chemistry and biology courses. Students in
              these courses have access to each other's questions, experiments, and data
              through a composite web site developed for the entire project. The integration
              of two disciplines and investigations at different levels facilitates
              understanding of the interdisciplinary nature of applied problem solving. The
              institution serves a diverse cross section of California as a Hispanic Serving
              Institution (HIS).  We are evaluating the effectiveness of this program through
              pre- and post-testing of content and process knowledge within each problem
              based module and by comparing content knowledge in the problem-based modules
              with the relative content knowledge gained in the non-problem-based parts of
              each course.
