Title       : A Picture and a Thousand Words: Portfolio Writing in Introductory Biology Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9950930

Award Number: 9950930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42503              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Sasek sasek@ulm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred H. Groves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Knesel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey W. Galle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana - Monroe
	      700 University Avenue
	      Monroe, LA  712090001    318/342-1010

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The first introductory biology course for science majors at NLU focuses on basic
              chemistry, metabolism, genetics, molecular biology, and evolution.  A
              laboratory course complements the lecture but does not generate sufficient
              enthusiasm, leading to poor performance, high drop rates, and low retention
              rates for new biology majors.  Therefore, to enhance research skills,
              quantitative measurements, and data presentation, a new portfolio-style
              laboratory notebook incorporates writing assignments, imaging, and data graphs.
               Instead of quizzes and fact-based exams, grading is based on achieving goals
              for the notebook portfolio (using rubrics), and a multimedia presentation of a
              semester-long group project.  This conforms to current national efforts to
              improve science education through the use of authentic assessment and
              performance assessment techniques.  This project has been adapted as a hybrid
              from activities used today to stimulate undergraduate biology in Beyond Bio 101
              (HHMI) and from suggestions of how to incorporate writing in courses from
              "Writing in the Total Curriculum" (RH Weiss, 1980) and "Writing to Learn: 
              curricular strategies for nursing and other disciplines" (GP Poirrier, 1997). 
              Both Biology and English majors serve as in-lab mentors and evaluators to
              assist the instructors, providing a new cross-disciplinary collaboration
              between Biology and English.  Computer-interfaced desktop cameras, attachable
              to microscopes, provide  a range of magnifications used to incorporate imaging
              and quantitative measurements of scale.  Traditional activities are
              supplemented with open-ended research and observations to stimulate independent
              thought.  Real-time data acquisition to the computers from instruments like
              spectrophotometers and balances enhances technology skills.  Long-term projects
              that consider aquatic microcosms and fern genetics foster enthusiasm for
              scientific inquiry, collaboration, and data synthesis.  The use of
              nontraditional, cooperative learning strategies provides strong socializing
              effects.  To assist students further, special tutoring and interactive software
              is available through the University's Writing Center.  



