Title       : Bringing Systemic Change to Community College Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2002   
File        : a9950320

Award Number: 9950320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227621             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn J. Collins ccollins@nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy M. Su  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Magner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janice E. Chadwick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marie Ellen A. Villarba  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Comm Col of So NV
	      3200 East Cheyenne Avenue
	      North Las Vegas, NV  890304296    702/651-4485

NSF Program : 7426      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND ADOPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7426,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is transferring the reforms in undergraduate chemistry education to
              the community college.  Five southwestern community colleges - Fullerton
              College in California, Community College of Southern Nevada in Las Vegas,
              Nevada, Albuquerque Technical Vocational Institute in New Mexico, City College
              of San Francisco in California, and Montgomery College in Houston, Texas - have
              formed the FLASH consortium.  With a combined enrollment of over 131,000, FLASH
              impacts almost 5000 first-year chemistry students per year.  Because our
              community colleges admit all applicants, many students are under-prepared,
              lacking even basic skills in math and writing, and they often cannot succeed in
              chemistry courses.  These students are clearly "at risk," and steps are needed
              to help them.  This project is adopting and adapting the methodology of the
              Molecular Science curriculum project along with relevant materials from this
              and other projects of the NSF Systemic Changes in the Undergraduate Chemistry
              Curriculum Initiative.  FLASH believes students may learn better in a
              technology-mediated, student-centered learning environment in which students
              are active learners and cooperative learning is supported.  We are setting up
              Chemistry Learning and Support Studio (CLASS) rooms at our respective colleges
              to make the actual processs of studying chemistry more engaging and
              interesting.  The Web-deliverable nature of many of the materials allows use
              not only in on-campus facilities but anywhere students have access to the
              Internet.  We assist even the most under-prepared students to become more
              competitive as undergraduates and, ultimately, in their careers.  This project
              helps our students and has the potential to serve as a model for every
              community college.  
