Title       : Multicampus Science, Mathematics, and Technology Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1999       
File        : a9950803

Award Number: 9950803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Y. Narayan narayan@oswego.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Winn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan McCoy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol Freeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandeep Singh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart F. Boersma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret W. Groman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Adam Stinchcombe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Constant J. Goutziers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Oswego
	      
	      Oswego, NY  13126    315/341-2500

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this project a seven college collaboration is integrating inquiry-based
              learning, mathematical modeling and technology into the mathematics curriculum.
               These seven colleges, which represent a subset of the New York State Coalition
              (NYSC) of some 30 two and four-year colleges, are adapting materials and
              educational practices developed by the principal investigators of NSF projects
              as well as other public and privately supported mathematics, science, and
              technology (MST) projects.  In particular, the colleges are adapting and
              implementing materials developed under the Mathematics Across the Curriculum
              projects.  The seven schools are SUNY Oswego, SUNY Farmingdale, SUNY Oneonta,
              SUNY Brockport, Adirondack Community College, St. John Fisher College and
              Alfred University.  Faculty and administrators at these institutions are
              committed to making institutional-wide change and are endorsing programmatic
              changes.

The expectations are to:  

(a) increase faculty's knowledge of
              the content and pedagogy related to teaching and scholarship in mathematics and
              its application; 

(b) promote learning by inquiry in the context of
              mathematics, science and technology; 

(c) emphasize to faculty the
              importance of mathematical modeling in courses; 

(d) demonstrate how faculty
              in mathematics and in other disciplines can cooperate to develop
              interdisciplinary courses and instructional materials suitable for
              implementation at two and four-year schools; and 

(e) promote effective
              communication between two- and four-year institutions and users of mathematics
              in non academic environments.  

These expectations are being achieved by the
              collaborating group partnering with principal investigators of national
              projects to address the following themes:  Mathematical Modeling, Inquiry-Based
              Learning, Partnerships, Technology, and Programmatic Change. 
