Title       : Light Inquiry Through Experiments: Project LITE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1999      
File        : a9950551

Award Number: 9950551
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Brecher brecher@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Garik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project LITE is a two-year proof-of-concept project involving materials
              development, course instruction, and student learning assessment at Boston
              University.  The project's goal is to develop a prototype set of integrated
              educational materials--unique take-home laboratory experiments, written guides,
              Web-based software, and lecture demonstrations--which aim to clarify the nature
              of light, optics, color, and perception.

The project's major innovation is
              the development (and introduction into a range of university courses) of a set
              of "homelabs"--experiments employing inexpensive original devices and existing
              commercial and industrial optical materials.  These inquiry-based, quantitative
              laboratory experiences are being designed for use by students in their homes or
              dormitory rooms.  The project is  also developing easily implementable and
              inexpensive demonstrations about light for both individual and classroom use. 
              Written materials, as well as Web-based software, are being developed in
              conjunction with the homelabs and demonstrations.  Materials are being
              pilot-tested in two introductory physics and astronomy courses for non-majors
              at Boston University.

The basic educational goal of both the homelabs and
              the demonstrations is to encourage individualized hands-on (and eyes-on)
              learning.  The use of "homelabs" also seeks to alleviate a major resource
              problem faced by many large, introductory, non-major university science courses
              owing to the limited availability of laboratory space, equipment, and teaching
              assistants.

Future national impact of individual homelabs could be extended
              by integration into junior college, university, and standards-based high school
              science courses in astronomy, biology, chemistry, earth science, physics, and
              psychology, as well as into science courses for pre-service teachers.  The
              two-year pilot project should ultimately lead to the full-scale development of
              a complete suite of homelabs, lecture demonstrations, and Web-based software
              concerning light and optics.  The investigators are laying the groundwork for
              expanded development of materials and for the large-scale dissemination of
              resulting materials.  They are also identifying prospective partners and test
              sites at other colleges and universities, as well as appropriate publishers and
              equipment manufacturers.

