Title       : Molecular Modeling and Computational Chemistry in the Undergraduate Chemistry
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9950344

Award Number: 9950344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93802              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Zoellner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Paselk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Humboldt State Univ Fnd
	      P.O. Box 1185
	      Arcata, CA  95518    707/826-4189

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Undergraduate students need to have skills in molecular modeling and
              computational chemistry (MM&CC) in order to compete in the job market and for
              graduate and professional schools. However, few undergraduate curricula offer
              hands on laboratory courses in MM&CC. This project provides for the coordinated
              integration of molecular modeling and computational chemistry into the
              undergraduate curriculum using modern computational technology.  Models and
              experiments described in publications from Wavefunction, as well as in other
              commercial texts, are being adapted to create this integrated sequence.  During
              the first year of the project, a laboratory course, "Molecular Modeling" is
              being introduced with a pre-requisite of sophomore-level organic chemistry.
              During the second year an additional advanced course,"Computational Chemistry,"
              with a pre-requisite of junior-level physical chemistry is being introduced.
              Throughout the duration of the project, undergraduate research in MM&CC is
              being targeted and encouraged. In addition, but especially by the third year of
              the project, laboratory experiments in MM&CC are being designed and adapted for
              incorporation into existing experimental laboratories in organic, inorganic,
              physical and biochemistry. Through the integration of MM&CC technology into
              undergraduate education, life science, physics, and chemistry students attain
              greater preparedness to succeed in their chosen fields. In addition to an
              overall improvement in the quality of undergraduate chemical education, science
              faculty benefit from the exposure to the power and applicability of MM&CC
              techniques. 

