Title       : Learning Optics on the Web: 3D Interactive Graphics, Session Logging, and
               Collaboration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a9950569

Award Number: 9950569
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135651             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Foley jtf1@ra.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Banks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Taha Mzoughi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to help students learn about optics
              in
freshman/sophomore physics courses and in upper level physics courses. 
              We
will produce a prototypic set of educational materials: a Web-based,
              3D
interactive computer graphics system with session logging capabilities.
We
              will also investigate the possibility of giving the system
collaborative
              capabilities.

We have previously developed a 3D interactive computer
              graphics system
called The Optics Project (TOP).  TOP has been tested in the
              classroom at
two universities, and received excellent student evaluations.  We
              now know
how to port TOP to the Web, making it available for students with
              PC's.
For example, a student can point his/her browser at a URL (such
              as
http://www.erc.msstate.edu/~foley/webtop/ ) and select the single
              slit
submodule; the browser then loads the 3D environment in which the
              student
can change the width of a slit and see the diffraction pattern on
              an
observation screen change.

Our objectives are as follows.  (1) Make Web
              versions of the seven TOP
modules.  We call this Web version WebTOP.  (2)
              Create a new Lasers
module.  (3) Enable the automatic generation of session
              logs that can be
replayed, edited, and analyzed.  (4) Investigate the
              possibility of giving
the system collaborative capabilities.  In addition to
              developing the
software, we plan to aggressively disseminate and evaluate it. 
              We will
continue to give presentations at regional and national meetings, as
              we
did for TOP.  As each new WebTOP module is completed, we will put it
              on
our server, so that others may begin using it.  We will hold workshops
              to
show others how to use WebTOP.  We will coordinate with other
              universities
and colleges who use WebTOP and travel, when possible, to help
              them get
started, as we did with TOP.

At the end of the two years, we
              expect the outcomes to be: (a) an
interactive computer graphics system which
              runs on the Web and has session
logging capabilities, and (b) a large and
              growing set of university users
which will use the software.  The DUE theme
              that applies to this project
is 
