Title       : Laser-Based Methods for Laboratory Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1999      
File        : a9950513

Award Number: 9950513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24386              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Robert Carper bob.carper@wichita.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              D. Paul Rillema  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francis D'Souza  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wichita State University
	      1845 Fairmount
	      Wichita, KS  67260    316/689-3456

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to enhance the quality of undergraduate instruction
              by using lasers in several upper undergraduate laboratories as a tool that
              provides hands-on exposure to fundamental concepts which students have
              difficulty grasping.  This project builds on the earlier developments in laser
              education reported in the American Chemical Society Publication, Physical
              Chemistry: Developing a Dynamic Curriculum and by earlier investigators
              reporting in the peer-reviewed J. Chemical Ed.  These methods are adapted to
              fit our program, which emphasizes: (a) basic concepts involving quantum
              mechanical theory related to electronic and vibronic properties of molecules
              and (b) the interaction of light with molecules.  Laser education begins with
              the students building a laser spectrometer system from basic components. 
              Students use the constructed laser spectrometer to obtain and interpret Raman
              Spectra, examine Beer's Law, estimate solute concentration in solution,
              determine the pKa of a weak acid, construct Jablonski diagrams from absorption
              and emission data, determine emission lifetimes, and examine electron transfer
              quenching by Stern-Volmer techniques.  Finally, the students design, synthesize
              and characterize molecules for use as molecular sensors.  The number of
              students affected is approximately seventy per year.  The activities are
              centered on a nanosecond pulsed laser. 
