Title       : Integration of a Particle Image Velocimetry System into Undergraduate Fluid
               Mechanics Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1999       
File        : a9950521

Award Number: 9950521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann M. Anderson andersoa@union.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      
	      Schenectady, NY  12308    518/370-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project employs a sophisticated research technique, Particle Image
              Velocimetry (PIV), to enhance undergraduate teaching.  PIV is more commonly
              used as a research tool to study fluid mechanics and convective heat transfer. 
              The techniques for the use of this tool to make full field, instantaneous,
              quantitative velocity measurements, after those of researchers at the
              University of Minnesota, Florida State University, and Lehigh University, will
              be adapted to undergraduate courses and laboratories in the thermal sciences. 
              These adaptations of courses and laboratories support Union College's
              philosophy of three stages of investigative learning designed to prepare
              students for collaborative research with faculty by the senior year.  This
              three stage program  includes introductory courses emphasizing hands-on
              activities as well as the fundamentals, mid-level courses focusing on
              research-like experiences through open-ended projects, and senior research
              experiences designed to sharpen inquiry skills.  The improvement of student
              ability to perform fluid mechanics and heat transfer design, the development of
              student intuition about the effects of fluid mechanics on heat transfer, and
              the potential to excite students about the thermal fluid sciences are expected
              project outcomes. 

The PIV system will be integrated throughout the
              mechanical engineering curriculum at Union College and will serve as a model
              for enhancing the instruction of the thermal sciences throughout four year
              undergraduate mechanical engineering curricula.  



 
