Title       : Interactive Spatial Science: Multimedia Geography Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9950480

Award Number: 9950480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480960             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lance T. Wisniewski lance.wis@verizon.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cambridge Studios Inc.
	      78 Cleveland Street
	      Arlington, MA  02174    781/643-1771

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              "Interactive Spatial Science: Multimedia Geography Education" brings together
              multimedia technology and the compelling collection of 52 video case studies
              and much additional video material produced in 35 countries around the world
              for the PBS telecourse "The Power of Place: World Regional Geography."  The
              cases tell brief, often powerful, documentary stories about people whose lives
              have been shaped by particular highlighted geographical forces. 

There are a
              number of planned contributions to teacher preparation in this project.  Also,
              a planned joint product is a set of materials for a new Advanced Placement
              high-school level course in geography.  Materials are being negotiated with the
              College Board's content advisors and designed to meet the recently approved
              standards for an AP Geography course.  The teacher preparation version of the
              materials is being developed jointly with Sarah Bednarz, professor of geography
              at Texas A&M University, in consultation with Osa Brand, Director of Education
              Affairs for the Association of American Geographers, and Ruth Shirey of Indiana
              University of Pennsylvania, the Executive Director of the National Council for
              Geographic Education.  

The project is implementing an advanced and novel
              approach to interactive multimedia design.  Faculty and students can interact
              with a set of high-quality telecourse video segments stored on CD-ROMs and
              DVD-ROMs.  Control of those video segments, plus all other programming, text,
              and GIS maps come from the Cambridge Studios' World Wide Web server.  These
              materials are being produced in concert with geography faculty from over ten
              U.S. institutions, who are assisting with the development of new interactive
              versions of the materials. This hybrid approach solves the bandwidth problem of
              the Internet, which cannot quickly transmit truly high-quality videos.  At the
              same time, it also avoids the problem of obsolescence in traditional CD-ROMs. 
              The nonvideo materials can be improved at will and posted instantly over the
              Web. So can the decision about which video segments to use, since access to
              them is entirely Web based.

All non-video materials are handled in data
              bases associated with the Cambridge Studios' Web server, so the server has the
              ability to retrieve many sources of data for posting to multiple Web pages.
              This means that multiple versions of the same case study can be published for
              courses as varied as human geography and forest ecology.  Each instructor who
              uses these materials can customize the text and user interface, send the
              changes back to the central server, and receive a new version that can be
              published quickly.   


