Title       : Interdisciplinary Laboratory in Advanced Materials-A Team-Oriented Inquiry-Based
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9950411

Award Number: 9950411
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan P. Gosink                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69154              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Biernacki jbiernacki@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale A. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher D. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Few opportunities exist in most undergraduate engineering curricula for students
              of different disciplines, even within engineering, to work together. An
              interdisciplinary course of study is bringing together mechanical and chemical
              engineering students.   This project adapts processes developed and
              disseminated by the SUCCEED Engineering Coalition and others which focus on
              stimulating student learning.   These processes are used to enhance the
              chemical engineering curriculum at Tennessee Technological University.   In
              particular, the SUCCEED Vertically Integrated Design project at Virginia Tech
              was used as the basis for this project.  This project will implement a
              horizontal integration of several disciplines in a high temperature materials
              course.   

High-temperature materials production is the chosen common basis
              upon which to design such curricular activities.   Materials processing cuts
              across the disciplines of mechanical and chemical engineering and is a natural
              point for integration. Chemical engineering curricula typically focus on
              processing while neglecting the property and performance criteria of materials.
              Likewise, mechanical engineering studies typically focus on property and
              performance objectives. In practice, however, these two disciplines work
              together to design new processes and materials to achieve manufacture ability
              and performance targets by relating the factors connecting chemistry,
              processing, properties and performance.  The goals of this project are: (1) to
              create a laboratory resource that includes a high-temperature graphite element
              furnace, solids-mixing, milling and forming equipment to be used to support
              activities that provide a basis for interdisciplinary learning about process,
              microstructure, property and performance relationships in materials production;
              (2) to create an active interdisciplinary learning environment by integrating
              mechanical and chemical engineering students within a team-oriented
              inquiry-based setting that offers students the opportunity to design, plan,
              implement and analyze experiments as well as gain experience working within an
              interdisciplinary team and between teams to achieve a group objective; (3) to
              create a high-temperature materials processing thread within the existing
              curriculum by cutting across the core requirements and supporting laboratories
              with projects and examples; and (4) to use the proposed facilities to introduce
              pre-college students to materials research through the University Young
              Scholars program.  The project  will endeavor to attract minority and female
              students to research at both the undergraduate and precollege levels.
