Title       : Establishment of the Upper Clark Fork River Basin Long-term Characterization
               Project: Platform for Discovery-based Undergraduate Teaching and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1999      
File        : a9950637

Award Number: 9950637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42471              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc S. Hendrix marc@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Johnnie N. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald W. Hyndman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Woessner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              By adapting and integrating the total station techniques implemented by field
              camps at Eastern Illinois University and Rutgers, we have established the Upper
              Clark Fork River Basin Long-Term Characterization Project.  This project adapts
              GPS indexing (Jacobs, et al, 1997 and Anderson, et al, 1997) which creates a
              series of evolving, web-based datasets and initiates a series of
              cross-disciplinary environmental studies in western Montana.  The foundation
              for the project is a series of undergraduate laboratories and undergraduate
              research projects implemented at all levels of the geology curriculum. 
              Exercises and undergraduate research projects adapt discovery-based learning,
              focused on the Earth as a system, and are geared toward teacher preparation and
              integration of technology into education (Ireton, et al. 1996).      The
              projects rely on three types of equipment purchased with NSF support: 1) two
              total station surveyors for high resolution surveying of topographic surfaces;
              2) a kinematic GPS for high resolution absolute positioning in 3-D; and 3) a
              grain size analyzer for characterization of fine-sediment grain-size
              distributions. Each piece of equipment has been successfully implemented into
              undergraduate teaching and research programs elsewhere (e.g. Cowan 1993; Bryce
              and Taylor, 1995; Anderson et al., 1997; O'Driscoll et al., 1997).  By adapting
              the approaches described by these previous studies and by using this equipment
              to quantify changes in topography and sediment grain size at a series of study
              sites across western Montana, different generations of UM students are able to
              compare data sets from year to year, document the evolution of these systems
              through time, and hence more clearly understand and appreciate the natural
              processes that shape them. The utility of such time-series data bases in
              research and education was presented by the National Research Council (1991)
              and Post et al. (1998).  Student data sets and accompanying interpretations are
              made available at (http://www.cs.umt.edu/GEOLOGY/FAC/hendrix/hendrix.html),
              presentations at national meetings and publication in peer-reviewed journals. 
              The teaching effectiveness of the project is evaluated twice per year by a
              departmental oversight committee that includes students, project PI's and other
              faculty. 
