Title       : TYC Physics Workshops for the Twenty-First Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2002     
File        : a9950062

Award Number: 9950062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis J. Hieggelke curth@jjc.cc.il.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. O'Kuma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Joliet Junior College
	      1215 Houbolt Road
	      Joliet, IL  60431    815/729-9020

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to help two-year college students develop a stronger
              understanding of science with an emphasis on physics and its applications. This
              is important because of the large number of students, particularly women and
              minorities, attending two-year colleges and enrolled in technology or transfer
              programs. The task of updating physics programs at two-year colleges is
              difficult because of the many rapidly occurring changes, the distribution of
              physics teachers, the heavy and complex workload of the faculty, and their lack
              of knowledge about the needs and applications of physics in the workplace. This
              two-year national pilot program is providing a series of six faculty
              development workshops (three each year) for two-year college teachers who teach
              the diverse talented groups of students found at two-year colleges in the core
              physics courses for technology programs and other programs. These workshops are
              acquainting participants with the integration and implementation of technology
              and active learning strategies in such areas as microcomputer based
              laboratories, digital video, modeling, computer simulations, qualitative and
              conceptual exercises, web and internet connected courses, cooperative and
              collaborative group work, research and assessment in student learning, plus
              addressing the educational and workforce needs of technicians as they relate to
              physics.  Each workshop is being led by two-year college physics professors
              along with university/college physics professors who are experts in developing
              and/or implementing these approaches. The impact of the workshops are being
              reinforced by a newsletter and other incentives provided to encourage the
              implementation of the workshop ideas. This project is facilitating the rapid
              incorporation of this knowledge and technology at two-year colleges for the
              students they serve.  

