Title       : Integration of a Developmental Biology Program into a Research-Based Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9950879

Award Number: 9950879
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Montgomery montgomery@macalester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project establishes a research-based developmental biology program
              affecting students in introductory, intermediate, and advanced courses at
              Macalester College.  The primary objective of this project is to support the
              design and addition of research-based laboratories in Developmental Biology
              throughout the biology curriculum, but especially in the new intermediate and
              advanced level classes, Developmental Biology, and Research in Developmental
              Biology.  Laboratory modules are adapted from "The Developmental Biology
              Teaching Laboratory" workshop led by L. Johnson at the Darling Marine Center
              which introduced several developmental investigations.  By using research-grade
              microscopes with a video-imaging system dedicated to student research, this
              project supports enhanced demonstration capabilities in a minimum of three
              courses, greater comprehension of scientific methods and principles by
              potential science majors in an introductory cell biology course, proficiency in
              several sophisticated techniques in the intermediate developmental biology
              course, and the enhancement of senior level research (enrolling up to a total
              of 42 students per year).  In the courses affected by this project, students
              are introduced to one or several model organisms and contemporary techniques
              used to study the organism's development, including vital dye staining,
              immunocytochemistry, microsurgery, in situ hybridization, and reverse genetics.
               The comprehension of developmental and cell biology is being enhanced by the
              use of video-imaging capabilities that can demonstrate and store for retrieval,
              study, and comparison the different stages of the life cycle of the organism
              under study as well as microsurgical and staining techniques.  Improved
              comprehension and mastery of these techniques result in increased technical
              expertise later in the course and in potentially more sophisticated
              developmental biology research.  Finally, the research grade microscopes with
              imagining capabilities enhance the quality of undergraduate research
              publications and presentations.  
