Title       : Physiology of Exercise Laboratory Enhanced by Computer-Assisted Instruction and
               Inquiry-Based Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1999       
File        : a9950622

Award Number: 9950622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47193              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred W. Kolkhorst   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Buono  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Traditional teaching strategies in the undergraduate physiology of exercise
              laboratory course utilize numerous demonstrations of the metabolic measurement
              system or involve laboratory problems that simply involve determining
              descriptive physiological measures. These teaching strategies often fail to
              develop students' higher cognitive skills or their understanding and
              appreciation of the scientific process. This project is adapting an
              inquiry-based computer-assisted strategy used at the University of Oregon and
              integrating computer-assisted instruction into the laboratory course and
              develop inquiry-based laboratory investigations.  Eight computer workstations
              will be acquired, ensuring no more than two students to a workstation, and
              networked with a metabolic measurement system. Also, two data acquisition
              systems will be interfaced to each workstation which allow measurement of a
              variety of physiological variables. All data files from the metabolic
              measurement system and data acquisition systems will be stored on the server.
              Students will be able to access a large database of previously collected data
              from any workstation, or have the opportunity to manipulate experimental
              variables using a data acquisition system providing "hands-on" experiences.
              Inquiry-based laboratory experiments will be developed which supply fewer
              instructions and place more responsibility on students to design and organize
              their own experiments. This teaching strategy emphasizes the scientific inquiry
              process, such as hypothesizing, designing and conducting the experiment,
              organizing and analyzing data, and drawing and defending conclusions from the
              data. The primary expected outcomes of this project are greater infusion of
              technology in the laboratory course and an enhancement of higher cognitive and
              scientific process skills. Effectiveness of this teaching strategy will be
              evaluated and the results presented at professional meetings and published in
              national science education journals.


