Title       : Western Massachusetts Advanced Technology Training Consortium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a9950067

Award Number: 9950067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David B. Campbell                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Mulholland wmulholl@berkshirecc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Teresa B. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew S. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene R. Atwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Simmons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas DelGreco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen B. Green  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Gregory Vouros  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Berkshire Cmty College
	      West Street
	      Pittsfield, MA  01201    413/499-4660

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Western Massachusetts Advanced Technology Training Consortium is composed
              of post-secondary institutions (Berkshire and Greenfield Community Colleges),
              secondary schools, government agencies, and several manufacturing and
              technology networks.  The consortium is developing, field testing, and
              implementing learning modules with units designed to enhance understanding of
              specific technologies utilized by selected regional industries and to improve
              mathematics, science, computer, and problem solving skills. The development
              model focuses upon environmental/agriculture technology, plastics and paper
              manufacturing, and computer animation as the targeted industry clusters.
              

Modules, units, and groups of units can be integrated into the curriculum
              as part of an educational course of study or used by practitioners in the field
              for exposure to a range of procedures and technologies providing practical
              applications of mathematics, science, computer, and engineering concepts.  The
              modules will be designed to accommodate the needs of diverse audiences by
              providing learning tracks suited to the specific learning styles, developmental
              levels, competencies, and skill proficiencies of various target groups. 
              Through multiple delivery options, each target group will be able to select a
              particular set of units suitable to its own educational needs and access
              modules at a track compatible with its learning style and background.  In
              disseminating the modules to other settings, the Consortium will collaborate
              with the NSF-funded  Telecommunications project at Springfield Technical
              Community College.
