Title       : Rapid Tooling and Time Compression Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9950816

Award Number: 9950816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vedaraman Sriraman vs04@swt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary J. Winek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John E. DeLeon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Habingreither  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas State U
	      
	      San Marcos, TX  78666    512/245-2111

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project adapts and applies exemplary manufacturing engineering educational
              practices in concurrent engineering and time-compression technologies from
              across the nation at Southwest Texas State University.  This effort largely
              borrows on the successes of two nationally reputed schools in manufacturing,
              Purdue University and Georgia Institute of Technology.   The project supports
              the teaching of the integrated application of rapid tooling and other
              time-compression technologies that center around rapid prototyping (RP), such
              as Computer Aided Design (CAD), Computer Aided Engineering (CAE), Computer
              Aided Manufacturing (CAM), investment casting and Room Temperature Vulcanizing
              (RTV) molding in manufacturing education technology courses.  This represents a
              comprehensive curriculum change because the teaching objectives are infused
              into a core of building experiences instead of being addressed in a
              compartmentalized fashion.  Our objective is implemented by designing exercises
              in three sophomore and senior level courses that permit each student to apply
              several varying technical approaches in an integrated fashion.  The resulting
              student experience provides intimate knowledge of a complete product cycle,
              from design to manufacture, using a "hands-on" approach.  The most significant
              outcome of the project is the graduation of a cadre of engineering technology
              students, many of whom are minority students, who have had "hands-on"
              laboratory experiences with synthesizing time-compression technologies and
              understand all of the technical activities that span the product cycle.    
