Title       : Geology of Utah's National Parks and Monuments: Education Materials for Earth
               Science Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9950213

Award Number: 9950213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $428132             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline E. Huntoon jeh@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregg J. Bluth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fritz J. Erickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Kennedy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Funds requested in this proposal will be used to develop, evaluate, and
              disseminate three components of an introductory earth science multimedia
              laboratory that is targeted for use by pre-service and in-service teachers. The
              three components are: 1) a CD-ROM based virtual course including exercises
              based on the exceptional geologic exposures in five of Utah's National Parks
              and Monuments as well as hands-on exercises that can be performed anywhere and
              are intended to give users experience analyzing geologic processes and their
              products; 2) a course kit containing extensive lesson plans, key rock samples,
              relevant geologic and topographic maps, references from the technical and
              popular literature, and course evaluation materials; and 3) a video providing
              in depth information about the remote field sites and techniques used by
              students and researchers in the field to solve problems.

The multimedia
              laboratory will be designed to help secondary school earth science teacher's
              present information using an Earth System approach. The laboratory will include
              a series of open-ended questions that focus on problems that are currently
              being researched by the Geoscience community. The questions will be chosen to
              encourage development of problem solving skills and the ability to integrate
              information from a variety of sources. Technical skills and theoretical
              concepts will be presented in the laboratory only as necessary to solve the
              problems. Quantitative and qualitative assessment vehicles, including
              diagnostic learning logs, pre-test/post-test attitude surveys and an instrument
              designed to measure higher-order cognition will be used by students and
              teachers who participate in the project to determine the materials success at
              teaching basic geologic concepts.

During the first year of the project the
              three components will be developed. In the second year, the materials will be
              tested and assessed during the academic year by undergraduate students
              (including pre-service teachers) and in-service teachers recruited from the
              local area. The components of the multimedia laboratory will be modified in
              response to participants' and our own evaluations. During the summer of the
              second year the course materials will be tested on secondary school students
              from underrepresented minority groups (women, African American and Native
              American) that visit the University as part of an existing Summer Youth Program
              designed to increase minority enrollment. This program allows access to a wide
              variety of students to participate in assessment of the materials, and will
              allow the PIs to investigate the impact of different teaching methods and aids
              on students from diverse ethnic and economic backgrounds, as well as both
              genders. The components of the multimedia laboratory will again be modified as
              suggested by the participants in and instructors of these courses. During the
              third year, in-service teachers who participated during the second year will
              test the multimedia laboratory's effectiveness in their own classrooms. Final
              modifications to the components and production of the multimedia laboratory
              will be made at this time, and the laboratory will be made publicly available
              at the end of the third year.


