Title       : A Senior Design Project Laboratory: Platform Independent Remote Data Acquistion
               and Control Over the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1999       
File        : a9950697

Award Number: 9950697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew P. Bernat                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24294              (Estimated)
Investigator: Farhad A. Kamangar kamangar@cse.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hee Yong Youn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Behrooz A. Shirazi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project proposes to adapt and implement techniques used in industry to a
              new senior level course and the senior design project laboratory, based upon
              remote data acquisition and control over the Internet.  The purpose of the
              project is to improve the laboratory experiences of senior computer science
              engineering students by implementing a suitable hardware/ software environment
              for multi-platform computer-based monitor and control of the environment to
              better prepare them for their professional work.  

The project incorporates
              the use of platform-independent languages such as Java to remotely control and
              monitor the environment from any computer connected to the Internet.   It uses
              the National Instrument's data acquisition software and hardware to provide a
              uniform representation of the physical environment across multiple computer
              platforms.  The project provides students with the novel opportunity to
              integrate their knowledge from different courses such as computer networks,
              microcomputers, signal processing and software languages into a real-life,
              hands-on experience to prepare them to be successful computer engineers.  
              

The institutional impact of this project is to greatly enhance the senior
              year educational experience of computer science engineering students.  An
              evaluation that includes a senior exit survey, feedback from an Industrial
              Advisory Council, and site visits from engineers from National Instruments is
              being conducted for the duration of the project. 
