Title       : Acquisition of a Liquid Scintillation Spectrometer for Undergraduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9950126

Award Number: 9950126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale D. Ensor densor@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward C. Lisic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey O. Boles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Radioisotopes are important tools in biochemical and medical research, as well
              as in environmental monitoring and radiochemical research.  This project
              focuses on the adaptation of current research techniques in biochemistry,
              environmental science, and radiochemistry into the undergraduate laboratory
              experience of chemistry students at Tennessee Technological University.  Liquid
              scintillation spectrometry is the primary counting technique for weak beta
              emitters and, with advances in current instrumentation, the analysis of alpha
              emitters is becoming common. The objectives of this project are: 1) providing
              the students with experience in sample preparation and analysis of alpha and
              weak beta emitters; 2) providing students with an appreciation of the internal
              workings of the system so that the instrument becomes more than "a black box
              that produces a number;" and 3) furnishing the students with a tool to attack
              advanced problems in radiochemistry and biochemistry.  Examples of adaptations
              are the measurement of the binding of small molecules to proteins (Boles,
              Biochemistry, 1990 and Boles, J. Biol. Chem., 1992), the determination of
              radionuclides in drinking water using new absorbent materials (Smith,
              Radiochimica Acta, 1993), and the incorporation of 99Tc into
              radiopharmaceuticals (Deutsch, J. Nucl. Med, 1987).

The instrument exhibits
              high sensitivity and low background, separates alpha and beta counts through
              the use of time-resolved pulse shape analysis, allows the observation of the
              differences between alpha and beta pulse shapes, and performs isotopic
              identification based on the energy spectra with the use of live spectral
              display.  This project results in a more effective linkage between
              undergraduate students and professional schools, graduate studies, industrial
              positions, or government laboratories, where an understanding of the theory,
              operating characteristics, and applications of liquid scintillation
              spectroscopy is needed. 

