Title       : Reform of Undergraduate Biology Education: Biological Inquiry and Integrative
               Biology.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1999       
File        : a9950289

Award Number: 9950289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane C. Robertson robertdc@grinnell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Voyles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan M. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent M. Eckhart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles H. Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grinnell College
	      1121 Park Street
	      Grinnell, IA  501121690    641/269-4939

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The College is reforming its biology core curriculum to enhance student learning
              of the process of biology, give introductory students authentic research
              experience, present modem, integrative biology to majors, and enhance
              opportunities for interdisciplinary study. Biology's rapid expansion challenges
              educators, who must teach clear biological principles amidst an overwhelming
              and ever-growing amount of information. A promising approach to this challenge
              is to use research-based learning to move away from teaching biology as a
              collection of facts and toward teaching biology as it is actually practiced.
              Meanwhile, the growth of integrative research fields suggests that advances in
              biology are becoming increasingly dependent on integration across
              sub-disciplines. We propose an introductory curriculum that combines extensive
              research-based study within an integrative framework. With support to enhance
              equipment, technology, and instruction, we will introduce three new
              semester-long courses. The first is a small enrollment introductory course that
              will apply the model of having students pose questions, design experiments,
              analyze data, and communicate scientific information, by focusing on
              integrative topics that will often be related to individual faculty members'
              research. The second and third courses are a two-semester sequence focused on
              organismal problem solving. Each course applies a research-based style to
              develop explanations for organismal function, mainly at the levels of cells and
              molecules (semester 1), or mainly at the levels of individuals, populations,
              and communities (semester 2). Multi-week laboratories will synthesize
              information across levels of biological organization from molecules to
              ecosystems, with concepts, model systems, and data developed in the first
              semester being revisited and applied in the second. We expect this new core
              curriculum to develop substantially the level of interest and scientific
              preparation of our students.



