Title       : Studio Based Modern Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a9950886

Award Number: 9950886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50205              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil Fleishon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Saenz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Studio-Based Modern Physics Project is a project to adapt and implement a
              wealth of existing materials, many developed at various universities with
              National Science Foundation support.  A set of stylistically coherent and
              pedagogically consistent modules is produced for use in the teaching of the
              standard Modern Physics course for scientists and engineers which typically
              follows the introductory physics sequence.  Specifically, these modules
              integrate modern technologies into the teaching of the basic concepts of
              Special Relativity and Quantum Mechanics at an introductory level.  This
              material is envisioned for use as a supplement to any of the standard Modern
              Physics textbooks.  The resources to be adapted include simulation software
              [including "RelLab",  "Spacetime", "Photoelectric Tutor",  Java "physlets"
              created by W. Christian [including " Doppler", "Minkowsi", and "QM Time",
              desktop laboratories developed by the Visual Quantum Mechanics group at Kansas
              State University,  and Maple worksheets by M. Maloney [including " compton",
              "schro", and "orbital".  These modules are developed  for use in the classroom
              "studio" environment, implementing learning strategies and classroom practices
              developed and tested under NSF sponsorship and shown to be successful at the
              introductory physics level at fostering conceptual understanding(e.g. 
              Real-Time Physics [Sokoloff,et.al], Tutorials in Introductory Physics
              [McDermott]).  A series of evaluative instruments is created in order to test
              for success in realizing specific pedagogical objectives compared with the
              traditional, lecture based, course.  Class testing and evaluation of materials
              is conducted over a span of several quarters.  The effectiveness of student
              centered, guided exploration methods in application to abstract subject
              material and greater mathematical sophistication is probed.   A website
              summarizing project activities and allowing free download of all material
              developed is created and maintained.
