Title       : Comprehensive Curriculum Reform : Adapting and Implementing the Enhanced
               Education Experience for Engineers ( E4)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1999       
File        : a9950353

Award Number: 9950353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Cattell dcattell@ccp.cc.pa.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cmty Col of Philadelphia
	      1700 Spring Garden
	      Philadelphia, PA  19130    215/751-8000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Community College of Philadelphia is developing a new freshman and sophomore
              engineering core curriculum by adapting and implementing the Enhacement
              Educational experience for Engineers  (E4) and The engineering Test, Design,
              and Simulation Laboratory (ETDSL) pioneered by Drexel University.

E4 and
              ETDSL give students an experience of real engineering work early in their
              education.  Students learn the materials needed for engineering practice and
              retention in the program.  In the traditional curriculum, students learn much
              of this material by rote memorization without putting it into practice.  This
              project also enhaces the national need to recruit more minority students into
              SMET.  As a large, comprehensive urban community college, successful adaption
              of this program will serve as a model for other community colleges.

E4 calls
              for the design, development and testing of an engineering core curriculum
              emphasizing interdisciplinary sicentific foundations:  the pivotal role of
              experimentation; the transcendent role of the computer; the imperative for
              superior communication skills; the importance of teamwork and the habit of
              vigorous life-long learning; and the role of design as the defining element of
              professional practice.  This proposal addresses the DUE themes of faculty
              development, diversity, and integration of technology into education.

E4 and
              ETDSL will be adapted to an urban, community college seytting through: (1) the
              development of two new courses using the E4 aproach and the simulation
              laboratory; (2) the revision of four existing courses to utilize the the ETSDL
              approach; (3) a provision of faculty development on E4 and ETSDL; (4) retention
              of 80% of disadvantaged students in the engineering major by providing a
              positive educational experience to the students enrolled or interested in
              engineering; and (5) initiation of two addtional articulation agreements with
              four years schools offering a baccalaureate in engineering.
