Title       : From Concept to Production: Reconceptualizing the Mechanical Engineering
               Technology Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a9950726

Award Number: 9950726
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167545             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rupert Chandler brchanr@br.cc.va.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Wayland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Broom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Blue Ridge CC
	      P.O. Box 80
	      Weyers Cave, VA  24486    703/234-9261

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Blue Ridge Community College is revising the content and curricular framework of
              its Mechanical Engineering Technology (MET) Cluster to create an innovative and
              comprehensive educational program that will provide highly skilled technicians
              for manufacturing industries.  Through curricular revision, the creation of a
              new Mechanical Engineering Technology Center, and collaboration with industry
              partners an integrated approach to the manufacturing process is achieved.   The
              Center's projects and the MET Cluster's courses adapt computer numeric control
              conversational programming applications and 3-D modeling modules developed by
              the Virginia Highlands Community College and the Piedmont Virginia Community
              College to enhance the Cluster's holistic approach to education and
              learning.

Existing partnerships with secondary school systems, local
              manufacturing industries, and James Madison University are being used to
              develop and implement innovative learning methodologies.  Faculty are adapting
              the team oriented approach which has been successfully used by the College of
              Integrated Science and Technology at James Madison University.   The college's
              partnerships with industry and the regional tech-prep consortium are resulting
              in the design of real world manufacturing projects to engage high school and
              college students in mathematics, design, and engineering courses.  

The
              project enables Blue Ridge Community College to achieve improved integration of
              manufacturing technology throughout the mechanical engineering technology
              cluster, to provide faculty with increased opportunities to remain abreast of
              technological changes in manufacturing, and to demonstrate to the powe
