Title       : Components for a Comprehensive Computer-Assisted Physics Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1999       
File        : a9950707

Award Number: 9950707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58269              (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Mark Riffe riffe@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Peak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Robert Dennison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project will facilitate completion of the final, key components of our
              current, sweeping revision of the undergraduate physics curriculum. A primary
              emphasis is the relevance of multiple academic tracks within the department to
              post graduation employment, as enhanced through integration of
              computer-assisted learning and familiarity with modem instrumentation. The
              project will produce a coherent, sequential set of hands-on courses from the
              introductory courses through our capstone Undergraduate Research course. A
              unique feature will be the implementation of HTML documents throughout the
              curriculum that uniformly integrate the software for instrumentation control,
              data acquisition, analysis and visualization, and modeling. We build on
              previous NSF-ILI, industrial, state, and institutional funding that focused
              primarily on introductory elements of our program. The current project impacts
              development of seven specific upper-division courses: (1) "Introduction to
              Scientific Computing" introduces computer-assisted mathematics and computer
              interfacing at the sophomore level; (2 and 3) "Intermediate Laboratory I & II"
              teaches interfacing, experimental, and analysis methods through application to
              well-defined junior level experiments; (4) "Advanced Laboratory" acquaints
              students with research grade instrumentation in open-ended, application
              oriented experiments; (5 and 6) "Computational Physics I & 1P' emphasizes
              numerical methods and modeling ; and (7) "Undergraduate research' demands
              creative application of all aspects of the preceding courses. Key deliverables,
              include Mathcad and Science Workshop based multimedia courseware that are
              designed to progressively develop students' critical thinking, problem solving
              skills, and experience with computers and instrumentation. Dissemination of
              courseware, together with its implementation and evaluation, will follow a
              multifaceted approach previously used for our earlier instructional curriculum,
              including potential publication in cooperation with MathSoft, the producers of
              Mathcad.



