Title       : Improving Conceptual Understanding and Complex Problem Solving in General
               Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1999       
File        : a9950511

Award Number: 9950511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92382              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark F. Masters   (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Maloney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In order to promote conceptual understanding, improve problem solving skills and
              increase student motivation, this project will make three coordinated changes
              in two general physics courses at Indiana University - Purdue University Fort
              Wayne (IPFW).  These changes include the adaptation and implementation of
              Microcomputer Based Laboratory tools (Thornton and Sokoloff) as the foundation
              for changes in the laboratories and lecture.  First, the laboratories for the
              courses will be changed to a combination of (1) laboratory skill development
              (CPT laboratories) with (2) complex/real world problem (C/RW) laboratories
              which promote qualitative problem solving procedures, experiment design,
              measurement techniques and data analysis.  The CPT laboratories will be adapted
              from Laboratory Manual for Physics from Ohio State University (Published by
              Burgess Pub., 1995) with modifications to incorporate data analysis procedures.
               Six C/RW problem laboratories for each course will be developed that
              incorporate the use of Interactive Physics in modeling the systems for
              analysis.  The second change will be adaptation and implement Interactive
              Lecture Demonstrations on kinematics, Newton's Laws, rotational dynamics,
              electric field, electric current, magnetic force and electromagnetic induction
              for the class segment of the course.  The third change will be the development
              of four complex/real world problems also for use in the class segment of the
              courses.   Evaluation of the project will focus on conceptual development and
              qualitative problem solving skills of the students.  A laboratory manual with
              instructor's notes will be produced so other instructors can implement these
              materials.

