Title       : Using Constructivist - Based Investigations and Cooperative Learning in
               Introductory College Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2002   
File        : a9950724

Award Number: 9950724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond W. Scheetz Raymond.Scheetz@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rosalina V. Hairston  (Principal Investigator former)
              Aimee L. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sherry S. Herron  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Biological Sciences at the University of Southern Mississippi
              is improving the content, method of instruction, and delivery of two sequential
              introductory biology courses.  A summer workshop is bringing together faculty
              members from two universities, and three area community colleges, graduate
              teaching assistants, and preservice teachers to learn from instructional
              experts how to use constructivist-based investigations and cooperative learning
              techniques. The instructional materials are being transformed from cookbook
              exercises into investigative activities integrated with the lecture materials
              to develop the processes of science and problem solving skills of students
              through experimentation and research projects. The efforts are an adaptation of
              projects funded previously by NSF, such as BioQuest centered at Beloit College,
              the Human Genome Project at BSCS, and Louisiana Tech University. The various
              typologies of cooperative learning are being used to cultivate teamwork,
              positive interdependence, and individual and group accountability. The plan
              also includes the use of technology in data collection, calculation, simulation
              and modeling to teach problem-solving skills. Two introductory biology
              instructors from Jackson State University with experience in computer-assisted
              instruction will collaborate in the project. In addition, three area community
              colleges will share their experiences in developing critical thinking in
              biology. A feature of this project is the opportunity to provide experience in
              curriculum development and constructivist methods of teaching and assessment to
              graduate teaching assistants who are future faculty members. After one year of
              implementation and evaluation, participants will collaborate with one another
              to formalize strategies by which these reforms in introductory biology courses
              can be institutionalized.


