Title       : Combining GIS, GPS, and Electronic Total Stations (EDM) in Field and
               Environmental Sciences for the Undergraduate Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1999      
File        : a9950822

Award Number: 9950822
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99985              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Bampton bampton@usm.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark T. Swanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Southern Maine
	      96 Falmouth St
	      Portland, ME  041049300    207/780-4411

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Global positioning systems (GPS) and electronic total stations (EDM) are
              essential field equipment for gathering spatial data for geographic information
              system (GIS) analysis. These tools are increasingly applied in a variety of
              research and professional activities by earth, environmental, and geographical
              scientists, but at present few undergraduate students outside surveying
              programs are exposed to the technologies. Training materials and applications
              developed by manufacturers are designed only to meet the needs of this
              specialist audience. Our objective is to employ Geometronics Spectra Precision
              EDMs, Trimble GPSs, and IBM laptops, in the development of a series of course
              modules that will significantly augment our existing multi-disciplinary
              field-based GIS curriculum.  As such, this represents an adaptation and
              expansion of the efforts of others with NSF support as well as the adaptation
              of industrial and research applications for use by college students.  The four
              innovative features of this project are: 1) integrating this equipment into the
              existing multi disciplinary science curriculum, teaching students to gather
              high quality data in the field using current technologies; 2) adapting
              manufacturer's published training materials and supporting technical literature
              for an undergraduate audience; 3) designing an adaptable field data recording
              methodology and documentation system integrating GPS and EDM to generate data
              for discipline-specific laboratory analysis; 4) developing software extensions
              and operational procedures to import data directly into the GIS software
              currently in use in our GIS laboratory.  Regular bulletins are posted on our
              website, which include progress reports, a selection of the student projects
              produced in each of our four GIS classes, and a full set of our teaching
              materials for integrating EDM, GPS, and GIS as they are developed. Target
              audiences are undergraduates in the earth, environmental and geographic
              sciences, K-12 teachers working with the state geographic alliance, and
              non-matriculated students from the local professional communities.
