Title       : Use of an ICP Spectrometer for the Undergraduate Materials Characterization
               Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1999        
File        : a9950359

Award Number: 9950359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56419              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne E. Pemberton pembertn@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tabitha D. Sims  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neal R. Armstrong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Bonner Denton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Use of an Inductively Coupled Plasma atomic emission spectrometer (ICP-AES) is
              being integrated into the undergraduate instructional program in Analytical
              Chemistry. The ICP-AES is serving as a catalyst for the implementation of a
              Materials Characterization Project (MCP) into our Instrumental Analysis course
              in order to expose our chemistry majors to the challenges of real world
              analysis and to provide an improved grounding in the fundamentals of the
              "analytical process".  The MCP involves the complete characterization of a
              commercially available product including the packaging. The students are given
              unique samples, which include, for example, a solar calculator, infant formula,
              and platinum spark plug or halogen lamp bulb and are asked to answer questions
              about the sample matrix, purity and packaging. The questions are chosen so that
              the student has the opportunity to use a variety of instrumental techniques as
              they characterize the polymer, inorganic, metallic and ceramic components down
              to a prescribed detection level. The undertaking of an actual analysis (sort of
              a reverse engineering) is intended to provide an experience which is very close
              to that encountered in an industrial setting. The students are challenged with
              the tasks of experimental design, technique choice and execution, all features
              which are a vast departure from pre-designed "canned" laboratory experiments. 
              ICP-AES technology is at a mature level in a variety of fields and we seek to
              adapt this tool to our unique application of trace metals analysis of various
              components of the samples used in the MCP. We believe that this realistic
              laboratory experience will better prepare our chemistry majors by exposing them
              to the entire analytical process.
