Title       : X-Ray Diffractometry Applications for Geological Engineering and Geology
               Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1999 
File        : a9950729

Award Number: 9950729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80450              (Estimated)
Investigator: S.Douglas McDowell sdmcdowe@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George W. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore J. Bornhorst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geological and other engineers who routinely work with fine grained Earth
              materials are rarely trained in the X-ray diffractometry techniques needed to
              identify the minerals that make up those materials.  Diffractometry is not
              normally applied until after material failure has ocurred, when specialists are
              brought in to determine the cause of failure.  In this project, the Department
              of Geological Engineering and Sciences is installing a modern X-ray
              diffractometer and developing a series of laboratory modules that will cover
              diffractometry applications that are of most use to practicing engineers. 
              These modules include: basic mineral identification methods, quantitative
              diffraction techniues, particle size analysis, and especially the specialized
              diffractometry procedures needed to accurately characterize the clay menerals,
              a mineral group that is of major use in engineering.  The objective is to
              produce graduates that will be able to decide when X-ray diffractometry
              techniques need to be applied, how to prepare representative analyses, where
              the analyses can be carried out, and how to interpret the results in a
              meaningful way.   This educational approach is adapted from the geology
              departments at Smith, Carleton, Central Washington, Indiana, and Purdue
              Universities.  The long term objective is to make other professional engineers
              aware of the usefulness of diffractometry in solving real engineering problems,
              so that the method becomes much more generally applied than at
              present.

Additional modules, designed for Geology and Earth Science
              Education majors, will cover a variety of topics with the objective of
              preparing these students to utilize diffractometry in teaching and research. 
              In conjunction with the A.E. Seaman Mineral Museum, X-ray diffractometry
              applications in mineralogy will be demonstrated as a means of introducing
              modern scientific technology to K-12 teachers and members of the general
              public, in a summer field mineralogy class offered at the museum.
