Title       : An Inexpensive Data Logger Designed to Record Analog Signals in Hydrogeology and
               Computer Architecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1999       
File        : a9950544

Award Number: 9950544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75850              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Halfman halfman@hws.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Vaughn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Brooks McKinney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hobart & William Smith Col
	      
	      Geneva, NY  14456    315/781-3000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project tests and integrates a simple, easy-to-assemble and inexpensive
              data logger designed to record analog signals from a wide variety of sensors in
              the field. This "proof-of-concept" project establishes the versatility,
              reliability, precession and accuracy of the data logger and provides a number
              of examples of how the data logger integrates into the science curriculum.
              Funds cover faculty salaries, undergraduate student summer help, and essential
              equipment including data loggers, a variety of sensors, various test equipment
              and computers. The curricular improvements focus on two fields, hydrogeology
              and computer architecture.  In hydrology, data loggers collect flow
              characteristics within and between stream basins and massbalance data. In
              computer science, data loggers are used for design, programming, A/D
              conversions and other modifications. The data logger is an inexpensive solution
              for data gathering over time and integrates nicely with the recent rise in
              earth systems science and embedded computer systems. The interdisciplinary
              results allows geoscience students and computer science colleagues to build
              specific sensors and/or logger design modifications to detect specific
              environmental parameters. Dissemination of this inexpensive data logger
              specifications and curricular improvements are posted on the Web, presented at
              regional and national meetings, and submitted to appropriate educational
              journals. The Web site contains data-logger plans, circuit diagrams, circuit
              board layouts, parts list, suppliers, user manuals, and tutorials so that
              educators (college or high school) can download these items and construct
              her/his own data loggers. The team has initiated plans for the complete
              dissemination and independent testing of the data logger and its curricular
              integration across the nation at completion of the project. 
