Title       : Physiology Curriculum Reform through Adaptation of Workshop Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1999     
File        : a9950607

Award Number: 9950607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30731              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Gahbauer MGahbauer@otterbein.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Otterbein College
	      
	      Westerville, OH  43081    614/890-3000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Animal physiology at the University is in need of curricular revision. At
              present the laboratory component of courses has either fallen away from
              investigative empiricism to passive observation of demonstration, or is
              entirely absent. Consequently many students have little idea of experimental
              design, procedures, or analysis of results; also we have found that critical
              thinking skills of our senior students are not increased over those of our
              freshmen. Although, the College and the Department promote undergraduate
              research, no facilities presently exist for a student to carry out a research
              project in animal physiology.

We propose to adapt 'Workshop Biology', an
              inquiry-based approach to learning which was developed at the University of
              Oregon. Problem posing and problem solving enable students to construct meaning
              from learning experiences. By integrating lecture with laboratory the
              integration of content (concepts) and process (investigation) is also achieved.
              Students will use their own bodies as experimental subjects to investigate
              acid-base, cardiovascular, renal, respiratory, and neuromuscular physiology;
              invertebrates will be used for invasive procedures. Computerized data recorders
              will be needed for measurement of physiological parameters and analysis of
              results.

The students impacted by this use of technology to drive curricular
              reform will be in freshman biology (40), junior/senior level biology (15),
              secondary teacher education (1 -3), freshman nursing (30) equine science (8),
              and freshman physical education (30) courses.

We expect that this
              investigative approach to animal physiology will improve conceptual learning
              and scientific reasoning abilities, expose students to research methods,
              equipment and opportunities early in their college years, and build technical
              skills and familiarity with the types of instruments which many of our student
              use in their later careers.



