Title       : Development and Implementation of an Investigative Laboratory Component for the
               Molecular Biology Course at St. Mary's College of Maryland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1999     
File        : a9950557

Award Number: 9950557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31665              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel Myerowitz rmyerowitz@osprey.smcm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Mary's Col of Maryland
	      18952 E. Fisher Road
	      St. Marys City, MD  206863001    240/895-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The laboratory component of the Molecular Biology course is framed to l) teach
              students basic recombinant DNA methodology, 2) reinforce the theoretical
              underpinnings of the discipline, and 3) teach the discovery process. While
              successful in achieving the first two goals, the current laboratory activity of
              repeating well-defined experiments has been ineffective in achieving the third
              goal. In addition, the laboratory has been deficient in the utilization of
              information technology. To address these problems I propose to redesign the
              current laboratory experience so that it include a truly investigative project
              that I have adapted from that originally described by Monroe and Knight which
              requires extensive use of information technology. During the last eight weeks
              of the semester students will in fact become part of the ongoing global effort
              to sequence the genome of the small plant species, Arabidopsis thaliana.
              Students will isolate, characterize and sequence clones from a cDNA library of
              Arabidopsis thaliana and will then use Gen Bank DNA databases to determine the
              novelty of their clones. Vital to implementation of this laboratory activity is
              an automated DNA sequencer, the request of this proposal. In addition to its
              importance for the investigative project of the Molecular Biology course, it is
              expected that the DNA sequencer will also be used by students to carry out
              independent research projects as well as by faculty to develop investigative
              laboratories for other courses. It is anticipated that investigative activities
              such as those described above will provide opportunities for students to learn
              the discovery process and acquire the analytical and critical thinking skills
              necessary for lifelong learning.
