Title       : Quantitative Reasoning and Informed Citizenship: Implementing an Activity-based
               Laboratory Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1999      
File        : a9950229

Award Number: 9950229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79412              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kay B. Somers somersk@moravian.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alicia Sevilla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Moravian College
	      Main Street & Elizabeth Avenue
	      Bethlehem, PA  18018    215/861-1300

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is establishing a new general education course "Quantitative
              Reasoning and Informed Citizenship" at Moravian College by drawing on,
              adapting, and implementing practices and materials developed by a number of
              projects including "A Practical Guide to Cooperative Learning in Collegiate
              Mathematics" by Hagelgans et al.; "Workshop Physics and Workshop Mathematics"
              at Dickinson College; "Mathematics for Life" by Don Pierce; "Workshop
              Statistics" by A. Rossman; and "Mathematics in Public Discourse" by J.
              Anderson.  The course is aimed at a large group of students not generally
              attracted to mathematics and science who are expected to take this course as
              part of their general education requirements.

The course will focus on
              building students' skills in the areas of numbers and reasoning, functions and
              graphing, and probability and statistics while engaging them in collaborative
              activities.  Reasoning skills and learning to interpret and critically assess
              numerical arguments will be stressed through meaningful applications taken from
              a variety of sources, including existing problem sets, newspapers and news
              magazines, and the World Wide Web.  Involving students in collaborative
              learning activities is expected to build their ability to reason
              quantitatively, to formulate numerical arguments, and to explain, orally and in
              writing, the results of quantitaive analyses.  The use of computers on an
              everyday basis is expected to increase students' proficiency with a variety of
              computer software and the use of internet resources in a learning environment. 
              The applications and pedagogical techniques are expected to improve students'
              attitudes toward quantitative reasoning tools, quantitative analyses, and
              computers.


