Title       : Integrative Workstations to Enhance Undergraduate Learning of Metabolic and
               Physiological Responses to Exercise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9950350

Award Number: 9950350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marialice Kern Mkern@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9103,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Exercise physiology is a fundamental course for kinesiology, exercise science,
              and movement science majors, and is of particular interest to future teachers,
              health professionals and researchers. The teaching of exercise physiology
              laboratories has mainly been done by demonstration (due to lack of equipment),
              although the relevancy and excitement of the subject is best conveyed to the
              greatest number of students by allowing each student to take part in the
              laboratory experiments. The acquisition of modern instructional equipment
              expands and strengthens the student's experience in undergraduate exercise
              physiology resulting in a better understanding of basic human physiological
              principles. The objectives of this project are two-fold: a) to promote active
              learning by the students through individualized and small group investigation
              and b) to provide instrumentation enabling students to study several
              fundamental exercise physiology principles that cannot be investigated with the
              current equipment. The computerized physiology workstations (metabolic
              measurement systems and bicycle ergometers, interfaced with an
              electrocardiograph) are facilitating more active learning by students as
              compared to traditional presentations in exercise physiology laboratories.  The
              approach is an adaptation of several projects previously funded by NSF.  The
              configuration of these workstations provides for a "hands-on" team approach to
              understanding exercise physiology by allowing for the observation and
              investigation of laboratory problems by an individual or small groups of
              students either in scheduled laboratories or out-of-class projects.  The
              equipment is allowing pre-service teachers to learn how this equipment
              operates, calibration techniques, and what measures can be obtained, as they
              perform both laboratory and field tests on themselves, classmates and
              pre-college students.  Also, the metabolic measurement systems interfaced with
              an electrocardiograph provide experiences for our students that were not
              previously available to them, but are integral to the study of exercise
              physiology.  Specifically, students are able to test the effects of exercise on
              myocardial function as well as investigate real-time changes in energy
              metabolism as exercise intensity and/or the environment is varied. Students
              also plan and conduct research experiments, analyze data, and present their
              findings at the Annual Movement/Exercise Science Fair. The enhancements in the
              laboratory foster a direct problem-solving approach to the learning process and
              are reflected in the student's increased comprehension of scientific
              principles, concepts, and methods.
