Title       : Developmental Mathematics and its Applications (DevMap) Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9950036

Award Number: 9950036
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $674677             (Estimated)
Investigator: Solomon Garfunkel sol@mail.comap.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Forman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Consort Mathe/Its Applic
	      57 Bedford Street
	      Lexington, MA  02420    781/862-7878

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Students who attend two-year colleges often arrive on campus lacking the basic
              skills necessary to succeed in college-level work. This is a particularly
              serious problem for students in Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and
              Technology (SMET) programs, who may have significant deficits in their
              mathematics  backgrounds but high aspirations for their future success.
              Students in this  situation need to build both their mathematical skills and
              confidence in their ability to solve challenging problems in order to succeed
              in the mathematics-intensive programs they have selected. We propose to develop
              a two-semester program that will offer an alternative approach to the
              elementary and intermediate algebra courses currently taught at most two- and
              four-year colleges. Students completing this program will be prepared to enter
              a course in precalculus.
At the 1997 National Center for Research in
              Vocational Education (NCRVE) workshop, "Beyond Eighth Grade," industry
              representatives emphasized the need for "systems thinking" that enables
              employees to recognize complexities inherent in situations subject to multiple
              inputs and diverse constraints. In addition, science-based fields such as
              agricultural biotechnology require technicians who are able to formulate a
              problem in terms of relevant factors and design an experiment to determine the
              influence of those various factors. Yet, most developmental programs in
              mathematics, at both two- and four-year colleges, offer students what amounts
              to a replication of the high school mathematics curriculum they either studied
              and forgot or never studied. We now have a chance for real and positive change.
              Both the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) Standards,
              published in 1989, and Crossroads in Mathematics: Standards for Introductory
              College Mathematics  Before Calculus, published by the American Mathematical
              Association of Two-Year Colleges (AMATYC) in 1995, advocate an integrated
              approach to mathematics content.  Given students' needs in developmental
              mathematics, the vision of the AMATYC Standards, and COMAP's experience, we
              propose to create a one-year sequence, Developmental Mathematics and its
              Applications (DevMap). We believe that there are several benefits to the DevMap
              approach:
1.	The program will not be divided into topics called algebra,
              geometry, intermediate algebra, and trigonometry, although all the major
              concepts in those courses will be covered. 
2.	The applications-based
              curriculum will appeal to mature students who choose to pursue postsecondary
              education; the applications can be drawn from areas in which students may find
              themselves working or from situations that they recognize from their daily
              lives. 
3.	Solving the problems posed in DevMap will call for integrating
              technology in a natural way as compared to the "drill-and-practice" use of
              technology currently found in many developmental mathematics programs. 
