Title       : Adapting Student-Centered Learning Modules and Implementing Technology Into
               Real-World Problems in Water Quality, Steam Flow and Floods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9950435

Award Number: 9950435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52577              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy C. Horner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin Cornwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St U Sacramento Fdn
	      6000 J Street
	      Sacramento, CA  95819    916/278-7381

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Student-centered learning modules are adaptations that build technological
              literacy and build a better understanding of the scientific process as
              developed by Cheek, 1992, and create a higher order of understanding (Bonwell
              and Eison, 1991; Meyers and Jones 1993), and increase the retention of women
              and minority groups who may not be reached by traditional instructor-centered
              teaching methods (Boettcher, 1993).   These adaptations expand on previous
              classroom and laboratory exercises offered at CSUS that measure a variety of
              water quality features (Sanders, 1998).  CSUS has an on-campus wellfield and a
              strong groundwater program that now expands previous surface water and water
              quality exercises as originally adapted from .  The newly implemented
              curriculum modules emphasize student-centered learning, increased technological
              literacy, application of the scientific method, and internet publishing.  These
              modules are adapted into different levels of undergraduate studies by
              implementing technology into the collection of water quality, stream flow, and
              flood data.  Non-scientists are often uncertain about how to approach
              scientific problems, and these modules implement hands-on exercises that have
              application in real life. Underrepresented groups are targeted for increased
              retention by shifting the learning to a student-centered model and enhancing
              their technological proficiency. Students of all levels and backgrounds are
              guided through the process of designing experiments, collecting data,
              interpreting results and applying their conclusions about water quality or
              water supply to related social and political issues. This strengthens the tie
              between science and daily life, and results in a higher level of learning that
              can be applied to other real life situations.
Curriculum modules are
              constructed to address needs at three levels. Introductory students
              (non-majors) design water quality and stream flow experiments that are
              conducted on the American River which runs through the campus using guidelines
              provided in lab. An intermediate curriculum module is available to Geology
              Majors and Minors, and consists of a ten-day tour of western National Parks
              that is run during the semester intercession. In this module water supply and
              water pollution is examined in an interactive setting and is related to
              underlying geologic, social and political control. An advanced curriculum
              module challenges Geology Majors and upper division science students to design
              and implement complex experiments that examine floods, stream flow, water
              pollution and the geochemistry of natural waters. Conclusions from these
              experiments are applied to broader social and political issues in an
              interactive classroom setting. Internet publication and group projects are used
              to disseminate student results in the middle and upper curriculum modules, and
              project summaries and curriculum modules are available on CD-ROM to interested
              instructors from other teaching institutions. 
