Title       : Integrated Demonstrations and Laboratory Experiments for Six Ideas that Shaped
               Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9950454

Award Number: 9950454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31490              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda S. Fritz l_fritz@acad.fandm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin & Marshall Col
	      Office of the Provost
	      Lancaster, PA  176043003    717/291-3911

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We have found, as have others, that traditional teaching methods in physics
              often do not lead to good conceptual understanding, therefore we are revising
              our courses so that they focus on active student engagement .  We are
              developing an integrated infrastructure for our two-course calculus-based
              introductory physics sequence.  In this sequence,  Six Ideas That Shaped
              Physics, (Moore) is adapted and implemented to foster student understanding of
              basic physical concepts through class time devoted to active, cooperative
              learning.  To further enhance student learning, we are developing and
              documenting an on-line database indexed by physics topic and chapter in Moore's
              book,  a complete set of  interactive demonstrations and "discovery" style
              microcomputer-based-laboratories adapting and implementing from Tools for
              Scientific Thinking (the Universal Lab Interface, and MacMotion, Data Logger,
              and the ULI Timer), developed by R. Thornton, et al. at Tufts University,  and
              Workshop Physics Tools, developed by P. Laws, et al. at Dickinson College.  The
              demonstrations are participatory so that the students are engaged in a
              "minds-on" manner and the laboratory experiments fully embrace the "discovery"
              mode of thinking.  The students are guided in formulating hypotheses and in
              their understanding on how to analyze data. The demonstrations and experiments
              are coordinated with the text and with each other to provide students with an
              integrated and coherent whole. The goal of this project is for our students to
              develop a good conceptual and concrete understanding of basic physics and of
              how one uses data to develop and test theories.   Our assessment  focuses on
              learning outcomes using nationally recognized standardized tests to assess our
              students' learning.
