Title       : Affinity Learning in Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a9950349

Award Number: 9950349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis E. Davenport                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78696              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur I. Zygielbaum aiz@unlserve.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott Henninger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neal F. Grandgenett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charlotte I. Hazzard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a proof-of-concept project for a collaborative effort to develop
              innovative web-based modules for an undergraduate developmental mathematics
              course.  The goal is to improve the quality of mathematics education by
              creating engaging, effective online course modules tailored to the needs of
              both students and educators. The Affinity Learning in Mathematics modules,
              designed for use in any computer-based learning environment with Internet
              access, will deliver high-quality, cost-effective mathematics instruction that
              is easily integrated into other disciplines, incorporates multi-disciplinary
              skills and perspectives, and is accessible to all students.

This project
              will produce a sample module for a developmental course in algebra-based
              mathematical modeling. If this project is successful then seven additional
              modules will be developed for the complete course.  A developmental mathematics
              sequence was chosen because it offers an innately assessable discipline driven
              by a significant need. Although the primary focus is developmental mathematics
              instruction, the modules will be easily customized to satisfy the curricular
              requirements of students majoring in education, liberal arts and math. The
              modules can stand alone or be easily integrated into existing courses. A
              prototype system of embedded assessment that will be widely applicable to other
              modules, courses, and disciplines is a critical component of the proposed
              effort.

While Affinity Learning in Mathematics uses new and emerging
              technology, its primary innovation is the melding of educator, student and
              technology. The module instruction will be an interactive process, using
              appropriate technology to free the educator to become a cognitive coach. The
              research effort is expected to produce modules differing from and improving
              upon currently available computer- and web-based learning material in three key
              areas: adaptive technology, instructional design and assessment.

Affinity
              Learning in Mathematics is the first phase of Project Socrates, a collaborative
              effort to drive fundamental changes in the way online education is presented.
              The modules proposed here will serve as a prototype for a flexible, scalable,
              adaptive learning system that can be applied in any discipline. The system
              will:  continually profile the student according to competence level, learning
              style, and background knowledge through a method combining personalized
              assessment and appropriate technology;  automatically structure material in
              modules that deliver learning activities, background material, enrichment
              resources, and peer/educator interaction in an environment tailored to
              individual needs; and create forums where the knowledge repository can evolve
              by incorporating on-line communities of learning peers, experts and mentors, so
              the knowledge grows with each user.


