Title       : Upgrade of the Undergraduate Instrumental Analysis Laboratory: Purchase of a
               Raman Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9950656

Award Number: 9950656
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg M. Swain   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Bialkowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Funds are requested for the acquisition of a Raman Spectrometer to be used in a
              new materials characterization module being implemented into the undergraduate
              Instrumental Analysis Laboratory (CHEM 5650). The instrument will also be
              utilized in the undergraduate research program, Chemical Problems (CHEM 4800).
              The requested funds will be used to acquire a Wizard 1200 Raman Spectrometer
              (ChrQmgx, Albuquerque, NM) with a fiber optic probe to be extensively used in a
              new materials characterization module. This instrument is extremely versatile,
              allowing for spectroscopic studies of gases, liquids and solids, and can be
              configured to perform not only Raman but also fluorescence, absorption and
              emission measurements. The proposed Raman experiments will involve most aspects
              of the analytical process (problem identification, sampling, sample
              preparation, measurement, data analysis, and interpretation). The
              instrumentation will significantly improve the quality of instruction and
              practical training offered by our Department in the fields of vibrational
              spectroscopy and materials characterization.

A program has been initiated to
              revise and modernize the undergraduate Instrumental Analysis Laboratory (CHEM
              5650). A major change involves the implementation of a Problem-based Learning
              (PBL) approach. "Analytical chemistry is essential to much of the nation's
              science and engineering. So to ensure that the nation's technical needs will be
              met, the undergraduate analytical curriculum (e.g., Instrumental Analysis and
              Chemical Problems) needs to better prepare students to become problem solvers.
              In turn, this preparation will give students a broader range of career
              opportunities. If the learning is exciting and relevant, analytical science
              courses may attract more young people into the sciences" (1998 NSF-sponsored
              study titled Curriculum Reform in the Analytical Sciences). Curriculum
              revisions are focused in two areas: separation science and materials
              characterization.
Due to increased demand for science-based curricula, this
              Junior College has instituted a Natural Science program and is developing
              science courses for serving nonscience majors. A new interdisciplinary course
              entitled Environmental Quality is being developed to satisfy new science core
              requirements for majors in the Liberal Arts and Education Transfer programs.
              This project seeks matching funds for the acquisition of equipment for
              student-based environmental quality assessments of the Lackawanna River, its
              tributaries, and other water sources which are contaminated with acid mine
              drainage and combined sewer overflows. Assessment strategies will be based on
              examining actual and potential impacts on water quality and biota, specifically
              metals, nutrients, dissolved oxygen, and benthic macroinvertebrates. Portable
              field analytical instrumentation, in addition to a new laboratory spectro
              -photometer, will be used to estimate pollutant loads and to evaluate levels of
              chemical constituents in areas of suspected impact and non-impacted control
              (reference) sites. Students will become familiar with the scientific
              methodologies involved in sample collection and analysis, as well as the
              interrelationships between the biological, chemical, and hydrological
              components of the environment. Results of the project will be evaluated in
              terms of scientific validity, contributions to environmental databases, and its
              impact on student learning. Dissemination of results will occur through
              research publications and conference presentations.
