Title       : Increasing the Flow: A Community College-centered Model to Meet Rural
               Information Technology Needs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  1999    
File        : a9950105

Award Number: 9950105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas H. Wilkins wilkins@gcc.mass.cdu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert F. Schilling  (Principal Investigator former)
              Erica Goleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steve Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Carabetta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen B. Green  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Greenfield Cmty College
	      College Drive
	      Greenfield, MA  01301    413/775-1000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project implements a nationally relevant model for making the community
              college a focal point for creating Computer and Information Technology (IT)
              pathways for students in rural regions. This is accomplished by involving three
              tiers of public education, local and regional government, business and
              industry, and professional and trade organizations as partners in developing
              practices and processes uniquely suited to areas without large employers.  The
              project goals are being met through a series of objectives designed to meet the
              growing demand from small business enterprises for information technology
              resources. 

The project is increasing access for a diverse, rural population
              to two and four year post-secondary programs in IT training.  It is building
              upon existing relationships to create a persistent academic stream from
              high-school to community college to baccalaureate institutions or IT
              employment. Curriculum is being coordinated and courses are being shared via
              Internet and distance video platforms. Formal articulation agreements are being
              drafted and implemented. 

The project models how small colleges, many with a
              strong liberal arts tradition, can develop on-going processes to involve small
              business and education representatives throughout their service areas to
              strengthen the regional information technology infrastructure. Rural business
              and industry are full partners in this process, informing curriculum
              development and providing student co-op work experiences and externship 
              opportunities for high school teachers and college faculty. Through activities
              and initiatives developed during annual meetings among guidance, admissions,
              and transfer personnel, greater numbers of students with diverse backgrounds
              are becoming involved in IT related fields. Increased computing capacity and
              infrastructure are being developed and maintained to facilitate
              inter-institutional cooperation and program
              development.



















