Title       : Integration of Multidisciplinary Computer-based Problem Solving into the
               Undergraduate Science Curriculum: A Model for Cross-Curricular Technology
               Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1999       
File        : a9950920

Award Number: 9950920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Whileyman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kendra V. Woods  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Hobbs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theresa M. Bodus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Leach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Caleb A. Makukutu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Harris Mont Comm Col
	      250 N Sam Houston Parkway East
	      Houston, TX  770602544    713/591-3500

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is to create a multidisciplinary interactive technology-based
              problem-solving model for cross-curricular technology transfer.  The project
              objectives are:
1. incorporate meaningful technology-based problem solving
              applications into all science courses by developing innovative curricula,
              adapting existing resources, and integrating new technologies,
2. target
              unserved and underserved populations, including women and minorities for
              science success,
3. promote multidisciplinary collaborations to strengthen
              interdisciplinary problem solving as a foundation for new program
              development,
4. create valuable outreach programs for updating teachers' and
              faculty's technological enhancement, and 
5. update skills for
              non-professional individuals, thereby enabling them to integrate into technical
              positions in emerging industries.  

The creation of a multifunctional
              computer laboratory for intra-and inter-curricular studies is to provide the
              environment for a faculty to adapt commercially available software,
              computer-based laboratory interfaces, internet databases, and digital imaging
              techniques to promote students' exploration, visualization, and creative
              analysis of complex scientific concepts.  Implementation of advanced computer
              applications are to provide a broader range of strategies to teach creative
              problem solving.  Virtual applications in Astronomy, Biology, Chemistry,
              Geoscience, and Physics are expected to peak the interest of more students,
              inspiring some to pursue careers in basic and applied science.




