Title       : Project FOURIER : A Browser-based Program for Enhancing an Interdisciplinary
               Undergraduate Fourier Analysis Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2001     
File        : a9950738

Award Number: 9950738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135678             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Eubanks deubanks@pascal.coker.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick Van Fleet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Coker College
	      East College Avenue
	      Hartsville, SC  29550    803/332-1381

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Elementary Fourier analysis is an essential component in the education of
              scientists and engineers. The interplay between theory and applications makes
              it an ideal capstone course in the education of mathematics students,
              especially potential teachers who want to learn some ways that mathematics has
              contributed to our culture. Traditional presentations of this body of
              mathematics focus on the use of Fourier series to solve boundary value problems
              and some of the related 19th century theorems that deal with issues of
              convergence. The development of distributions and the FFT have made it possible
              to present a thoroughly modern elementary introduction to the theory and
              applications of Fourier analysis for undergraduate students. A new text, A
              First Course in Fourier Analysis (Prentice-Hall) by David W. Kammler, provides
              a wonderful organization of these ideas and contains a wide variety of
              applications sure to appeal to students across many disciplines.
Computer
              assisted visualization (and sonification) is essential for the modern
              applications of Fourier analysis. Students can use Maple, Mathematical, or
              Matlab to plot various functions and to prepare animations or sound files for
              certain applications. It takes time to prepare such code, however, and we would
              like to make the course more efficient by giving students the ability to
              experience the most commonly used visualizations and sonifications instantly.
              Static illustrations are included in every elementary mathematics text. We
              envision the use of the Internet (or a CDROM) to provide dynamic multimedia
              illustrations. The text develops the formula for the motion of a vibrating
              string and with a few mouse clicks the student sees a computer simulation. The
              professor describes a wavelet decomposition of a signal and with a few mouse
              clicks lets the students hear the effect of such processing on a simple musical
              theme. (You can experience a prototype at
              pascal.math.stthomas.edu/fourier/demos. html).
A portion of NSF funding
              (NSF-USE 89503, NSF-USE 9054179, and NSF-USE 9156064) provided resources to
              develop FOURIER, a software package designed to produce such instant
              experiences for students. FOURIER is used by faculty at a dozen universities to
              enhance student understanding of Fourier analysis. This software package was
              developed jointly by the PI and David Kammler. This work was initiated in 1990
              and the software was designed to work in a DOS environment. The co-PI on the
              proposal is currently using the program to teach Fourier analysis to
              undergraduates at the University of St. Thomas.
After experimenting with the
              software for nearly a decade we are now ready for a top-to bottom recoding that
              will result in a commercially available product that runs under a web browser
              such as Netscape or Internet Explorer. The idea is that the program will then
              be platform-independent as well as accessible via the Internet, on a local
              network, or on a CD or hard disk. This proposal is a request for NSF funding
              for this purpose. The basic design features of FOURIER will be preserved. The
              PI will be responsible for the bulk of the programming. The co-PI will take the
              lead in designing several tutorials and modules to be packaged with FOURIER for
              distribution on CD or the World Wide Web. Undergraduate students at the
              University of St. Thomas who have taken the Fourier Analysis course, will
              assist the co-PI in this endeavor. David Kammler has agreed to serve as a
              consultant on the project. In addition, faculty from Louisiana State University
              and the University of Akron will take part in the testing phase of the
              project.

