Title       : Development of Undergraduate Laboratory Experience in Civil and Environmental
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9950185

Award Number: 9950185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39230              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger A. Minear r_minear@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project bridges the existing gap between class room theory and practical
              measurement techniques through adaptation of graduate undergraduate laboratory
              experience in environmental engineering within a senior level laboratory
              course. The experiments are structured to let the students participate in
              common field and laboratory measurements that are used in environmental
              engineering to design monitoring programs and treatment systems in air, water,
              wastewater, hazardous waste and ecology. The students are directly involved in
              evaluating data reliability and assessing QA/QC issues as a part of performing
              the experiments. They make decisions on the use of their data in classroom
              projects simulating assessment or the development of design parameters for
              treatment systems.

The standard graduate-level methodologies for field
              assessment methodologies for environmental science published jointly by the
              AHPA, AWWA, and WEF are the basis for this project.   "Standards Methods"
              graduate courses based on these standards and taught at the Illinois Institute
              of Technology (developed by the PI) and Clemson University are models for the
              materials which will be adapted to undergraduate education and implemented
              along with new air pollution and ecological field analyses.  A series of
              experimental modules represent the range of sub disciplines within
              Environmental Engineering such that the students have an exposure to the
              laboratory and field techniques. They use state-of-the-art methodologies
              representative of professional practice in addition to the research tools they
              would encounter if they pursue advanced degrees. The combined input of six
              professors ensures a broad base technical knowledge in the overall design of
              the laboratory and field experience. The equipment associated with this project
              ensures the ability to provide this enhanced educational experience on a
              continuing basis with dedicated equipment and provides an educational
              experience not previously available except on an ad-hoc and unreliable
              basis.

A broader underlying objective of the project is the preparation of a
              course man
