Title       : A Flexible Networked Laboratory Simulation for Use in Introductory Chemistry
               Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9950673

Award Number: 9950673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Yaron yaron@chem.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              As the material covered in introductory chemistry courses is abstract, teachers
              find it difficult to convey an intuitive understanding to their students, and
              without an intuitive understanding, retention is bound to suffer. Part of this
              difficulty stems from the tools currently available to faculty. The
              paper-and-pencil activities used in lecture courses are simply not well suited
              to convey an intuitive feel for chemical phenomena. In laboratory courses,
              practical constraints make it difficult to go beyond scripted laboratory
              procedures and toward inquiry-based learning.

The chemical laboratory
              simulation proposed here allows faculty to: (i) create lecture demonstrations
              that enable a concrete discussion of the qualitative nature of the material
              before and while discussing the underlying mathematics (ii) create assignments
              that involve chemical, in addition to paper-and-pencil, manipulations and (iii)
              design exercises that prepare students for actual laboratory experiments, and
              that allow students to design their own procedures which they will then
              implement in the laboratory. The software is designed to be easily incorporated
              into existing course structures. Since it uses the Java network computing
              language, it need only be installed on a Web server. Use of a network database
              allows faculty to create automatically graded assignments and monitor student
              performance in real time. The software allows users to select from hundreds of
              standard reagents and combine them in any way they see fit. Due to this
              flexibility, we will not only present faculty with completed materials, but
              also empower them to create effective curricula that are tailored to their
              local needs and environment.

In addition to formative assessment, summative
              assessment of the effects on student retention will be based on individual
              student data collected and stored in the network database, performance on
              course exams, and retention exams given 3 and 15 months after the end of the
              course. For the past two years, retention data has been collected to act as a
              baseline for this study.

