Title       : A Hardware Laboratory for Incorporating Computer Science Theory with Real-World
               Interests and Difficulties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1999      
File        : a9950839

Award Number: 9950839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew P. Bernat                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35687              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl W. Steidley   (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Stephen Dannelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to better prepare students of computer science, both
              majors and minors, in the areas of systems and hardware-dependent software
              development.  An active learning laboratory built around the central theme of
              the interdependence of software and hardware in the computer, as well as in
              embedded systems, is being developed.  This laboratory is based upon similar
              labs developed under previous NSF support, but adds some unique components such
              as mobile robots and an instrumented model railroad to provide exposure to
              complex, real-world problems.  This laboratory serves as the hands-on
              experimentation center for two required senior-level capstone computer science
              courses.  Since this is a predominantly Hispanic-serving institution, the
              project is involving students in "near-peer" teaching to attract more students
              from the minority service area to study mathematics, science, and computer
              science.

Students graduating from this program have hands-on experiences
              with hardware interfacing, data acquisition, real-time programming and
              observing actual results of numerically computed solutions to problems.   They
              are better prepared for positions as systems developers and applications
              programmers, thereby filling a need in the local workforce for such skills.  
              As a result of their interaction with this lab, students are also better
              prepared for graduate school.  

Evaluation of the project includes pre, mid
              and post data collection of student satisfaction with the courses.  It also
              includes collection of student test scores on the ETS Major Field Assessment
              Test in Computer Science and evaluation of student projects by an independent
              computer science faculty jury.    Dissemination is being accomplished by
              presentations at ACM, ASEE, and IEEE conferences as well as through a web page
              with practical information about how to implement a similar lab and projects
              for other faculty members. 
