Title       : Virtual Mass Spectrometry Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1999  
File        : a9950867

Award Number: 9950867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425899             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Grabowski joeg@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Bier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project uses resources at the University of Pittsburgh and Carnegie Mellon
              University to address several challenges in post-secondary science education:
              (i) to increase the access to high-performance instrumentation, (ii) to use
              cross-disciplinary knowledge, and (iii) to improve learning using interactive
              case studies. Our approach, for which we know of no existing model, is to
              develop a flexible interactive internet-based Virtual Mass Spectrometry
              Laboratory (VMSL) that allows for "real" problem solving while using a virtual
              mass spectrometer. Students using the VMSL solve known cross-disciplinary
              science problems by operating a virtual mass spectrometer (MS) over the
              Internet. The student sees "real" MS data displayed on the computer at one
              location while the central internet VMSL server which stores the previously
              collected MS data files is at another location. The data displayed are
              dependent on the interaction that the student-operator has with the VMSL system
              as she/he learns the proper experiments to conduct. This method makes scarce
              but important resources widely available, utilizing the Internet, and
              demonstrates a cost-effective and pedagogically powerful use of technology
              limited neither by discipline or geographic location, nor by the expense of
              scientific instrumentation. Our project is being developed for all
              undergraduate science students, including, but not limited to, those enrolled
              in Chemistry, Biology, Environmental Sciences, Geology, and Clinical
              Pharmacology courses. We hope to improve a student' s critical thinking ability
              and scientific problem solving skills nationwide by using a "hands-on" Virtual
              Mass Spectrometry Laboratory.  This project is funded by the Division of
              Undergraduate Education in the Directorate for Education and Human Resources
              with co-funding from the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the
              Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.


