Title       : Field Experiences for Undergraduate Engineers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9950609

Award Number: 9950609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19927              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jess W. Everett everett@rowan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda M. Head  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kauser Jahan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Hesketh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beena Sukumaran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jawaharlal Mariappan  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rowan University
	      201 Mullica Hill Road
	      Glassboro, NJ  080281701    856/256-4057

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Field methods are an important part of engineering often ignored in the
              undergraduate curriculum.  The College of Engineering at Rowan University is
              incorporating field methods, both sampling and measurement, across its
              engineering curriculum.  Preplanned field exercises in laboratory components of
              select courses and modules are used in Freshman and Sophomore Engineering
              Clinics, and open ended field exercises are used as part of Junior and Senior
              Engineering Clinics.  These efforts extend current engineering clinics at Rowan
              by adapting and unifying the laboratory approaches at the Chemical Engineering
              Department at New Jersey Institute of Technology (traditional, specific
              laboratory experiments) and at the Chemical Engineering Department at Colorado
              State University (discipline specific engineering design projects).  The
              cross-disciplinary interactions are adapted from work going on at Clarkson
              University's Civil and Environmental Engineering Department.

This project is
              supporting the purchase of field equipment which is used to obtain water, air,
              and sediment samples, measure fundamental soil, water and atmospheric
              parameters in the field, and survey/map field sites.  In preplanned activities,
              students complete specific tasks similar to traditional laboratory exercises,
              except the activities are conducted outside using field equipment.  In
              open-ended activities, students determine what media they need to collect and
              what field measurements they need to make to solve open-ended problems.  
