Title       : Training Graduate Students How to Teach Biology to Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1999       
File        : a9950527

Award Number: 9950527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy E. Stamp nstamp@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Murrish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Stein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Most biology graduate students do the majority of their teaching in introductory
              courses and, thus, they can have a great impact on their undergraduate
              students. However, graduate students in general receive little instruction
              about teaching. A regimen of pedagogical courses is not the solution since
              graduate students must take courses in their biological subdiscipline, develop
              a research program, and have teaching responsibilities of up to 20 hours a
              week. 

Part of the solution is a course that introduces pedagogical theory
              and methods in a way that graduate students can see for themselves how their
              learning is enhanced by a particular understanding or method and see how they
              can implement that understanding or method in their own teaching. The course
              being designed in this project is specifically for biology graduate students to
              help them improve their teaching skills.  

The other part of the solution is
              reinforcing what is learned in this course through supplemental workshops which
              also reach a broader audience of graduate students and faculty across the
              sciences, thus fostering a larger supportive culture about teaching science. 
              These special topic workshops are advertised university-wide and are offered
              monthly.  Topics include:  how brain chemistry and development affect learning
              by college students; science and learning styles; the art of leading a
              discussion; developing and using cooperative learning; developing critical
              thinking in your students; teaching scientific writing; using educational
              technology in the classroom; and teaching future teachers.  The format of the
              workshops stresses collaborative problem-solving among participants (e.g., case
              studies, inquiry method) and involves as many faculty members as possible as
              participants and experts. Several instructional videotapes are being made based
              on the course and workshops. These videos will be used in subsequent workshops
              and be available at cost to others. The attitude, learning, and competency of
              the graduate teaching assistants in the course and workshops and of the
              undergraduates taught by these teaching assistants are being evaluated.

Both
              the course and workshops are based on the generic materials, techniques and
              practices developed in part for Preparing Future Faculty by the Association of
              American Colleges and University and the Council of Graduate Schools, but are
              adapted to be discipline-specific so that graduate students can help
              undergraduates learn biology content in context.  
