Title       : ANT: A Coherent Framework for Computer Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1999      
File        : a9950239

Award Number: 9950239
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margo I. Seltzer margo@eecs.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This full EMD project is enhancing ANT, a virtual machine framework.   
              Previously used to teach CS students introductory concepts about machine
              architecture, assembly language programming and data representation, ANT is
              being expanded to be applicable and useful across the CS core curriculum, such
              as in architecture and logic courses, VLSI design courses, compiler courses,
              and operating systems courses.   ANT is designed to provide students with the
              background, tools, techniques and intuitions that can be applied to solving
              real problems. The ANT framework provides continuity between courses,
              demonstrates real-world examples of code reuse, and gives students a thorough
              understanding of a computational framework that cuts through many layers of
              abstraction.  

The ANT implementation is being revised to make it suitable
              for diverse populations, including other universities, community colleges,
              adult education programs, and high school computing courses.   This is being
              accomplished by developing multi-platform support and a robust graphical user
              interface.  A formative evaluation is being conducted at several different
              computer science education settings.  An evaluation protocol has been developed
              to be distributed to all test sites. Both pre and post treatment data is being
              collected to provide a comparison of results using ANT.  In addition a
              methodology for studying student work habits is being implemented to allow
              analysis of usefulness of ANT in the context of specific courses. 
              

Dissemination is being accomplished using an ANT web site containing
              documentation, tutorials, the evaluation results and the actual ANT platform. 
              This is being established and maintained on the Harvard University server with
              the commitment to sustain the site as long as ANT is considered to be useful to
              teach computer science.   Negotiations are taking place with a publisher of
              computer science texts books to publish the complete ANT documentation along
              with a CD-ROM containing the product and sample problems.  
