Title       : BIOSCAPES: Biological Informatics Office-Studies of Complex Anatomy and
               Physiology within Education Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9950613

Award Number: 9950613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $457652             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jayshiro Tashiro tashiro@jan.ucc.nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gina Long  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen Sullins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael M. Kelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              1Northern Arizona University has formed a partnership with three community
              colleges, the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, and Prentice-Hall to
              develop and test a new model of courseware that we call BIOSCAPES: Biological
              Informatics Office ---Studies of Complex Anatomy and Physiology within
              Educational Simulations. This interactive software allows students to conduct
              research on the complexities of multisystem interactions in human anatomy,
              physiology, and pathophysiology, including impacts of infections from a variety
              of pathogens. They identify data necessary to answer a variety of research
              questions, and begin to collect, analyze, and interpret data within a virtual
              university-hospital that has two interconnected work settings.

BIOSCAPES
              allows students to move back and forth from a research-oriented university
              setting (with various types of information and databases) to a
              hospital-oriented database with a very realistic human element. This movement
              is facilitated by having students work within two virtual but connected worlds,
              providing complementary databases necessary to answer very complex questions
              about human systems interactions. Importantly, our educational model is based
              on strategies to: (1) improve students' tendency to engage in and enjoy
              effortful cognitive endeavors; (2) to create articulated mundane and
              experimental realism in simulated problem-solving venues; (3) to train students
              how to use multiple databases to answer complex problems; (4) to mimic research
              on complex problems in a student-active framework; and (5) to find out what
              works in science education, for whom, at what time, under what conditions and
              to what effect.  The project has a strong K-12 outreach component that includes
              formal agreements to test the BIOSCAPES software in courses taken by preservice
              teachers, and to disseminate information about the model through an extensive
              inservice teacher network.

