Title       : Technology Enhanced Core Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9950848

Award Number: 9950848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89177              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward B. Reeves e.reeves@morehead-st.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Rudy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca S. Katz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Bylund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Constance Hardesty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Morehead State University
	      University Boulevard
	      Morehead, KY  40351    606/783-2221

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is improving sociology education at Morehead State University
              through adaptation and implementation of exemplary materials, laboratory
              facilities, and educational practices.  Its design is to improve the basic and
              advanced science skills of undergraduate students through reforming 8 classes
              ranging from freshman to senior level.   All of these improvements are based on
              the implementation of what this department calls the Technology Enhanced Core
              Project (TECP).  

There are three major components to TECP: 
(1) Implement
              pedagogical strategies to strengthen students' analytic abilities.
The central
              pedagogical approach is implementation of the idea that students are best able
              to learn good scientific practice and reasoning through hands-on projects
              conducted under the mentorship of an experienced practitioner.  These projects
              are introduced at the beginning of a student's university career, through the
              use of computer facilities to perform simple workbook exercises, such as the
              instructional materials provided by MicroCase and the Social Science Data
              Analysis Network (SSDAN).  The basic features of inductive and deductive
              reasoning are introduced at this time.  

Students will learn advanced skills
              through student-initiated research, starting with the creation of a research
              design.  Students learn effective use of bivariate and multivariate inferential
              statistics, and how to produce clear and accurate written and oral reports of
              the results.  In some courses, students will use secondary data sources,
              obtained from SSDAN and MicroCase.  In other courses, students will design
              their own data collection procedures and will gather original data. 
              

Students who show the strongest motivation and skill at the advanced level
              may elect to take a special class that introduces SPSS Basic and the use of a
              large, complex data set, such as the National Longitudinal Education Study of
              1988-94 (obtained from the National Center for Educational Statistics). 
              Because scientific research is so often a group endeavor, the development of
              teamwork skills will be enhanced throughout the curriculum by assigning
              projects to small groups of students whose work is supervised by the
              instructor.

(2) Provide students with a state-of-the-art, interactive
              computer lab with the tools, software, data sets, and linkages to actively
              pursue scientific analyses.  
(3) Enable students to do science by preparing
              and publishing reports on topics such as criminal justice and education. 
              Opportunities for students to become involved in the preparation and
              publication of scientific reports will be realized by student participation in
              funded projects being carried on by Morehead State's Institute for Regional
              Analysis and Public Policy, Institute for Correctional Research and Training,
              and R & D Center for Students, Schools, and Communities.  Students will have
              the opportunity to become co-authors with faculty of monographs and 
              publications on which they make important contributions.  Furthermore, the
              annual meeting of the Kentucky Association of Anthropologists and Sociologists
              provides an appropriate, supportive forum for students to present their own
              research results.  

Students are required to maintain individual portfolios
              of their accomplishments with which their progress through the curriculum is
              being assessed.  Regular analysis of the portfolios of each cohort of senior
              students is also providing a means to evaluate the project.  

TECP is a
              national model for similar institutions and programs.  Results of the project
              are being disseminated via: (1) the World Wide Web, (2) workshops or panels
              delivered at a regional and national meetings, and (3) professional newsletters
              and refereed journals.  


