Title       : New Laboratory and Integrated Course Materials to Improve the Psychology
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9950856

Award Number: 9950856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86276              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Ottaway ottaway@cc.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale L. Dinnel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is integrating current technology into the psychology curriculum
              and significantly expanding the range of laboratory experiences available to
              undergraduates, both majors and non-majors.  It is establishing a networked
              laboratory of 30 PCs. In particular, it is adapting materials for the teaching
              of statistics that are available from several NSF-supported projects:  Project
              Chance at Dartmouth College (www.dartmouth.edu/~chance/) and the "Rice Virtual
              Lab in Statistics" web site at Rice University (www.ruf.rice.edu/
              ~lane/rvls.html) to provide an interactive environment for students to explore
              statistical concepts.  It is also using the behavioral statistics applet
              demonstrations available at the University of Ohio (ouvaxa.cats.ohiou.edu/
              ~wallace/class/demons.html) and Southwest Missouri State University
              (www.psychstat.smsu.edu).  

A second goal of the project entails development
              and evaluation of innovative Internet and Windows 95/98/NT instructional
              modules, using the experiment authoring software "Inquisit" developed by
              Millisecond Software (www.millisecond.com). These modules will include original
              computerized demonstrations of new and classic psychology experiments, homework
              assignments and in-class activities. Seven undergraduate courses will integrate
              the requested workstations and the instructional materials into lectures,
              demonstrations, class assignments and research projects.   

The new lab is
              boosting the impact of the psychology curriculum on student learning by
              enhancing the education of undergraduates in modem psychology principles,
              methods and research skills.  Benefits to students include development of
              concrete understanding of the scientific methods used by psychologists and
              increased computer expertise and confidence, especially important for the large
              number of women psychology majors.  

The final aspect of the development
              plan includes a clear strategy for evaluation and dissemination of the new
              instructional methods. The instructional modules and original course materials
              will be freely distributed. 


