Title       : A Course in Scientific Analysis for Prospective Elementary School Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1999      
File        : a9950460

Award Number: 9950460
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74980              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Jadrich jjadrich@calvin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley L. Haan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Calvin College
	      3201 Burton, S. E.
	      Grand Rapids, MI  49546    616/957-6000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              According to the national standards now in place, good elementary school science
              teachers not only need to have a firm grasp of the science content they teach,
              but they also must be able to lead their students in scientific inquiry. This
              latter requirement proceeds directly from the belief that children learn
              science best when it is inquiry-based. Unfortunately, prospective teachers
              apparently do not learn the analytical skills needed for inquiry-based science
              simply by having the process modeled to them in their own course work. They
              need explicit instruction in these analysis skills in order to carry out their
              own scientific explorations.

This project is utilizing methods derived from
              research in science education and cognitive psychology to develop units in
              scientific analysis for prospective elementary school teachers. Students learn
              integrated process skills such as identifying and controlling variables,
              designing experiments, and problem solving, and the metacognitive skills
              related to these endeavors. Students successfully completing these units are
              expected to have the skills needed to engage in scientific inquiry and the
              ability to lead others in inquiry as well. The written and recorded materials
              being developed are general and extensive enough to allow faculty at other
              institutions to sequence these units within or after their already existing
              content courses, or they may combine these units with an interdisciplinary
              science course that is being made available as well.



