Title       : Bioscience Education-to-Employment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a9950057

Award Number: 9950057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $749998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gloria J. Vogt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene S. Long  (Principal Investigator former)
              Audrey Trotter  (Principal Investigator former)
              Amy Ryken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary A. Rathbun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Stronck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia T. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Peralta Cmty Col Dist Off
	      333 East Eighth Street
	      Oakland, CA  946062844    510/466-7300

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The burgeoning bioscience industry in the San Francisco Bay Area requires a
              highly trained technical workforce to meet the employment demands in the
              production sector.  Laney College, Berkeley Biotechnology Education, Inc.,
              (BBEI), and 35 local health and bioscience companies have formed a dynamic
              partnership with two local high schools and CSU-Hayward to educate and train
              urban youth for entry-level positions in the biotechnology field.  The project
              has received major contributions of time, money, and equipment from industry
              partners to ensure the success of students in school and in the workplace. 
              BBEI has piloted a program in two urban high schools that targets students from
              backgrounds underrepresented in the laboratory sciences.  These students
              complete two years of biotechnology education in high school and graduate with
              a Certificate in Biotechnology.  Laney College, through its Bioscience Career
              Institute, enrolls these graduates in a one-year intensive science program
              designed to meet the bioscience industry's requirements for skilled entry-level
              technical positions.  Students at Laney College are concurrently employed in
              co-op jobs at local bioscience/biotechnology companies.  Linking the college
              curriculum to industry employment increases students' understanding of the
              scientific career opportunities available in the local area.  The NSF ATE
              project builds on the existing model to increase student enrollment and
              modifies the curriculum making it more relevant and responsive to industry
              needs.  The three-year project:  (1) establishes a working Bioscience Process
              Laboratory that integrates industry personnel in training underrepresented
              students in relevant laboratory skills; (2) expands student enrollment in the
              biotechnology program to all interested students in addition to students in the
              current high school programs; (3) increases industry involvement by creating
              additional co-op jobs and new industry co-teaching roles; (4) provides
              additional support in recruitment and retention to increase the numbers of
              qualified program graduates by 50%; (5) evaluates obstacles students encounter
              during recruitment, education, training, retention, and after program
              graduation; (6) disseminates this model by means of manuals that detail the
              establishment of school-industry partnerships to support technical education. 
              The NSF ATE project engages, recruits, trains, retains, and inspires students
              for life-long learning.  

