Title       : Computer-mediated Social Science Instructional Modules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2001       
File        : a9950335

Award Number: 9950335
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard T. LeGates dlegates@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. DeLeon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/469-2141

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A team of faculty from the departments of Political Science, International
              Relations, and Urban Studies (PSIRUS), working through the PSIRUS Center, is
              adapting and extending existing innovative practices in computer-mediated
              instruction, incorporating recently published research and available databases
              in the social sciences.  The project team is producing four thematic modules,
              each designed to reach both majors and non-majors in the social sciences, and
              structured to work for a diverse student body that includes working students,
              minority students, older re-entry students, and students with special learning
              needs.  

The modules are:
1. The Media and Politics. This module is modeled
              on innovative practices at the Wexler Learning Center at the United States
              Holocaust Museum in Washington, D.C. The proposed  "virtual learning center"
              will teach students to integrate a variety of audio and video materials into
              undergraduate research projects examining the effect of the media in shaping
              public opinion, and the relationships between media, public opinion, and
              politics.  The content of this module will be adapted from Richard Davis,
              "Politics and the Media," (Prentice Hall, 1992) and Lawrence Grossman, "The
              Electronic Republic: Reshaping Democracy in the Information Age," (Viking
              Press, 1995).  

2. Urban Sustainable Development.  This module is adapting
              use of on-line forms to capture data.  It is employing modern computer
              techniques to transfer the data into electronic databases for analysis using
              statistics software.  (Amazon.com and other private sector e-commerce
              organizations are using this methodology effectively.) Its purpose is to
              develop an understanding of the relationship between urbanization and the
              natural and "built" environment, and to support undergraduate research on
              "sustainable development."  The module is being constructed from materials
              found in Marcia Lowe, "Shaping Cities: The Environmental and Human Dimensions,"
              (World Watch Institute, Paper 105, 1992);  Graham Haughton and Colin Hunter,
              "Sustainable Cities," (London: Regional Studies Association, 1994);  the
              President's Council on Sustainable Development, "Sustainable America,"  (U.S.
              GPO, 1996); and Sim Van de Ryn and Stuart Cowan, "Ecological Design," (Island
              Press, 1995).

3. Immigration.  This module is taking advantage of the
              revolutionary changes occurring in the availability and accessibility of
              immigration data, which are increasingly available on-line.  It is teaching
              students about data analysis and building on practices developed by the
              California State University Social Science Research and Instructional Council
              (SSRIC) and other organizations which have created on-line, public domain,
              social science data archives.  
Its purpose is to help students sort out truth
              from assertion, and how to formulate reasoned political responses.  It is
              particularly based on Michael Fix and Jeffrey Passel, "Immigration and
              Immigrants: Setting the Record Straight, (Urban Institute, 1994);  Sanford
              Ungar, "Fresh Blood: The New American Immigrants,"  (Simon & Schuster, 1995); 
              Gregory DeFre, "Immigration, Inequality, and Policy Alternatives," (Russell
              Sage Foundation, 1995);  and U.S. Department of Justice, Immigration and
              Naturalization Service, "Statistical Yearbook of the INS," (U.S. GPO, 1995). 
              
 
4. Global Conflict.   This module is developing a novel use of Prolog - a
              logic language - to teach about both values and critical thinking in relation
              to global conflict.  Students are learning to gather data and test theories
              about causes of global conflict, following Paul Viotti and Mark Kauppi,
              "International Relations Theory," (MacMillan, 1993).  This module is also using
              existing databases such as the Correlates of War data managed by the
              Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research (Correlates of
              War Database 9905, 1994).  


