Title       : Neurobiology Laboratory to Examine Exploratory Behavior in the Rat
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1999       
File        : a9950735

Award Number: 9950735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24572              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Hoffman hoffman@arcadia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca L. Craik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beaver College
	      Church & Easton Roads
	      Glenside, PA  19038    215/572-2900

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to develop an integrated undergraduate laboratory
              experience in the field of neurobiology, utilizing careful, systematic
              observation of rat behavior. The experience will be integrated as a vital
              component in the conceptual development of our students as scientists. While
              the course will be able to stand on its own as an upper-level laboratory
              science elective, students will be encouraged to use the course as a bridge
              between the foundation (200-level) anatomy and physiology courses and
              independent research projects and collaborative empirical research-based senior
              theses. The focus of the guided laboratory work in the neurobiology course will
              be to design and complete an experiment examining the factors involved in
              altering rat exploratory behavior. Our goal is to provide a laboratory that
              will challenge students to "think as a scientist, rather than a technician," by
              involving the student in a research group that will be required to conduct a
              literature search, produce a hypothesis, develop an research plan, become
              proficient with experimental techniques, run a series of experiments, collect
              and analyze data, and write up a professional style journal report. Once
              obtained, these analytical skills can be applied throughout the students
              professional and personal fife. Audiences targeted by this program include
              women, who comprise 75% of our student population, and biology, psychobiology,
              and pre-professional majors. The impact of this project will be analyzed by
              student surveys, course evaluations, career choices, and employer evaluation.
              It is expected that the laboratory activities developed in this program will be
              made available to other undergraduate neurobiology programs (through the
              Faculty for Undergraduate Neuroscience group of the Society for Neuroscience)
              and published in journals. The experimental results will be presented at local
              and national scientific meetings, and submitted to peer-reviewed journals.
