Title       : Gene and Development Investigated in the Biology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9950647

Award Number: 9950647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57220              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Campbell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul E. Barney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Warren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry R. Eckroat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald M. McKinstry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Students majoring in biology usually get a good foundation in genetics and
              biochemistry but many fail to grasp the concept that many genes encode for
              protein products that regulate and are regulated by developmental events. To
              address this deficiency we will integrate a number of courses within the
              biology curriculum that will result in a research based system that win teach a
              genetic approach to developmental biology. This system will rely on the use of
              zebra fish as a model animal system and potato as a model plant system.
              Student's investigators will isolate and characterize genes from these
              organisms and these genes will then be used to develop undergraduate exercises
              that will examine the association of gene expression with different stages of
              development. Initial gene isolation experiments will be conducted in an
              undergraduate molecular biology course. The genes isolated will be both random
              clones and genes targeted to specific metabolic enzymes. These genes will then
              be used by students in animal and plant developmental biology courses as
              pedagogical tools for demonstrating the interaction of genes and development.
              Additional courses in biochemistry, protein structure and function, and
              histology will give students the opportunity to examine different aspects of
              the genes and gene products isolated. With this approach we intend to instill
              in undergraduate biology majors a sense of the scientific process by giving
              them ownership and input into the experimental process.
