Title       : Maple Computing Across the Math and Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1999      
File        : a9950705

Award Number: 9950705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174602             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mylan Redfern m.redfern@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Betounes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing materials, printed and electronic, for extending and
              strengthening computing skills for math, science, and engineering majors, as
              well as for secondary education majors from these disciplines.

Although
              computer algebra systems (like Maple) have been with us now for almost twenty
              years, the full integration of these tools into the math, science, and
              engineering curricula has only recently begun to be widely implemented. Our
              project aids and facilitates this implementation in Mississippi. The major
              emphasis of the project is two new courses that use Maple as the actual
              programming language for students to learn concepts and structures. Maple
              offers a friendly, interactive environment that is most conducive for studying
              programming principles and has the combined power of graphic, numeric, and
              symbolic manipulation. The courses are being designed not only to stress the
              logic and algorithms inherent in programming, but also to use, and thus
              reinforce, the basic concepts learned in the calculus sequence. To maximize the
              effectiveness and impact of these courses, we are instituting new calculus
              computing labs and summer workshops.

The curriculum materials are being
              developed in conjunction with the creation of (1) four new calculus computing
              labs, (2) two new mathematical computing courses, and (3) six Maple workshops
              (extending over two successive summers). The labs correspond to (but are
              independent of) the freshman/sophomore courses in our calculus sequence, which
              are taken by math, science, engineering, and secondary education majors. The
              mathematical computing courses are junior level courses to teach the principles
              of computer programming with exercises and projects drawn from concepts and
              techniques learned in the calculus sequence. 

It is expected that the
              materials resulting from the grant will have two forms: (1) Printed: A special
              purpose LabBook designed to analyze and record results from computing
              experiments in the calculus labs, a textbook on programming in Maple, and
              pamphlets on the use of Maple in high schools and community colleges and (2)
              Electronic: CD-ROMs to accompany and extend the printed material and Web sites
              to augment the material and disseminate its concepts, 

