Title       : Applications of FT-NMR throughout the Undergraduate Chemistry Laboratory
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9950255

Award Number: 9950255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80781              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Harwood jharwood@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Chemistry Department is committed to expanding the use of NMR spectroscopy
              as a tool to enrich the laboratory experiences of students in undergraduate
              chemistry classes.  Experimental modules are being developed that allow the
              students to obtain, interpret, and report on their own NMR data in a variety of
              courses. The modules are adapting experiments found in the literature, largely
              in the Journal of Chemical Education.  First, we are developing modules that
              apply NMR to laboratories which are required for chemistry majors. We then
              expand the applications to laboratories that occur earlier in the chemistry
              major's sequence and to laboratories for non-majors. We intend for these
              NMR-based experiments to exemplify an experimental approach to teaching science
              so that students develop the skills needed to understand data acquisition and
              analysis. In addition, the use of modern NMR instrumentation and related
              computer equipment is expected to stimulate the interest of non-majors in
              chemistry.

In order to carry out this project, our spectrometer is being
              upgraded with a new console and is being equipped with a 100-sample
              sample-changer device.  We recently dedicated this spectrometer to supporting
              undergraduate education and recently relocated it to facilitate that use. With
              the sample-changer upgrade we can obtain spectra for labs with up to one
              hundred students by letting the spectrometer acquire the data under automation
              during overnight time, without taking up valuable lab time to do so. We are
              planning applications to organic, inorganic, instrumental, biochemistry and
              quantitative analysis laboratory courses, as well as to two lower level
              non-majors classes.

The institution has a high enrollment of students from
              underrepresented minorities, and those students are benefitting from
              participation in this project.  In addition, this project includes direct
              interaction with the Chicago Alliance for Minority Participation (ChAMP) by
              using the NMR to support undergraduate research by ChAMP scholars in the
              department, and the NMR also is being used as part of a ChAMP effort that is
              restructuring introductory laboratories for entering students. 

We are
              committed to maximizing dissemination of our work. To this end we are planning
              extensive use of the internet, and pages are being set up that present data
              obtained by students in the various labs. Other institutions may download that
              data and process and analyze it locally.



 

