Title       : An Internet Based System for Mathematics Homework Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a9950567

Award Number: 9950567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201795             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold K. Pizer apizer@math.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vicki Roth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Gage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop a robust, portable, easy-to-use software application
              from the pilot version of WeBWorK currently in use, and will make this freely
              available to other educational institutions. It will also develop and
              distribute a database of WeBWorK calculus and pre-calculus problems.

WeBWorK
              is an internet-based system for generating and delivering homework problems to
              students. WeBWorK enhances the educational effectiveness of homework in
              mathematics, physics, and other science and engineering disciplines by
              providing students with immediate feedback on the validity of their answers and
              giving them the opportunity to correct mistakes while they are still thinking
              about the problem. WeBWorK also provides students with individualized versions
              of problems which means instructors can encourage students to work together;
              yet each student must develop an answer to his or her own version of the
              problem.

Using WeBWorK, instructors can ask most questions found in calculus
              and other texts. WeBWorK can handle questions, which require numeric or
              symbolic answers in addition to standard true false, matching or short answer
              questions. Since WeBWorK is an Internet based program, instructors can use any
              Internet tools, such as JavaScript or Java applets, to enhance the educational
              effectiveness of the problems. The project will provide a central location for
              those who wish to distribute their own WeBWorK problems.




