Title       : Acitvity-Based Physics Suite
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9950346

Award Number: 9950346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99964              (Estimated)
Investigator: Priscilla W. Laws lawsp@dickinson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward F. Redish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Sokoloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Cooney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald K. Thornton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dickinson College
	      
	      Carlisle, PA  17013    717/243-5121

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Activity Based Physics Suite is a coordinated set of instructional materials
              designed for use in lecture sessions, laboratories, tutorials and studio
              courses.  Interactive Lecture Demonstrations engage students in the process of
              active learning in lecture environments.  The Interactive Lecture
              Demonstrations are potentially one of the most cost effective components of the
              Suite and are the centerpiece of this two year proof of concept project. 
              Interactive Lecture Demonstrations in kinematics, dynamics and energy are
              effective in improving student conceptual understanding.  An instructor
              performing an Interactive Lecture Demonstration uses a well-defined eight-step
              procedure in which students are asked to predict the outcomes of simple
              experiments, discuss predictions with their neighbors and observe and reflect
              on the outcomes of the actual experiment.  Experiment results are displayed on
              a real-time graph collected with microcomputer-based laboratory probes. 
              Demonstrations in new physics topics in mechanics, DC circuits, heat and
              thermodynamics and image formation are developed and tested in this project. 
              The new materials are tailored to coordinate with other Activity Based Physics
              Suite materials.  Development and alpha testing occur at the University of
              Oregon, Tufts University, and Dickinson College using conceptual evaluation
              instruments and beta testing occurs at a variety of other institutions engaged
              in using activity based materials.

