Title       : Laboratory Computers for Chemistry, Chemical Engineering, and Nonscience Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9950645

Award Number: 9950645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47055              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Topich jtopich@saturn.vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary E. Wnek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Shaping the Future (NSF 96-139) challenges us to provide science literacy for
              ALL in a way that emphasizes the processes of science.  It is pedagogically
              unsound today to teach the sciences in general and chemistry in particular
              without exposing students to computers and their uses. Our early exposure to
              the use of laboratory computers for data acquisition and reduction was the
              LIMSport project (Vitz, Kutztown Univ.). This was a DOS based system that is
              now evolving under the Windows environment.  A workshop and materials developed
              through the NSF-sponsored Computers in Chemistry Laboratory Instruction
              Initiative provided further impetus for this project.

Our project involves
              the adaptation of the gains from the NSF supported Computers in the Chemistry
              Laboratory Instruction Initiative.  Our present work entails the modernization
              of the introductory chemistry laboratory with data acquisition hardware,
              sensors, and software.  This modernization enables our students to be better
              prepared their challenges in the new millennium.  Three introductory chemistry
              laboratories use the hardware to serve a diverse student population.  In our
              first-year courses we teach chemistry majors, engineers, other science and
              pre-health science majors, and nonscience majors. In this group 60% are female
              and 33% are minority (21% African American) or international.  In General
              Chemistry Laboratory (CHE L101-L102) we expose students to a balanced mix of
              experimental experiences: those that primarily involve a computer for data
              acquisition and reduction; those that require nothing more than a balance, a
              flask, and a graduated cylinder; and those that are a hybrid of the two. 
              Engineers confront materials problems in Materials Science Laboratory (CHE/EGR
              L122). For nonscience majors, experiments in Chemistry and Society Laboratory
              (CHE L110) use computers to measure the conductivity and pH of environmental
              water samples, the heat content of some fuels and food, and the spectra of
              colored solutions.  Our goal for the use of this technology is not only to
              teach the principles of chemistry, but to excite our students, arouse their
              curiosity, make them critical thinkers, help them develop problem solving
              skills, and hopefully encourage them learn more about the sciences in general
              and chemistry in particular.

