Title       : Enhancing Undergraduate Chemistry Education with FT-NMR Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9950413

Award Number: 9950413
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94138              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Ball   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jess C. Vickery  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randy M. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rodney H. Quacchia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Chico Res Fdtn
	      1st and Normal Streets
	      Chico, CA  95929    916/895-6116

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              As the chemical industry and science graduate programs continually integrate
              state of the art analytical equipment and techniques into their work force and
              their research efforts, undergraduate academic institutions need to offer a
              curriculum that integrates technology into education and gives students the
              necessary background and preparation to be successful in scientific
              endeavors.

The addition of a high field FT-NMR spectrometer to our existing
              state of the art equipment, including an FT-IR, an HPLC, a capillary GC and a
              GC-MS, completes what we believe are the required instrument holdings to
              achieve our curricular changes. We are reorganizing the way we teach molecular
              structure in the beginning organic course and, for our majors, we are
              incorporating our advanced laboratory courses into a new integrated laboratory
              sequence team-taught by faculty with specialties in Analytical, Inorganic,
              Organic and Physical Chemistry. This project adapts a number of experiments
              from the Journal of Chemical Education and from the research literature to
              create the integrated laboratory sequence.  The integrated laboratory project
              most closely models ones at Rensselear Polytechnic Institute and Willamette
              University.  With these pedagogical and curricular changes, we expect to
              dramatically affect the way our students think and write about chemistry.  We
              also expect to see increased participation by undergraduates in research.



