Title       : The California Regional Consortium for Engineering Advances in Technological
               Excellence (CREATE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a9950015

Award Number: 9950015
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $494916             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen A. Alfano   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheila Tan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammad El-Soussi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Akelian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cuesta College
	      P O BOX 8106
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  934038106    805/546-3923

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	
Research shows that the nation faces a serious shortage of highly  trained
              engineering technicians. Traditional engineering technology  education will not
              be adequate to prepare students for occupations in the high  performance
              workplace of the future. Community colleges can play a major role in
              eliminating this shortage and respond to future needs, but the cost of advanced
              engineering  technology programs limits the ability of any one college to
              effectively  meet the demand. Links to industry will help colleges keep pace
              with rapid changes in  technology.  The California Regional Consortium for
              Engineering Advances in Technological Education (CREATE) is a joint effort of
              seven  community colleges and over 70 engineering technology employers. Through
              this project, the Consortium has developed two and three year programs which
              all  begin with a common core curriculum in engineering technology. Each campus
              then offer two to five advanced technological specialties. Students from any
              one participating college will be able to transfer to any other college in the
              Consortium.  This unique regional approach allows the CREATE Consortium to: 
              
(a) Reinvent science, mathematics, engineering, and technology  (SMET)
              curricula.  
(b) Serve the needs of all students, including low income,
              underrepresented, and those who previously would not have considered
              engineering  technology.  (c) Grow with industry and meet future needs of the
              high performance  workplace.	
(d) Provide upgrade training to current industry
              employees.  
(e) Enhance the status of, and strengthen, engineering technology
               education. (f) Nurture new teaching methodologies in the classroom and
              laboratory. 
