Title       : Power Distribution Systems Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a9950775

Award Number: 9950775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen N. Miu karen@ece.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dagmar E. Niebur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chikaodinaka Nwankpa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to create a power distribution systems
              curriculum through the adaptation of concepts and materials from several other
              institutions.  The power distribution systems curriculum is designed to educate
              students in the operation and planning of electric power distribution systems.
              The curriculum centers around a distribution automation and control equipment
              laboratory coupled with software programs to visualize collected data and to
              control the distribution system.

The proposed curriculum adapts and
              implements electric power distribution concepts that have been developed at
              other universities and further developed at Drexel University into an overall
              system approach. The curriculum centers on a laboratory that adapts software
              concepts, such as visualization, and experiments pertaining to capacitor
              placement and control, and implements improved hardware sensors and signal
              conditioning boards based on foreseen improvements to the distribution
              automation laboratory at National Taiwan University.  The designed curriculum
              has the following advantages by:
1) introducing students to mathematical
              models for components with different system connections and grounding,
2)
              approaching distribution networks from a system viewpoint where individual
              component models are applied to perform rigorous circuit analysis
              techniques,
3) utilizing Hall Effect Devices for advanced monitoring of
              physical network conditions, and
4) integrating signal conditioning boards for
              isolating varying phenomena - such as surges or spikes.

