Title       : Advanced Technology Education for Merging Microtechnologies: The Microchip & the
               Biochip
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9950053

Award Number: 9950053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71873              (Estimated)
Investigator: George H. Flowers gflowers@jsr.cc.va.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary E. Wnek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roland E. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah L. Neely-Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony Guiseppi-Elie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : J Sargeant Reynolds Co Col
	      P O BOX 85622
	      Richmond, VA  232855622    804/264-3200

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The emerging technology of the biochip--a microchip that contains DNA--including
              both its production and its use as a diagnostic tool, presents a unique
              opportunity for advanced technology education programs.  The similarities in
              the production  process between the biochip and the microchip place the
              proposed biochip curriculum directly in parallel with curricular programs that
              already exist for microelectronics and electronics.  Currently, there are no
              known comprehensive curricular programs at the community college level to
              address the workforce development needs, competencies and skills for the
              biochip industry, although these gene chips are already in production at
              several companies and in limited use in the medical profession.  This pilot
              project brings together national academic and industrial experts in
              biotechnology, biochip technology and microchip technology to build the
              foundation for a biochip science and technology curriculum that interfaces with
              existing microelectronics, electronics, and engineering programs being offered
              at many community colleges.  J. Sargent Reynolds Community College (JSRCC), in
              close coordination with faculty from the School of Engineering at Virginia
              Commonwealth University, is leading the project.  In addition, JSRCC is
              developing and coordinating the project using science and technology faculty
              from the Virginia, Maryland, and West Virginia community college systems. 
              Activities that support the development and dissemination of this unique
              biochip specialization are:  1) travel to biochip and microchip industries and
              biotechnology firms in Arizona, California, and Texas to meet experts involved
              in these industries and to invite them to join this project as part of a
              Curriculum Exploration and Development Team; 2) sponsorship of a Fall 1999
              workshop entitled, "Bioelectronics, Biosensors, and Biochips" in Richmond, VA,
              for community college faculty from the three CC systems involved; and 3)
              hosting workshops to delineate competencies, skills and workforce development
              needs in the biochip industry and to produce biochip specialization courses. 
              This multidisciplinary program will provide the framework for a national
              curriculum model for other institutions interested in offering a curriculum
              that will prepare workers for careers in the biochip, microchip, and
              biotechnology fields.    
