Title       : Force Field: Using Animation in Teaching Electromagnetism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9950380

Award Number: 9950380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149994             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Belcher jwb@space.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Markus Zahn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janet H. Murray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Classical electromagnetism is a fundamental underpinning of a technical
              education, but one of the most difficult subjects for students to master. We
              propose to help address this difficulty by using field line animation to
              develop the student's intuition about electromagnetic phenomena. Faraday was
              the first to realize that the shape of electromagnetic field lines is a
              remarkable guide to their dynamical effects. This becomes especially true when
              the field lines are animated. The increasing power of 3D animation hardware and
              software has made the creation of engaging 3D animations feasible. Such 3D
              animations are visually compelling, instilling in the student both a sense of
              wonder about the phenomena and a mental model of why and how it "works".
              Moreover, CPU power has reached the point that we can develop corresponding 2D
              Java-based animations which are interactive. Both of these approaches to
              animation can be delivered as part of a textual development in an increasingly
              seamless manner. The goal is to instill in the student a level of intuition
              about the subject not possible heretofore. Many of the 3D animations will
              correspond to actual demonstrations, reproducing their look and feel. The
              products of this approach will be: video clips of demonstrations; 3D animations
              of these demonstrations which display time-changing field lines as a guide to
              understanding their dynamical effects; and Java applets which allow the student
              to actively construct and animate 2D field lines for varying configurations of
              sources. This material is aimed at beginning students of electromagnetism, from
              high school to college freshmen. It can also profitably be used in upper level
              college courses. This proposal supports the CCLI Educational Materials
              Development theme at NSF. It also describes a systemic reform of educational
              pedagogy in electromagnetism across both science and engineering disciplines.
              Our approach can serve as a model for the reform of such courses, and for the
              development of distance learning via the Web for co-operative and internship
              students, as well as for life-long learning.


