Title       : Interactive Software to Improve Student Success in Developmental Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  2001   
File        : a9950568

Award Number: 9950568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107246             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanne E. Manville jmanville@bhcc.mass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bunker Hill Cmty College
	      Rutherford Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02129    617/228-2023

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Many students are unsuccessful in developmental mathematics courses.  Among the
              factors contributing to this lack of success are 1) student belief that
              mathematics is memorization of formulas and replication of procedures and 2)
              student unfamiliarity with effective study techniques and helpful learning
              resources.  This project is developing materials to address both of these
              problems.  To facilitate conceptual understanding, a collection of mathematics
              software is being developed for classroom use or individual student use.  Each
              interactive computer illustration focuses on a single topic from developmental
              arithmetic, measurement, or metric geometry.  To address the second problem,
              the developmental mathematics course will be linked to a one-credit course
              "Strategies for Student Success" whose curriculum includes study strategies
              specifically related to mathematics learning.  In addition to the software
              tools mentioned above, this project is producing a companion instructors'
              resource guide and a series of "Success in Mathematics" modules.

The
              materials are being developed, tested, and refined over four semesters.  The
              target audience is developmental mathematics students at two-year institutions.
              

This project is a collaboration between Bunker Hill Community College and
              the Massachusetts College of Art with Hu Hohn of the Massachusetts College of
              Art and Joanne Manville of the Bunker Hill Community College Mathematics
              Department designing and developing the software.


