Title       : Integrating Haptics into an Undergraduate Computer Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1999     
File        : a9950742

Award Number: 9950742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew P. Bernat                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28015              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger W. Webster webster@cs.millersville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Blaise W. Liffick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Hutchens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millersville University
	      PO Box 1002
	      Millersville, PA  17551    717/872-3820

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University requests funds from the National Science Foundation's CCLIA&I
              program for focused investment for instrumentation in the area of haptic human
              computer interaction for undergraduates in Computer Science and Computer
              Engineering. Haptics in computer science and engineering is a term used to
              describe the ability to interact with virtual worlds using the sense of touch.
              The concept of including the sense of touch along with sight and sound in the
              human-computer interface is not new. Research in haptics or force-feedback has
              been active since the 1960's. What is new is that haptic functionality has just
              recently moved out of the research labs and onto the desktop, on its journey
              into the mainstream of computer usage. Ultimately, the result will be a
              fundamental and profound enhancement of the human-computer interface that will
              allow people to better utilize the power of the computer for a broader array of
              applications. Enabling haptic capability will produce a revolutionary change in
              the way humans interact with computers, opening up new avenues of digital
              creativity in a vast array of simulation applications.

One of the primary
              objectives of this project is to integrate haptics into an undergraduate
              Computer Science curriculum with advanced projects in courses such as CS425
              Human Computer Interaction, CS375 Graphics and Virtual Reality, and CS498
              Independent Research. This will expose undergraduate students in Computer
              Science and Computer Engineering to the software techniques of programming
              haptic devices for human computer interaction applications. Students will be
              experimenting with a programmable, three-dimensional sense of touch that will
              allow the user to feel textures and shapes of virtual objects, modulate objects
              and even deform objects. This project will boost student interest in pursuing
              more scholarly activities such as going on to graduate school, and seeking
              employment in scientific, research oriented institutions. This instrumentation
              and the incorporation of haptics into undergraduate education may be of
              interest to other institutions, and may lead to the development of new
              experiments and approaches in laboratory instruction in Computer Science and
              Computer Engineering. This project may also provide a springboard for
              collaborative student projects between Computer Science and Physics majors
              giving them opportunities to engage in haptic simulation development at the
              undergraduate level.

