Title       : Spectroscopy for Student-Designed General Chemistry Explorations and Advanced
               Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9950507

Award Number: 9950507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20170              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Valente valente@mc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Magers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leland W. Benton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony B. Dribben  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi College
	      
	      Clinton, MS  39058    601/924-5131

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project incorporates the use of UV-VIS spectrophotometers into the
              chemistry curriculum in order to modify the laboratory emphasis of lower
              division chemistry and promote student design and conduct of experiments and
              application of technological tools. Creativity and relevance are improved by
              coupling an early introduction of spectroscopic instrumentation with
              biochemical subject matter.  Our first goal is to adapt introductory chemistry
              to involve course content guided by laboratory experimental work in which
              students, under faculty guidance, design and carry out fundamental chemical
              exercises (stoichiometry, equilibria, bioseparations, quantitative bioanalysis)
              with central spectroscopic applications.  A second goal is to incorporate
              biochemical content at the introductory level, and to increase its emphasis at
              other points outside of formal biochemistry/cell biology courses. A third goal
              is to increase student knowledge and application of spectroscopy to questions
              of chemical structure and analysis throughout the chemistry curriculum and with
              increasing sophistication at the latter stages (fast acquisition kinetics,
              global spectral analysis, reaction mechanisms), and to increase support for
              undergraduate research. The two-year project involves all chemistry faculty in
              the department.  The project overall is moving to a course structure built
              around student or student-team laboratory inquiries integrated with guided
              discussions led by faculty and, to do so, is adapting methods and procedures
              developed by the New Traditions Chemistry Initiative, centered at the
              University of Wisconsin.  The project models work published in the Journal of
              Chemical Education on the importance of the early introduction of spectroscopic
              principles into the curriculum.  The project also adapts a number of methods
              and experiments found in the Journal of Chemical Education and uses these to
              create the curriculum-wide emphasis on spectroscopy.  New exercises in
              introductory chemistry, and upper division changes, are being introduced and
              evaluated starting in the first year and continuing thereafter. Both are being
              continuously redeveloped based on student responses to the methods and
              experiences. Introductory chemistry is a core curriculum course, so the changes
              target science and non-science majors. Science students are expected to be
              better prepared for higher division classes while generally becoming more
              technologically competent.
