Title       : Semicondcutor and Photonics Learning Modules based on Consumer Products Case
               Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1999       
File        : a9950794

Award Number: 9950794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chu R. Wie wie@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander N. Cartwright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Multimedia simulation, visualization and interactive animation programs and
              materials are being packaged into easy to understand top-level systems based on
              consumer products.  These consumer products are understandable by the general
              public and high school students. Semiconductor and photonic systems learning
              modules based on ubiquitous consumer products using the Java programming
              language and accessible on the world wide web (WWW) are being developed. These
              modules can be seamlessly integrated into a number of course syllabi that
              include the study of semiconductors, photonics, lasers and optics.  They are
              intended as stand-alone (self-learning) modules as well as educational aids for
              students in traditional courses.  Specifically, in this project the top-level
              case study modules and all component applets, where the component applets will
              serve as stand-alone simulation tools for the basic concepts as well as
              constituent parts for the case-study modules, are being developed, evaluated
              and effectively disseminated. Moreover, case-study modules based on an optical
              compact disc readhead system and on an optical barcode scanning system are
              being developed.

The developed applets and modules address audiences ranging
              from high school students and the general public through upper-level University
              students and even some in the research community.  More importantly, the tools
              developed here are accessible to all students that have access to the WWW and,
              in this way, have maximum impact to the teaching community throughout the
              country. In addition, each applet program developed is to be evaluated and
              disseminated through a paid-peer review by teaching professionals at different
              institutions than the principal investigators. It is expected that the modules
              and applets, developed here, will simplify and bring the scientific principles
              underlying today's high-tech devices closer to more students and the general
              public. 


