Title       : An Evolving Program to Prepare Information Technologists in Southwest Ohio for
               the 21st Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2001       
File        : a9950029

Award Number: 9950029
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $853640             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sam Geonetta Sam.Geonetta@UC.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan Donley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ashraf Saad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cheryll Dunn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Colleen Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vladimir Uskov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Nakhoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this ATE project is to help increase the pool of qualified
              information technology (IT) workers thereby addressing the severe national and
              statewide shortage for such workers that is projected to persist well into the
              21st century. Our project will serve both traditional and returning students.
              The project aims to provide a 2+2+2 seamless transition for students from their
              junior year in high school, through an associate degree at the community
              college level or at the University of Cincinnati (UC), to a Bachelor of Science
              (BS) degree in Information Engineering Technology (IET) at UC's OMI-College of
              Applied Science (OCAS). A newly proposed Associate Degree (AD) of Applied
              Computer Science at OCAS could offer (starting September `99) one more avenue
              for students to prepare for joining the IT workforce or pursue a BS degree in
              IET. Articulation agreements between all partner institutions should pave the
              way to achieve this goal. Industrial partners will serve a crucial role in the
              success of the project by updating the partner educational institutions on the
              current and future IT skills desired of workers by the IT industry. They will
              also provide co-op opportunities for students and employment opportunities
              after graduation. This ATE project will comprise four
              components:
1.	Articulation agreements between partner institutions
2.	Course
              and Curriculum Development
3.	Faculty Development
4.	Industrial
              co-op/internship opportunities for students
Course and Curriculum Development
              at all levels will use as its blueprint an IT Competency profile that will be
              developed by March `99 under the guidance of a recently established Ohio
              Information Technology Task Force. The IT Competency profile will follow the
              Tech Prep model and will be developed through extensive collaboration between
              technical and academic educators with industrial partners.

Faculty
              Development will be achieved by a series of Summer Institutes and Workshops and
              will show the evolutionary nature of the project: course and curriculum
              material will be updated on a yearly basis "vertically" across all partner
              institutions. This updating will result in the transfer of course materials
              from the BS level to the AD level as well as from the AD level to the US level
              via Summer Institutes and Workshops. New courses will then need to be developed
              at the BS level that will in turn migrate to the AD level during the following
              year.  Such a dynamic program should be more responsive to industry demands as
              it will involve updating the skills of both instructors and students on a
              yearly basis.

Evaluation of the project will be conducted via semi-annual
              feedback from all participating educational institutions and IT employers. An
              Advisory Board for the project will also be established to provide feedback and
              guidance to the project development and goals. The Advisory Board will comprise
              members from both academia and industry. Another measure of success for the
              project will be to successfully recruit an increasing number of students at all
              levels, as well as job placement for an increasing number of graduating
              students, each year.  Dissemination of the project results will be achieved
              through the Summer Institutes and Workshops, through presentations at other
              educational institutions in the State of Ohio, and through publications in
              conferences and journals as well as on the project's Web site.  This project
              stands to benefit the State of Ohio as a whole by spearheading the
              implementation of the IT Competency profile and by its deliverables in course
              and curriculum development material. It can thereby pave the way for other
              institutions around the State of  Ohio, and nationally, to duplicate its
              outcomes thereby helping to alleviate the expected shortage of IT workers.

