Title       : Introduction of Modern Light Scattering Methods in Chemistry Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1999       
File        : a9950133

Award Number: 9950133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52209              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald R. Van Hecke gerald_vanhecke@hmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvey Mudd College
	      301 E. 12th Street
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8121

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal seeks to introduce modem light scattering instrumentation into our
              chemistry laboratories, especially our physical chemistry and biochemistry
              laboratories. The characterization of macromolecules, whether they be synthetic
              polymers or biological, depends heavily on the measurement of molecular weight
              and size. Light scattering techniques have long been recognized as one of the
              best means of determining molecular weight and size. Advances in
              instrumentation, largely made possible by the laser and improved photometric
              detection devices, have now made such techniques accessible for use in
              undergraduate laboratories. As examples, two of the several experiments
              proposed here will allow physical chemistry students to explore properties of
              diblock copolymers and micellar solutions of surfactants: (1) the transition
              from a random coil conformation to a globule conformation will be studied for a
              diblock copolymer system; (2) the size and polydispersity of self-assembled
              aggregates in aqueous surfactant systems will be studied. Biochemistry students
              will test the validity of get permeation calibration curve methods for
              molecular weight measurements against absolute molecular weight measurements
              made by light scattering methods. All the planned experiments are made
              extremely facile by the requested instrumentation whose data acquisition time
              represents such a saving in laboratory time that students will be able to
              explore further aspects of the projects on their own thereby enriching their
              laboratory experiences within the same currently available time frame. The
              advent of the new instrumentation can only encourage students to appreciate
              more fully the challenges available in the extremely important, increasingly
              interdisciplinary field of macromolecular
              science.






























