Title       : Assignment Chemical Technology - III
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a9950042

Award Number: 9950042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John V. Kenkel jkenkel@southeast.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Amend  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul B. Kelter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southeast CC
	      8800 O Street
	      Lincoln, NE  685201227    /   -

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Southeast Community College (SCC) in Lincoln, Nebraska, in partnership with
              the University of Nebraska, Montana State University, Texas State Technical
              College, and the DuPont Company, is designing a major curriculum and materials
              development project called "Assignment: Chemical technology-III," or ACT-III.
              The purpose of the project is to further enhance chemical technology
              educational programs in 2-year colleges by building on two previous successful
              NSF/ATE projects, called ACT-I and ACT-II, which were also lead by SCC. The new
              project completes the development of analytical chemistry course work begun by
              this group in ACT-II and also addresses organic/biochemistry courses. The
              analytical and organic chemistry courses are considered extremely important for
              these programs because they embody the heart of chemical technology education
              in the United States and are the primary vehicle by which the American Chemical
              Society's Voluntary Industry Standards (VIS) will be implemented. The project
              utilizes the VIS heavily and generate a variety of useful nationally
              disseminated products for such education, including a number of modules and
              monographs covering topics appropriate to these courses, a series of innovative
              laboratory activities for students, two interactive multimedia programs on
              CD-ROM modeled after the popular I.O.N.S. concept utilized in the previous
              projects, distance education models for these courses, and model 2+2+2
              articulation agreements. Methods to be utilized include the American Chemical
              Society's Gap Analysis, faculty enhancement and participation workshops and
              development institutes, and research to create and practice various distance
              education models. The partnership includes the DuPont Company, which has
              donated $50,000 in matching funds, and also a National Visiting Committee
              consisting of real-world chemistry technicians and others who have a stake in
              the outcomes.













