Title       : Improving the Study of Political Communication Through the Use of High-band with
               Networked Multimedia Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9950772

Award Number: 9950772
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97615              (Estimated)
Investigator: G. R. Boynton bob-boynton@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith R. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Electronic communication has transformed the way politicians communicate with
              citizens.  Guaranteed high-bandwith networked multimedia communication is being
              adapted for use in undergraduate education to significantly improve the
              educational experience in a branch of Political Science that studies political
              communication.  Adaptation of this technology is enabling access by students
              and faculty to video course materials that are central to this field, and
              facilitating collaborative learning.  

This technology is being adapted to a
              set of three courses, ranging from introductory to advanced.  The advanced
              course is taught jointly with the University of Colorado.  Students study
              political communication through electronic media such as TV.  They must be able
              to view hundreds of political segments and to create their own videos and test
              them on each other.  Because one course involves students at two universities,
              they need networked communication capabilities to work together.  High speed
              networks on and between campuses provide the infrastructure to allow students
              to work together and to share experiments and experiences, and new video
              technology is providing the tools necessary for these kinds of
              activities

This project is building on the robust networks already in place
              on and between both campuses.  The equipment is allowing students to view
              streaming video independently and together, and to create their own videos for
              experiments.  Students are able to work together easily, regardless of
              location, and through this joint work are gaining better understanding of
              political communications techniques.  

This application of technology, an
              Internet 2 application,  is being thoroughly evaluated and should serve as a
              model for other disciplines at the University of Iowa and at other
              institutions.  


