Title       : Interdisciplinary Environmental Program: Environmental Chemistry Laboratory
               Course and Field-Based Environmental Science Capstone Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9950378

Award Number: 9950378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97205              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marina Koether mkoether@kennesaw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald J. McGarey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark W. Patterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kennesaw State University
	      1000 Chastain Road
	      Kennesaw, GA  301445591    404/429-2700

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project implements an innovative laboratory and field based Environmental
              Chemistry Option and initiates the development of an Interdisciplinary
              Environmental Studies Program. The goal is to prepare students for careers in
              environmental research, education and/or in the areas of environmental
              analyses, monitoring and assessment. The project is adapting components from
              Susan Libes', Coastal Carolina University, laboratory manual supported by NSF
              award 9750477, and from Maureen Seviny's, Oregon Institute of Technology, NSF
              project 9752662.  A number of laboratory methods and experiments are being
              adapted from other published environmental texts.  Time is devoted to the
              curriculum development of the courses such that the experiments are pre-tested
              (by science education students as directed studies projects) for their
              educational value and include cooperative and collaborative learning methods.
              By adding specific instrumentation such as an atomic absorption spectrometer
              (AAS) and kits for field work, which are dedicated to the environmental and
              analytical sciences, the following four aims can be accomplished. (1)
              Development of an Environmental Chemistry Laboratory Course to cover: i)
              environmental chemistry using instruments as diagnostic tools, ii)
              environmental analysis using instruments as quantitative tools, and iii)
              environmental modeling using STELLA, minteqa2 and EXCEL software.  (2)
              Development of a Field-Based Environmental Science Capstone Course combining i)
              geography (Geographic Information System (GIS), Global Positioning System (GPS)
              and remote sensing (RS)), ii) chemistry (chemical analyses), and iii) biology
              (biological analyses) in order to develop an environmental impact assessment of
              a given area.  Both biology and chemistry students take this second course and
              work in teams to develop the environmental assessment and impact statement. 
              (3) Undergraduate environmental research projects are using the modern
              instrumentation.  (4) The Instrumental Analysis Course is being improved with
              the addition of a new AAS.

