Title       : The Efficacy of Classroom Experiments in Teaching Introductory Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9950825

Award Number: 9950825
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. McKinnon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig T. Schulman  (Principal Investigator former)
              Yvonne Durham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Economics has historically been a classic example of a science in which
              laboratory methods are impossible. Consistent with this view, it has generally
              been taught as a theory intensive science, not as an observational one. Because
              economics involves so much abstract reasoning and analysis, when it is taught
              with this emphasis on theory, many of the concepts are difficult for students
              to grasp.

The notion that economics is not an experimental science is
              changing, in large part due to the increase in research conducted using
              experimental methods. In addition, as evidence of the benefits of active
              learning for students has accumulated, more faculty have switched their
              teaching methods to actively engage students in the process of learning. 
              Introducing experimental methods into the economics classroom is a natural
              step, warranted both by the evolution of the discipline and the need to more
              actively involve students.

The primary objectives of this project are to
              develop course materials for introductory economics (principles) that integrate
              classroom experiments into the curricula and to assess the efficacy of this
              method of instruction. The evaluative phase of the project will seek to assess
              the impact of the new curricula on the depth of student learning, retention of
              economic knowledge, and attitudes towards the study of economics, among others.
               The evaluation will also be applied to five new macroeconomics experiments
              being developed at another institution.  

To achieve these objectives, this
              study proposes a three year controlled experiment.  Students in principles of
              economics courses will be separated into control and treatment classes. The
              control classes will be conducted using a traditional lecture/class discussion
              format. The treatment classes will supplement the lecture and class discussion
              with classroom experiments. Relative performance on an instrument designed
              specifically for this project that employs Bloom's taxonomy about the hierarchy
              of learning (knowledge, comprehension, application, analysis, synthesis, and
              evaluation) will serve as the basis for assessing the impact of classroom
              experiments (Benjamin Bloom, editor, "Taxonomy of Educational Objectives, David
              McKay Company, Inc. 1956).  



