Title       : Implementing Inquiry and Technology in a Biology Lab for Pre-service Teachers
               and Non-majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2002     
File        : a9950373

Award Number: 9950373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74806              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phyllis Laine laine@xavier.xu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda J. Heath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Xavier University
	      3800 Victory Parkway
	      Cincinnati, OH  452071035    513/745-3000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The goal of this project is to develop a Biology laboratory for non-majors to
              include scientific inquiry and critical thinking skills especially needed by
              the elementary education majors. The planned laboratory course, adapted from a
              NSF funded investigative non-major Biology laboratory at Clemson University,
              includes inquiry in a computer networked facility. The student will experience
              6 inquiry based investigations. The course is organized into three
              phases.

Introduction: Working in cooperative teams, students will carry out
              4 inquiry-based activities demonstrating process skills of the science
              discipline. Practice: Teams will select an organism to investigate through a
              guided inquiry. Investigations will focus on aspects of growth and development.
              Application: Teams will then design and execute an original inquiry on their
              organism. Team members will be required to develop background information from
              electronic resources. Teams will "record" all experimental data, internet
              information, and pertinent course material in their "computer" notebook.
              Presentations to the class will be via a computer projection system.

For
              this course new laboratory exercises will be developed by the PI's. Basic lab
              skills will be taught via CD-ROMs, web sites, lab manuals and instructor
              demonstrations. Collaborative efforts with faculty from the education
              department will allow for the evaluation of education majors over a four year
              period. This effort will examine the impact of this new course on future
              teachers from Xavier. The new facilities will be used to introduce inquiry life
              science teaching to classroom teachers during summer workshops.

