Title       : The Texas A&M Racial and Ethnic Studies Institute Virtual Lab in Ethnic
               Relations and Stratification: Instruction of Sociology Undergraduate Students
               Via Web-Based Java Applets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1999       
File        : a9950389

Award Number: 9950389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Fossett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This "proof-of-concept project is to demonstrate the feasibility and value of
              using interactive, -web-based computer programs and associated web-based
              support materials to teach sociological principles of ethnic relations and
              social stratification to undergraduate students.  This is being accomplished by
              developing: 
(1) a Java applet (the Ethnic Inequality program) that students
              will be able to access via the World Wide Web and use to explore questions
              about the persistence of ethnic inequality across generations, and 
(2) a set
              of web-based support materials for the program (e.g., downloadable student
              exercises). 

The Ethnic Inequality program is intended to provide a fully
              functioning example of the interactive, web-based programs that would be
              developed in a broader "full scale" development project.

A second part of
              this project is creating a web site entitled the "Virtual Lab in Ethnic
              Relations and Stratification".  This web site will serve as the institutional
              "platform" giving students access to the Ethnic Inequality program and
              associated, web-based, support materials.  It will be installed in the Race and
              Ethnic Studies Institute and supported as a means of disseminating educational
              programs and materials focusing on ethnic relations and stratification.

The
              Ethnic Inequality program and other results from this project will be used as a
              basis for applying for a "full scale" development project in a year's time.
              This broader project will develop programs geared to: (a) teaching and
              illustrating theoretical principles relating to ethnic relations and
              stratification and (b) using graphical and other intuitive methods to present
              data on ethnic relations and stratification (e.g., ethnic composition, racial
              attitudes, segregation, neighborhood change, inequality, status inheritance,
              etc.).









