Title       : Powder X-ray Diffraction in the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9950700

Award Number: 9950700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76720              (Estimated)
Investigator: Angus P. Wilkinson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart R. Stock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) is an important technique for practitioners of
              Chemistry, Materials Science, Physics, and Earth Science. It is the primary
              method for identifying and quantifying the phases in solid samples.
              Consequently, equipment for powder XRD experiments in the undergraduate lab is
              potentially of great pedagogical value. However, there are two sizable problems
              associated with the use of powder XRD in undergraduate lab classes: the
              equipment has traditionally been expensive and the collection of a powder
              diffraction pattern suitable for qualitative or quantitative analysis takes
              between 15 and 30 minutes. A typical lab class is too short to allow each
              student to collect and analyze their own data if a single instrument is
              employed, and the high cost of the instrumentation precludes the purchase of
              multiple systems if the instrumentation is only employed for a small number of
              experiments each year.

Recently, Rigaku has begun marketing a low cost
              powder XRD system (Miniflex) that is designed with portability and fieldwork in
              mind. The purchase of three identical Miniflex systems for use in both
              Chemistry and Materials Science (MSE) undergraduate classes is proposed. These
              small rugged systems will be set up on lab carts and controlled using lap top
              computers. Their portability will allow us to move the instrumentation between
              classrooms and buildings so that the maximum possible impact can be obtained.
              The purchase of three identical systems will give us the sample throughput
              needed to provide every undergraduate in a lab class with hands on experience.
              This hardware will be used in the following Chemistry and Materials Science
              classes: analytical chemistry (for both engineers and chemistry majors),
              organic chemistry, physical chemistry, advanced inorganic chemistry, MSE
              crystallography and diffraction, and the MSE Materials Laboratory. The proposed
              project will benefit 400 students per year.

