Title       : The Technology Connection: Computer Training for Residents of Arctic Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a9950069

Award Number: 9950069
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308764             (Estimated)
Investigator: Courtney A. Bartholomew courtney.bartholomew@ilisagvik.cc  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brooke Selmer  (Principal Investigator former)
              Chris McNally  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Ilisagvik College
	      P.O. Box 749
	      Barrow, AK  99723    907/852-9120

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              he Technology Connection links residents of remote villages on Alaska's Arctic
              Slope with a two-year Associate of Applied Sciences program in information
              technology (IT) using a mobile computer lab and other distance delivery
              strategies.  

Project Activities:   With support from five partner
              institutions with established IT curricula, courses worth 30 credits at the
              200-level are being tailored to meet the needs of local employers, to address
              Alaska Native pedagogical issues, and to provide the best mix of
              distance-delivery teaching strategies. Prior to implementation in the region's
              seven remote villages during year two, courses are being pilot tested on
              campus. Both a campus-based computer lab and mobile computer lab are being
              equipped to meet the needs of second-year students.

Organizational
              Structures, Major Participants:  The applicant, Ilisagvik College, is a public,
              nonprofit, two-year, postsecondary school located in Barrow, Alaska, the
              northernmost city on the continent. Local public agencies and private
              businesses have partnered with Ilisagvik to provide classrooms in the villages
              and hands-on training opportunities. Five academic partners have pledged to
              share their IT curricula and expertise: Dine College, Maui Community College,
              Santa Fe Community College, the University of Alaska-Fairbanks, and Nunavut
              Arctic College. Third- party evaluation will be conducted by staff from the
              Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory, with support from Dr. Robert
              Lorence, President of the Northwest Indian College. Project groups established
              include an Advisory Panel, Instructional Design Team, and Evaluation Committee.
              Schedule for Activities The project will span 26 months. Phase 1 is devoted
              primarily to curriculum development. Phase 2 focuses on pilot testing and
              dissemination.

Expected Outcomes: At least one resident from each of the
              area's seven villages and 10 Barrow residents will complete the AAS degree and
              will be hired into IT positions in the region.



