Title       : LUCID-A New Model for Computer-Assisted Instruction in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9950612

Award Number: 9950612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330702             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Hanson david.hanson@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              To be prepared for the rapid changes occurring in society, technology, and the
              world economy, students need to become quick learners, critical thinkers, and
              problem solvers. They need to become computer literate and skillful in
              communicating, teamwork, management, and assessment. An integrated knowledge of
              fundamental concepts beyond a single discipline is essential. To acquire these
              attributes, students need to actively engage in learning, thinking, problem
              solving, working with others, communicating their accomplishments, assessing
              the accomplishments of others, reflecting on their performance, developing
              strategies to improve, and documenting their growth. Traditional teaching
              methods and the software products supporting them are focused on presentation
              and evaluation and are not addressing these issues.  We are developing a new
              model for computer-assisted instruction.  This model is embodied in a set of
              activities and tools named LUCID, for Learning and Understanding through
              Computer-based Interactive Discovery.

These issues are being addressed
              through the objectives of this project. 1. Develop innovative Web-based tools
              that can be used by educational software developers to support team-based
              learning, reporting, and peer and self-assessment activities. 2. Provide a
              series of Web-based activities encompassing representative topics across a full
              year of general chemistry to serve as a model for employing such tools in
              curriculum development and teaching. 3. Develop authoring tools to support the
              development of similar materials in other disciplines.

To achieve these
              objectives we are porting our current PC LAN-based software to the Web,
              encapsulating our functionality in Java components, developing databases for
              curricular elements and student work, and improving and extending our current
              set of activities. Our audience includes secondary and post-secondary students,
              teachers, curriculum developers, and educational software developers. While the
              primary thrust of this project is to integrate technology into education, our
              activity design addresses issues of diversity, and our dissemination plan
              involves faculty development.  Faculty from a number of other institutions are
              working with us to develop, implement, assess, and disseminate the materials
              that are being produced.


