Title       : Integrating Computational Problem Solving into General Chemistry Activity
               Session
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1999      
File        : a9950387

Award Number: 9950387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27851              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin E. Johnson johnson1@pacificu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James O. Currie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard V. Whiteley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pacific University
	      2034 College Way
	      Forest Grove, OR  971161753    503/357-6151

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With this proposal we intend to address student learning and attitude in our
              general chemistry course by incorporating computational tools for problem
              solving into weekly activity sessions. These activity sessions will include a
              flexible combination of wet-laboratory experimentation with computerized data
              collection as appropriate, data analysis, molecular modeling, and group problem
              solving. To facilitate this enhancement, we plan to equip our general chemistry
              laboratory with the modem computer tools of a chemist. The equipment will be
              used in the weekly small-group activity sessions, which are an integral part of
              our general chemistry course. The application of computational tools to
              chemical problems will be systematically introduced to students in sequential
              activities, which teach and ultimately integrate different methodologies for
              measuring, modeling, and understanding chemical phenomena.

The specific
              equipment requested include a computer problem solving station for each pair of
              students that will consist of a low-cost computer, data acquisition hardware.
              Each computer will be loaded with software licensed by the college, including
              molecular modeling software. Additionally, computer projection equipment for
              the laboratory is requested.

The primary focus of the curricular changes
              motivating this proposal is augmenting the participatory activities we offer
              students in order to improve their learning in general chemistry. Experiments
              will be improved by better and more efficient data collection followed by
              subsequent analysis. Learning and understanding will be enhanced by individual
              access to modeling software. By creating a classroom atmosphere that encourages
              engaged and cooperative inquiry, our proposed general chemistry activity
              sessions will not only improve students' learning but their perception of
              science as well.

