Title       : Versatile Networks Laboratory (VeNeLa) Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9950946

Award Number: 9950946
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17664              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guillermo A. Francia gfrancia@cs.jsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jacksonville State Univ
	      700 North Pelham Road
	      Jacksonville, AL  36265    256/782-5284

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project establishes a versatile computer networks laboratory to enhance the
              CIS curriculum to meet the challenges presented by the rapid advancement of
              telecommunications technology. The laboratory is being designed for
              versatility, scalability and adaptability to new technology and is separately
              or concurrently configured to handle four (4) protocols: 10Mbps ethernet, fast
              ethernet, asynchronous transfer mode (ATM), and fiber distributed data
              interface (FDDI) on token ring.  The design of the laboratory and the lab
              exercises are being adapted from previous exemplary NSF projects as well as
              from the current literature. 
 
Previously,  the course in computer networks
              was taught without any hands-on laboratory exercise to reinforce class
              lectures. The laboratory exercises designed to be used in the proposed
              laboratory are dramatically changing the way several computer courses are being
              taught. Some of the laboratory projects and exercises are adaptations and
              implementations of exemplary materials from previous NSF grants of similar
              nature. Others are gathered from published literature expounding on successful
              networking projects which resulted from grants that were directly or indirectly
              supported by NSF. All of these adaptations are being implemented based on the
              current state of networking technology and network traffic.

The proposed
              laboratory and its innovative activities will have a positive impact on the way
              computer science is taught at the local site.  It has potential to be a model
              suitable for adaptation for other sites as well.


