Title       : Integration of Image Processing and Spectroscopy into Modern Astronomy
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9950602

Award Number: 9950602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15440              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph T. Pollock pollockjt@appstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel B. Caton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard O. Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Appalachian State Univ
	      
	      Boone, NC  28608    704/262-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Many lab activities in introductory and advanced astronomy courses still rely on
              the use of photographic prints- a technology no longer used in the profession.
              The drop in the price of computers and the advance of high-quality,
              user-friendly image processing software has made possible the integration of
              modem methodology into the curriculum. Also, an accumulation of digital images
              originally obtained for research purposes offers an opportunity for students to
              do lab activities and even research on archival data. Finally, modem visual and
              CCD spectroscopic equipment provides the opportunity for students to
              participate in this extremely important area.

The objective of this project
              is to integrate modem image processing techniques and spectroscopy into the
              astronomy curriculum, from the introductory level through the program for
              majors. Introductory lab exercises traditionally done with photography will be
              replaced with ones that use modem digital images, spectra and computer
              processing techniques. For advanced astronomy students, a larger format CCD
              camera will allow high quality photometric and spectroscopic data to be
              obtained. Faster computers and Internet access will allow students to use modem
              resources to prepare for their observations.

Specific activities will
              include the measurement of variable star brightness in a globular cluster to
              determine the distance to the cluster, determination of brightness and colors
              of stars in open clusters to study stellar evolution, measurement of proper
              motions of stars, and calculation of the age of the Crab Nebula. Other
              activities will examine images from the Hubbell Space Telescope to study
              properties of the early universe. In addition, teams of students, to discover
              any variable stars in those fields will study archival images of star fields.
              Astronomy majors will use the CCD camera and spectrograph to obtain images and
              spectra of a variety of astronomically interesting objects. These images will
              be analyzed with image processing techniques to provide quantitative
              results.


