Title       : The Power of Partnerships: Integrating Academics into the Manufacturing World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2001 
File        : a9950076

Award Number: 9950076
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $725292             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol Chambers cchambers@tbaisd.k12.mi.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald Swaney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kirk D. Hornburg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Hoffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Siciliano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Ostrowski  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Traverse Bay Area Intermed
	      Department of Mathematics
	      Traverse City, MI  496966020    /   -

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Powerful Partnerships for Integrating Academics into the Manufacturing World is
              a project that seeks to transform a successful, ongoing regional Manufacturing
              Technology Academy into a flexible and adaptable technological academy model
              that lifts students from the traditional high school or technical center
              setting into a more meaningful educational environment that delivers high level
              academic content while emulating a corporate culture of quality. Although the
              academy currently focuses on the manufacturing industry as the theme around
              which its academic concepts are woven, almost any industry can serve as the
              skeleton for this model. The technological academy model differs from the
              mainstream of both technology centers and traditional high schools in four key
              aspects: 1. A rigorous academic curriculum which integrates high level
              secondary content like calculus, chemistry, economics and physics into a
              workplace focus. 2. A uniquely-successful manufacturing council partnership
              structure that ensures constant communication and in-depth collaboration
              between teachers, manufacturing personnel, liaisons and students. 3. An
              innovative blend of classroom and workplace that extends the classroom beyond
              its walls and brings an entrepreneurial spirit and corporate culture to its
              students and curriculum. 4. Marketing, recruitment, evaluation and replication
              strategies aimed at continuously improving effectiveness and opening the
              technological academy door to an exponentially larger and more diverse pool of
              students by generalizing the model for ease of replication and adaptation. 	It
              is precisely these departures from mainstream educational practices (both
              academic and vocational) that have already infused enthusiasm, meaning,
              commitment and "spark" into the MTA experience. The Powerful Partnerships grant
              proposal would intensify the learning for MTA students and greatly expand the
              student participant pool so that many more students can develop academic and
              technical skills in an integrated and meaningful way. 
