Title       : Instructional Shake Tables: A Cooperative Effort in Earthquake Engineering
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1999    
File        : a9950340

Award Number: 9950340
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley J. Dyke sdyke@seas.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin Z. Truman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip L. Gould  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Although considering the dynamic behavior of buildings and bridges is of
              fundamental importance in modern structural design, undergraduate civil
              engineering students seldom develop an understanding of the way that these
              structures respond when acted upon by time-varying loads. Because this topic is
              of great social and economical importance, there is an unmet need in current
              civil engineering programs to provide more formal training in structural
              dynamics and earthquake hazard mitigation to undergraduates. Further, many
              students in non-engineering disciplines would learn from exposure to basic
              concepts in earthquake engineering. Therefore, over 20 institutions drawn from
              the three national earthquake centers are adapting the idea conceived at the
              centers of using bench-scale shake tables to integrate earthquake engineering
              into the undergraduate curriculum. Students learn these principles through the
              introduction of a series of experiments throughout their coursework. Both
              classroom demonstrations of effective techniques in structural design, and
              "hands-on" experiments on scaled specimens at all levels have a significant
              impact on the entire civil engineering curriculum. The program has been
              strategically planned to achieve the goals set forth, and is headquartered and
              managed at Washington University. Each university associated with the project
              has selected a task associated with the project that matches the interests and
              capabilities of the identified investigator. Additional experiments are being
              developed specifically for non-engineering students who have an interest in the
              consequences of severe seismic events (architects, geologists, etc.). The
              outcomes of the program include a series of experiments with test specimen
              designs and lab manuals, a set of videos, and a CDROM. All of the resulting
              experiments will be distributed to interested parties and made available on a
              web site. Additional opportunities include nationwide student competitions and
              undergraduate research experiences. Plans are in place to reach a significant
              number of students from underrepresented groups, including both undergraduates
              and school children. 


