Title       : An On-Line Virtual Reality Laboratory Linking Students to Research at the
               Coastal Studies Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9950928

Award Number: 9950928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74260              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carey R. Phillips cphillip@bowdoin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter D. Lea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Amy S. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowdoin College
	      5700 College Station
	      Brunswick, ME  04011    207/725-3000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              An on-line virtual reality research laboratory will be created as mirror image
              of the College Coastal Studies Center. The virtual reality laboratory will be
              an educational tool designed to integrate technology into the process of
              learning. The virtual reality laboratory combines a topologically accurate 3-D
              Web-based exploration of a real research site while providing access to a
              multi-dimensional database. The virtual laboratory will teach students how to
              interact with and use large amounts of information while making
              interdisciplinary inquires about real world problems. Visitors in the virtual
              world have 3-D representations known as avatars. Several students can
              simultaneously use the virtual world where they can "see" and communication
              with each other's avatars. This capability provides for several educational
              opportunities. Students can collaborate to solve problems by interacting with
              the databases, in real time. Students can interact with teachers or experts
              from anywhere in the real World while they are in the virtual world. Anyone
              with a computer and an Internet connection can enter this virtual world, thus
              increasing access for the disabled or students without field research
              opportunities. This will be a valuable tool for teachers anywhere in the real
              World by developing student interest in using technology tools to understand
              complex interrelationships in the environment.




