Title       : Tech-4 Electronic Workforce Development System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2001      
File        : a9950106

Award Number: 9950106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1100000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nasser Hedayat NHedayat@valencia.cc.fl.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cap Jadonath  (Principal Investigator former)
              Hugh K. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey B. Bindell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Gilbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander K. Dickison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gaby N. Hawat  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Valencia Community Coll
	      P O BOX 3028
	      Orlando, FL  328023028    305/299-5000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
An internationally-competitive US electronics industry requires a
              well-prepared workforce. Many community colleges and universities along the
              Central Florida "Interstate-4 corridor" (Tampa-Orlando-Daytona) work with
              industry to offer programming in the engineeringtechnology/electronics field;
              rapidly-evolving industry demands and increasingly-limited resources have led
              to the establishment of an education-business alliance known as the Tech-4
              High-Technology Industrial Education Consortium. Tech-4 will utilize ATE
              funding and over $1million in substantially cash value industry match to
              enhance individualized institutional efforts to design and deliver a
              collaborative, replicable Electronics Workforce Development System that
              maximizes learning for secondary and lower-division students through
              coordinated sharing of industry and educational resources. Crossing the
              boundaries of three ATE areas (Curriculum and Instructional Materials; Teacher
              and Faculty Development; and Laboratory Development), eight modules focusing on
              different aspects of the electronics industry will be located across the region
              to serve as collaborative resource centers; instructional approaches will be
              based on the latest trends in pedagogy and content. Articulated courses and
              activities will be developed or modified (using the MATEC NSF ATE Center as a
              model) through extensive collaboration among education and industry
              representatives. Outcomes will include increased enrollment, retention,
              completion, and placement rates. Thousands of students, including a significant
              number of special population students, will be encouraged to pursue higher
              education studies through enhanced coursework and career awareness focusing on
              engineering/engineering technology careers at large manufacturers and smaller
              support service companies. Community college graduates may elect to immediately
              enter employment and/or upper division study. Secondary/community college
              instructors will increase their understanding of instructional relevancy
              through professional
              development.




























