Title       : Sigma Xi Chapter-Based Program to Catalyze Institutional Adoption of Science and
               Engineering Teaching Practices for All Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1999 
File        : a9950127

Award Number: 9950127
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146022             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter D. Blair pblair@sigmaxi.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Evan R. Ferguson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela H. Blondin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cathryn A. Manduca  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sigma XI Sci Res Soc
	      
	      Research Triangle Park, NC  27709    919/549-4691

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Shippensburg University recently recognized four areas for improvement in
              undergraduate education: greater use of technology, increased student-faculty
              research, emphasis on innovative teaching strategies, and enhanced
              interdisciplinary study. Accordingly, the Departments of Geography-Earth
              Science, Biology, and Teacher Education at SU are developing the "Burd Run
              Interdisciplinary Watershed Research Laboratory" to improve undergraduate
              science education. Some existing courses are being improved through new field
              and laboratory exercises based on state-of-the-art equipment. Perhaps more
              importantly, learning is being linked across courses and disciplines, allowing
              students to build and integrate scientific skills throughout their education
              using the watershed as a common case study.  

This project is adapting
              undergraduate teaching methods and materials being used by faculty in several
              other institutions.  It is building on the work of Kenneth Potter of the
              Department of Civil Engineering at the University of Wisconsin, who has been
              teaching an innovative course on watershed monitoring.  It was also influenced
              by a project under the direction of Stephen Thompson of the Geography
              Department of Millersville University of Pennsylvania, supported by an ILI
              grant ("An Integrated Land and Water Resources Analysis Curriculum").  The
              current project reflects the evolution of good work that has been appearing on
              a number of campuses around the country.

The watershed laboratory is
              expected to: (1) provide intensive undergraduate field training through
              collection and analysis of related environmental data from a single watershed,
              (2) establish a comprehensive watershed database and digital map library using
              a geographic information system (GIS), (3) provide access to the database
              through enhanced computer laboratories and a project internet site supporting
              interdisciplinary student studies in a wide variety of environmentally related
              courses, and (4) facilitate similar approaches at other institutions through
              conference presentations, publications, and internet access to the database and
              instructional/curricular materials.

This project is improving earth-space
              science and biology education curricula by providing pre-service teachers with
              intensive training in scientific methods as applied in a field and laboratory
              learning environment.  The watershed laboratory is being made available for use
              by public school classes, giving pre-service teachers opportunities to observe
              their intended careers in action.  This project is also promoting faculty
              development through campus-wide instructional innovation workshops providing
              instruction on project equipment and GIS skills, and increasing field
              opportunities for women through related university programs.
              





\

This project is engaged in developing a series of campus-based
              workshops to be offered across the US to catalyze adoption of innovative
              materials and instructional practices in undergraduate education in science,
              mathematics, engineering, and technology.  The platform for these efforts is
              comprised of Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Society, and a group of national
              experts in undergraduate education.  This 1-year project will sponsor an
              international forum on "Reshaping Undergraduate Science and Engineering
              Education:  Tools for Better Learning,"  and two pilot workshops during the
              winter and spring of the year 2000 to test the format and content of the
              planned workshop series, to develop more fully the content and follow-up
              materials, and to refine the evaluation procedures.  A major purpose of this
              project is to develop the full capability to begin in the Fall of the year 2000
              to offer frequent workshops on the campuses of Sigma Xi chapters across the US
              to promote the adoption of a variety of improved practices in undergraduate
              education in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology.  A focus of
              these workshops will be developing institutional support for the adoption of
              innovative educational practices.
