Title       : The Faculty Associates in Science and Technology Leadership Corps Project for
               Enhancing Environmental Technology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a9950051

Award Number: 9950051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600328             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk J. Laflin KLaflin@maine.rr.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Dickinson  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Partshp for Env Tech Ed
	      584 Main Street
	      South Portland, ME  04106    207/771-9020

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Partnership for Environmental Technology Education (PETE) proposes a
              revised version of the FAST Leadership Corps Project -- Faculty Associates in
              Science and Technology Leadership Corps for Enhancement of Environmental
              Technology Education. The FAST project (FAST-I) was a very successful
              professional development program for faculty from two-year colleges. From our
              work in the program, we feel our proposed professional development activities
              hold real promise for making FAST-Il a stronger and more broadly-based faculty
              development program than its predecessor.  FAST-Il will serve a new cohort of
              70-100 faculty for each of 3 years. We plan to start the program as soon as
              funding is granted. There are three phases of activities.
	Phase 1. Curriculum
              101 --- An Introduction to Macro and Micro Issues in Science and Technology
              Education: An entering cohort would begin the FAST Project by completing a
              Web-based workshop. Faculty without Web access will receive hard
              copies.
	Phase 2.-- Faculty Associate Summer Internship: Following their
              workshop experience, Associates would enter a 4-8 week internship in private
              industry, a national laboratory, Department of Defense facility, or a federal
              or state regulatory agency.
	Phase 3.  Course and Curriculum Development
              Technical Assistance Network: In the academic year following the Summer
              Internship, Faculty Associates will work on course and curriculum design,
              developing a new course or revising an existing course.  
	The FAST-Il Project
              will rest on a sound foundation of program components developed and evaluated
              in its precursor. The data from FAST-I allow us to conclude that the FAST
              program is a viable model for community and technical college faculty
              development that will facilitate nation-wide systemic impact on environmental
              technology education.

