Title       : Quantitative Measurement and Analysis Laboratory for Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9950843

Award Number: 9950843
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne G. Strait   (Principal Investigator current)
              Protip K. Ghosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Norton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marshall Univ Res Corp
	      401 11th Street
	      Huntington, WV  25701    304/696-4837

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing a user-friendly measurement and analysis laboratory
              with tremendous flexibility for faculty instruction and undergraduate student
              research projects at Marshall University, a predominantly undergraduate
              institution.  Increasingly important in the scientific community is detailed
              quantification of variation among and between structures and organisms.  With
              the development of new instrumentation and more powerful computers and
              software, the ability to go beyond mere qualitative descriptions of variation
              is possible.  These new morphometric techniques have been developed for
              graduate studies at a few institutions (e.g., Duke University and SUNY Stony
              Brook), however, the goal of this project is, for the first known time, to
              adapt the laboratory facilities and exercises from Duke and SUNY for
              undergraduate instruction.  Currently missing from our instructional efforts is
              the ability to measure and analyze scientific specimens in a rigorous manner. 
              We have been unable to incorporate detailed structural measurement and analyses
              into many of our laboratory exercises and independent study projects.  This
              project rectifies these situations by obtaining various measurement devices,
              permitting both 2- and 3- dimensional analyses of variable-sized specimens. 
              Two-dimensional measurement will be possible with digital calipers, digitizing
              tablets, binocular microscopes, or by images obtained from either video camera
              frame-grabbing or our recently purchased Scanning Electron and Confocal
              microscopes and imported into appropriate software systems.  Students will also
              be able to make three-dimensional measurements with either 3D digitizing
              tablets, or when more precision is needed, the laser digitizing system Surveyor
              810 or VoxBlast imaging software.   Additionally, computer facilities permit
              image analysis, quantitative and statistical evaluation, graphic
              representation, and slide presentations to be conducted by the students. 
              Undergraduates encounter this technology in both introductory and advanced
              laboratory exercises.  Laboratory exercises are incorporated into five of the
              non-majors and majors introductory courses.  In addition, the lab is used in
              several upper-division courses, including a new course in scientific
              quantification and analysis.  This equipment is available to the ever-growing
              number of undergraduates involved in scientific research.  With the Capstone
              senior thesis requirements, student opportunities for independent research must
              be expanded, and the measurement/analysis laboratory provides invaluable tools
              for sophisticated problem-solving.    
