Title       : Implementing Reform in an Internet-Based Classroom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1999       
File        : a9950600

Award Number: 9950600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65298              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeff Knisley knisleyj@ETSU.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Don Hong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret J. Huang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Tennessee State Univ
	      P O Box 23 980A
	      Johnson City, TN  376140121    615/929-4112

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The major objective of this proposal is to create a computer-based classroom
              that extends beyond the four walls of its physical setting, thus allowing both
              our traditional students and our rather large population of nontraditional
              students to experience the various reform efforts that have transformed
              mathematics over the past decade. In particular, we propose to establish a
              computer-based classroom that would be utilized for lecture, demonstration and
              tutoring in the sense of traditional technology-based classrooms. In addition,
              we propose to network the classroom through a dedicated web server allowing
              access to and participation in the laboratory environment from remote
              locations. As a result, students will have the ability to begin assignments in
              the classroom while on campus, and then they will be able to complete those
              assignments from any computer with access to the Internet after they have
              departed campus.  The project is adapting for this setting the text
              "Multivariable Calculus" by McCallum, Hughes-Hallet, Gleason, et.al.
              

Although the classroom will be available to all courses taught by the
              mathematics department, we are targeting this proposal at our courses in
              multivariable calculus, numerical analysis and numerical linear algebra. These
              are the courses that stand to benefit the most from a computer-based classroom
              which is also accessible via the Internet. Each semester we have several
              continuing-education students in these courses who live and work in either
              Kingsport, Bristol or Greeneville, which range from 25 to 30 miles from the
              main campus. Requiring these students to return to campus daily, as would be
              the case with a conventional computer-based classroom, is not an option. Thus,
              we propose to teach these courses in a computer-based classroom with a physical
              presence for instruction and tutoring, and an on-line presence for outside
              assignments and projects.  

