Title       : Improving Student Learning in Introductory Chemistry: Building on the New
               Traditions Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9950952

Award Number: 9950952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence J. Boucher lboucher@towson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Crystal Yau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan J. Pribula  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph J. Topping  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Greenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard S. Preisler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Towson University
	      8000 York Road
	      Towson, MD  21252    410/704-2236

NSF Program : 7426      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND ADOPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7426,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Student achievement in our introductory chemistry courses remains
              unsatisfactory, and transfer of knowledge from the introductory courses to
              subsequent courses in chemistry and biology is also a concern. In order to
              increase student learning of introductory chemistry, and thus first time
              success, we are implementing a student-active learning environment that
              promotes conceptual understanding and critical thinking and supports a variety
              of learning styles. This is being accomplished by adapting/adopting the
              curriculum materials, approaches, information management, and computer tools
              developed in the New Traditions Project (NT). The ConcepTests, Challenge
              Problems and guided-inquiry laboratories of NT are being used. These are being
              supplemented, and new ones with a biological emphasis are being developed. The
              varied student populations in all our introductory chemistry courses ("majors,"
              "allied health," and general education) are being served. The student-centered
              environment and emphasis on effective teaching is expected to enhance the
              attractiveness of chemistry to underrepresented groups and to education majors.
               Faculty from Morgan State University and Coppin State College are joining in
              these efforts.

A guided inquiry laboratory manual is being developed for use
              in all introductory courses. Parts or options within the same experiment are
              being used to meet the laboratory goals of specific courses. Professional
              development activities focus on preparing faculty from the University, area
              community colleges and urban colleges and universities to implement the
              adapted/adopted NT curriculum. A peer assistant program is being developed to
              increase the efficiency of student learning. The assessment of student
              achievement in our new program is expected to provide valuable data concerning
              the effectiveness of NT with a variety of students and in a range of
              introductory courses.




