Title       : Environmental Sampling and Analysis: A Laboratory Course for 21st Century
               Environmental Engineers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1999       
File        : a9950452

Award Number: 9950452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn E. Katz lynnkatz@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kerry A. Kinney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Desmond F. Lawler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald E. Speitel, Jr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Environmental engineering is evolving from a field primarily concerned with
              municipal water supply, wastewater treatment processes, and end-of-pipe
              treatment of industrial wastewater discharges to one with broader concerns. The
              field now encompasses air pollution concerns more than at any previous time and
              the end-of-pipe mentality for industrial wastes is being supplemented by
              pollution reduction at the process level. Our education of undergraduate
              students in environmental engineering needs to change to reflect these advances
              in the field.   

This project adapts and updates the water chemistry
              approach and laboratory exercises available in existing published materials and
              which had been implemented previously at the University of Maine and University
              of Michigan.  This implementation will add the consideration of  measurements
              in other media (air, soil), and add more practical engineering experiences to
              enhance student learning.

Our undergraduate curriculum includes a class on
              Environmental Sampling and Analysis. For many years, this class has remained
              essentially unchanged-a strong laboratory class devoted to learning the
              standard measurement techniques for the common constituents of concern in
              municipal drinking water and wastewater treatment. The emphasis on measurement
              techniques has been on manual, wet chemistry methods of analysis.  This class
              is being revised to (i) improve the students' understanding of the relationship
              between manufacturing processes and environmental protection, (ii) broaden the
              type of samples to include air and soil samples, and (iii) enhance the
              student's understanding of modern instrumental methods of environmental
              analysis.

The revamping of this course requires a substantial commitment of
              human and financial resources. Four faculty members, three of whom have
              previously taught this class, are involved, and a review team of three external
              faculty members has been assembled. New equipment is to being purchased to
              accomplish the objectives.  The materials developed for this class are being
              disseminated broadly, primarily through the Association of Environmental
              Engineering and Science Professors, an organization with a history of sharing
              resources for laboratory-based courses.

