Title       : Using Transmission Electron Microscopy for Science Teacher Recruitment and
               Training, and Improving Biology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9950187

Award Number: 9950187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68209              (Estimated)
Investigator: Casey R. Lu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Humboldt State Univ Fnd
	      
	      Arcata, CA  95521    /   -

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project has two main thrusts: 1) forming a collaborative with school
              districts, centered on transmission electron microscopy (TEM) course work and
              research for the purpose of recruiting and training science teachers; and 2)
              bringing TEM into high school and undergraduate science curricula. The project
              is being adapted for use with a TEM facility from the K-12 microscopy
              collaborative project at CSU-Hayward called MAGIC (microscopy and graphic
              imaging center) which focuses on the use of the  SEM.  The project is forming 
              a professional collaboration between Humboldt State University and local school
              districts.  During the summer, science teachers learn TEM in a course in which
              they are paired with university students who are interested in science
              teaching, and high school students from their classes. The groups include
              teachers and students from Native American communities in our area.  After the
              summer experience with TEM, the university students join the science teachers
              and high school students in their classrooms. The university students assist
              with instructional delivery of cell biology topics, an introduction to TEM, and
              field trips to the university to see the TEM facility in operation as well as
              other campus science labs. This experience begins the process of recruiting and
              training future science teachers, and may eventually lead to a science student
              teaching placement in the classroom of the teacher with whom the university
              student was paired. It is expected that university students enter student
              teaching with a greater knowledge of the profession than they do currently.
              High school students also learn about science teaching as a career, science
              careers in general, and how one pursues these careers. Local science teachers
              receive invaluable professional growth, and become an integral part of a
              professional collaborative for recruiting and training future members of their
              profession.  This project also brings TEM into high school biology and
              lower-division biology classes at the university level, involves upper-division
              students directly in the development of TEM materials for instructional use in
              a variety of biology courses, and provides an arena for research by high school
              students, university students, high school teachers, and university faculty. 
