Title       : Product Design in Innovation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2000  
File        : a9950931

Award Number: 9950931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188425             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frances Bronet bronef@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Schumacher  (Principal Investigator former)
              Gary A. Gabriele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal addresses the problem of developing the kind of product design
              education required for the future well-being of our society and environment.
              Based on our previous work across school boundaries, we believe the challenge
              is to integrate three kinds of expertise as equal components of product design
              education: the technical, the social/cultural, and the aesthetic. 

This
              interdisciplinary project is completing the development of the RPI Product
              Design and Innovation Program (PDI), which awards a dual degree in Engineering
              Science (ES), and Science, Technology, and Society (STS).  At the heart of PDI
              is the design studio that students take every semester.  The design studio
              integrates the ES and STS curricula as well as the required elements of art and
              architectural design. The project aims, specifically, to develop these studios
              through a series of three week-long, summer sessions for fifteen faculty
              members. Each summer the faculty will conduct the necessary research on
              learning and teaching, and then design the two studios for the following
              academic year as well as redesign the two studios for the previous academic
              year. 

We are in the pilot year now, and this series of summer sessions will
              be used to develop all eight studios. The project is reaching out to other
              institutions by inviting eight professional designers to be in residence in our
              studios for brief periods during the three full academic years of the project.
              This will help to ensure that the resulting inter-school, multidisciplinary
              product design pedagogy will be shared with numerous colleagues across the
              nation. 

The audience of this project is the students who are taking PDI,
              the faculty who are teaching its studios, and the faculty and students who will
              eventually participate in similar studios at their institutions, but also,
              indirectly, all the people who will be affected by the new design pedagogy.
              

A number of sources and academic programs have been influential in shaping
              this project.  Some of these are:  
(1) The ABET 2000 standards
(2) Louis
              Bucciarelli, "Designing Engineers," (MIT Press, 1994)
(3) Clive Dym,
              "Engineering Design," (Cambridge University Press, 1994)
(4) The engineering
              design program at Carleton University in Ottawa, Canada, particularly two
              courses: Industrial Design Analysis, and Contextual Nature of Products
(5) 
              The "Gemstone" Program at the University of Maryland, especially the course
              called Introduction to Engineering Design,
(6)  A set of 3 courses at MIT,
              particularly Product Development in Manufacturing Firms, and the Integrated
              Studies Program
(7)  The Industrial Design Program in the College of
              Architecture at Georgia Institute of Technology
(8)  The Interactive
              Qualifying Project and the Major Qualifying Project (a capstone activity) at
              Worcester Polytechnic Institute, required of all students 

