Title       : A Resource Package for Integrating Mathematics and Algebra-Based Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a9950101

Award Number: 9950101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231043             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Kimball rkimball@waketech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ted Maynard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Denise M. Wetli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cyrus McCarter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maurice C. Sexton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Technical Cmty Col
	      9101 Fayetteville Road
	      Raleigh, NC  276035655    919/772-0551

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The goals of this project are 1) to construct a set of integrated activities
              that can be used to supplement mathematics and physics courses for engineering 
              technology programs at Wake Technical Community College, as well as for use in
              high school courses, 2) to help students develop a more positive attitude
              toward mathematics and physics, and 3) to better prepare students for a highly
              technical workplace. The activities will be designed to produce a student
              centered learning environment in which students use technology routinely,
              participate in hands-on experiences regularly, and acquire the skills necessary
              to immediately apply mathematics in a variety of contexts. The activities will 
              cover the same content found in Algebra and Trigonometry I, II, Calculus, and
              algebra-based physics courses.

A resource package of integrated mathematics
              and physics activities will be created by five members of the mathematics and
              physics department. They will  utilize information from the national skills
              standards, the AMATYC Crossroads document, and research from the AAPT to direct
              the content and skills required of the activities. Current involvement of the
              department in A Capstone Project (DUE 9652146 ) and local tech prep programs
              will continue and information gathered from this participation will be used as
              well. This resource package will be used in an integrated mathematics and
              physics sequence for AAS  curricula at Wake Technical Community College.
              Students' opinions of the activities will be assessed. Participating students
              will be tracked with regard to their future success.

The resource package
              will provide students with a coherent, organized array of mathematics and
              physics content. It will provide a model for an integrated  curriculum that
              other two-year colleges may replicate. Progress will be disseminated through
              AMATYC, NCMATYC, NCTM, NCCTM, and AAPT conferences across the state and nation.
              
