Title       : Applied Internet Technology: Curriculum and Careers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1999     
File        : a9950037

Award Number: 9950037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315792             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Sands sands@moraine.cc.il.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald J. Egger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Erich J. Spengler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah Z. Poropat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Reinhard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Moraine Valley Cmty Col
	      10900 South 88th Avenue
	      Palos Hills, IL  604652175    708/974-4300

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project addresses the industry need for information technology
              technicians with a specialized degree in applied Internet technologies and
              answers the need for an integrated information technology curriculum that is
              articulated from high school through the community college to the university
              level. By expanding the full articulation concept to include an option for dual
              enrollment, students least-served by higher education have the opportunity to
              train in this high demand occupation while still attending high school. The
              project provides in-depth training for high school teachers in this new field
              so that they, in turn, will be able to provide high school students with
              appropriate training. In addition, this project provides activities designed to
              increase high school students' knowledge of information technology careers and
              training required. The beneficiaries of the project are entering college
              students, high school teachers, and high school students, the majority of whom
              are members of minority groups.  

Activities include curriculum development,
              development and publication of the guide and manual, development of a dual
              enrollment course, training for high school teachers, increased knowledge about
              information technology careers for high school students and evaluation and
              dissemination of the project.

Project outcomes include: (I) a series of nine
              courses for a new A.A.S. degree in Applied Internet Technology, (2) a dual
              enrollment course with accompanying Instructor's Guide and Student Lab Manual,
              both with interactive CD-ROM, (3) workshops in technology curriculum
              development and curriculum delivery using technology, and (4) articulation of
              the A.A.S. degree to Illinois public universities. 
