Title       : Transformation of the Biology Major Core Sequence: Active Learning in
               Investigative, Problem-Solving Modules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1999       
File        : a9950835

Award Number: 9950835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce K. Ono   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Koch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Fromson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith Kandel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra Banack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Eugene Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn A. Dickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Goodhue-McWilliams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Biological Science is revising its core curriculum for majors
              to reduce the number of required core courses that are presently
              content-intensive to 4 courses that stress inquiry- and problem-based learning
              with a focus on acquiring important scientific skills. The laboratories of each
              core course impart computer skills important in scientific research,
              experimental design, and communication skills. The model for this adaptation is
              the NSF CETP (Collaboratives for Excellence in Teacher Preparation) program,
              and more specifically, the Guidelines for Reform for the 4th Annual Meeting
              (1998) of the Collaboratives from which suggestions for course revision have
              been taken.  The lecture component of these courses stress active learning and
              involve rapid, interactive assessment by means of digital keypads at each
              student's seat in the lecture hall. To implement this radical change in the way
              courses are being taught, CSUF faculty and community college faculty from
              campuses serving the majority of CSUF transfer students have formed "teaching
              collaboratives." These teaching collaboratives are linked to each of the 4 core
              courses and are responsible for developing, teaching, assessing, and
              maintaining a core course. The collaborative training imparts pedagogical and
              computer skills necessary to teach these core courses in a manner that deviates
              from the way many faculty presently teach.  PIs are collaborating with a major
              textbook publisher to develop materials for the courses that incorporate
              faculty development appropriate for teaching courses in a non-traditional way.
              The 4 courses are being phased in over 2 years, with each course offered
              initially to a group of 50 students and expanded to accommodate a typical class
              of 150-200 students. Together with internal and external facilitators,
              appropriate assessment tools are being developed to evaluate outcomes at
              several levels. The expected outcomes are students who retain basic concepts
              for success in upper division courses, a lower attrition rate, and the spread
              of improved teaching skills among other faculty, graduate students, and
              students interested in teaching careers. CSUF is a comprehensive, urban,
              commuter campus and the plans to implement and adapt approaches recognized to
              be better modes for teaching science may serve as a model for many similar
              institutions that educate large numbers of students.  

