Title       : Development of Experential Learning Modules for Environment Systems Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1999      
File        : a9950506

Award Number: 9950506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198234             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurtis G. Paterson paterson@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Learning style evaluation of more than 100 environmental engineering
              undergraduate students at Michigan Technological University indicates that the
              majority of students are active, sensing, visual, and sequential learners. 
              Unfortunately, traditional educational experiences promote passive, verbal
              skills.  While learning preferences and experiences are clearly mismatched, it
              is imperative that students develop all styles of learning.  This can only
              happen when a balanced mix of educational experiences is provided throughout
              the curriculum.

This project is developing ten learning modules for a
              sophomore level, semester-based course in Environmental Measurements and
              Analysis.  Five modules consist of four common elements: a lecture built upon a
              modified Kolb's learning cycle to introduce the motivation, theory,
              application, and analysis of environmental data using statistical data analysis
              methods; computer-based tools for student-directed learning about data analysis
              methods and instrumentation; experiential laboratory and field sessions for
              data acquisition and analysis experiments; and discussion opportunities to
              facilitate understanding of material and offer technical presentation
              opportunities.   Materials for these modules are computer-based, allowing
              classroom presentations, asynchronous learning, integration of multimedia
              elements, and widespread   dissemination via CD-ROM and the Internet.  The
              remaining five modules are similar, but do not have a computer-based learning
              tool.   As each module will be self-supporting, the tools will be available to
              other faculty to assemble in the order that suits any particular
              class.

Assessment of the learning module effectiveness will be determined
              through a variety of measures: student beta-version tool evaluation, student
              control group comparisons, evaluation of senior level work, and student exit
              interviews.  After  implementation and review at several test sites, the tools
              will be publicly released at the 2002 Association of Environmental Engineering
              and Science Professors Education Needs Conference.


