Title       : Adaption and Adoption of Workshop Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9950575

Award Number: 9950575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry L. Sarquis sarquijl@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Esther J. Gibbs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian D. Gilbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis S. Bartow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Garrison B. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lucille B. Garmon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Spuches  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Blake, Jr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 7426      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND ADOPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7426,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A consortium of seven diverse institutions has been established to adapt and
              adopt the Workshop Chemistry peer-led team-learning model, which was developed
              as part of the NSF initiative for Systemic Changes in the Undergraduate
              Chemistry Curriculum.  This 98-Workshop Chemistry Consortium (98-WCC) includes
              Coastal Carolina University (SC), Goucher College (MD), Indiana
              University/Purdue University at Indianapolis (IN), Prince George's Community
              College (MD), State University of West Georgia (GA), and State University of
              New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry (NY), with Miami
              University (OH) serving as lead institution.  The PI representing each
              institution has already implemented a pilot Workshop Chemistry program, and
              this project expands these efforts to serve larger numbers of students in a
              variety of courses.  The 98-WCC works closely with the parent coalition and the
              1997 MACK Workshop Chemistry consortium to refine and extend the Workshop
              Chemistry model by addressing workshop and laboratory integration, and the use
              of hands-on activities to serve as the basis of workshop lessons.  We also
              cooperate with the parent coalition in testing models for peer-leader training,
              stimulating collaboration between chemistry faculty and learning specialists to
              improve campus training of workshop leaders, and working with the earlier
              projects to evaluate the model and facilitate its use by other institutions. 
              Teacher preparation will be directly addressed at Goucher College which expects
              ultimately to be offering a course jointly between the chemistry department and
              the education department, exposing future teachers of science to the Workshop
              teaching environment, and at Indiana University - Purdue University,
              Indianapolis where a teaching methods course is being developed for secondary
              education majors in which they will be required to serve as student leaders for
              Workshop Chemistry.       
