Title       : Development of a Web-based Teaching and Learning System in Plant Biology at
               Miami University in Oxford, Ohio
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1999       
File        : a9950580

Award Number: 9950580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74808              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfredo J. Huerta   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy L. Smith-Huerta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              An Internet-based teaching and learning system for plant sciences is being
              developed, including the establishment of a dedicated web site that will serve
              as a repository for educational materials related to the teaching of botany. 
              This library of botanical information includes digitized and edited still video
              and microscope images, Quicktime 3.0 movies, time-lapse videos of natural
              phenomena, virtual reality simulations, as well as computer animations prepared
              by the investigators.  Most commercially available plant biology educational
              CDs, animations, and web pages suffer from a clear lack of quality and
              scientific soundness.  Thus, out of necessity, we are creating our own
              high-quality educational materials for use in lectures and labs.  In addition
              to the creation of educational materials, we are experimenting with a web-based
              publishing system for our undergraduate students as well as pre-service and
              in-service teachers.  With this system, students publish their reports,
              allowing for peer review of successful laboratory activities which the PI and
              Co-PI have developed in recent years.  An important part of this project is
              also to explore methods for training and encouraging other faculty members to
              use these educational techologies.  Finally, educational materials will be made
              available nationally, not only through the Internet but also as educational CDs
              and videos, distributed at an affordable cost through a book or CD publisher.
              This is necessary because most of our materials are based on very large file
              sizes that can't easily be transmitted over the Internet with current
              technology.  
