Title       : Classroom Experiments for Undergraduate Macroeconomics Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1999  
File        : a9950688

Award Number: 9950688
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134481             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denise Hazlett hazlett@whitman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Whitman College
	      345 Bayer Avenue
	      Walla Walla, WA  993622067    509/527-5111

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses a national concern about the need for innovation in the
              teaching of economics.  The project goal is to develop a set of macroeconomic
              experiments for the classroom.  These experiments will allow students in
              introductory and intermediate macroeconomics classes to discover macroeconomic
              concepts for themselves.  Analyzing the data they generate during the
              experiments helps students to critically evaluate theory.  Instructors who use
              classroom experiments attest to their effectiveness in increasing student
              interest, motivation, and learning.  However, the vast majority of existing
              classroom experiments illustrate microeconomic concepts.  Very few experiments
              currently exist for macroeconomics courses.  

The project is developing at
              least five macroeconomics experiments and associated writing assignments. 
              Experimental topics will include economic growth, unemployment, inflation and
              interest rates, consumption and investment, business cycles, and monetary and
              fiscal policy.   Thirteen faculty at ten different institutions have agreed to
              beta test the experiments in their macroeconomics classes.  The effectiveness
              of these experiments on student learning will be assessed quantitatively on
              another campus using a controlled experimental design applying Bloom's taxonomy
              about the hierarchy of learning (knowledge, comprehension, application,
              analysis, synthesis, and evaluation; Benjamin Bloom, editor, "Taxonomy of
              Educational Objectives, David McKay Company, Inc. 1956).  Each experiment will
              be published as a chapter in an instructor's manual on classroom experiments to
              be published by Addison-Wesley.  Dissemination plans include a broad base of
              presentations at national conferences, and articles in economics journals.  
