Title       : An Environmental Analytical Chemistry Course Based on a Local Aquifer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1999      
File        : a9950832

Award Number: 9950832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Jeffers jeffersp@cortland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles H. Spink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Cortland
	      P O BOX 2000
	      Cortland, NY  13045    607/753-2201

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The main object of this project is the development of an environmental analysis
              course, with specific emphasis on the integration of atomic spectrometry, ion
              chromatography, and infrared spectrometry into the curriculum. This course
              includes lecture and seminar, fieldwork and sampling, laboratory analysis, and
              the incorporation of results into sophisticated computer models. The course
              challenges students with complex, real-life, local environmental problems,
              where the results of their study make a significant contribution to the
              characterization and predictive modeling of a local aquifer.  This course is
              the center of our science-based environmental studies program.

The project
              activities are interdisciplinary, with seminar style classes discussing
              hydrogeology, methods and instrumentation for chemical analysis, kinds and
              sources of aquifer pollution, sampling methods, calibration and verification of
              experimental results, and modeling methods that provide a dynamic map of local
              groundwater quality.  The lab component emphasizes current instrumental methods
              and modern technologies appropriate for advanced study and research in
              chemistry and in environmental science.

The new program described in this
              proposal is an adaptation of one of the original NSF Chemistry Initiative
              projects, "Establishing New Traditions", centered at the University of
              Wisconsin, Madison.  Several strategies outlined in the New Traditions project
              are implemented.  First, the concept of establishing interdisciplinary courses
              to make important connections between chemistry and other disciplines is a
              fundamental aspect of the lab course.  The environmental focus of the project
              provides a bridge between modern analytical chemistry and the other diverse
              disciplines included within environmental science.  Second, the lab project
              uses a topic-oriented approach, dealing with a real world problem in
              environmental chemistry, a goal of the New Traditions project.  The choice of
              characterization and monitoring of the local aquifer provides a focus topic
              with scientific, economic, and political significance for students in any
              discipline.

