Title       : Development of an On-Campus Environmental/Hydrological Laboratory Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a9950260

Award Number: 9950260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55896              (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia L. Peterson peterson@wcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark L. Lord  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt G. Vandervoort  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Carolina Univ
	      
	      Cullowhee, NC  28723    704/227-7211

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Cullowhee Creek Environmental Field Station Project adapts practices that
              involve active investigations in local environmental systems using
              investigative experiences, collection and analyses of quantitative data, 
              expansion of  interdisciplinary opportunities, and emphasis on connections
              between theory and application.  This project implements investigative science
              using a variety of methods to stimulate student research questions including
              that developed by the NSF-sponsored NCL Nest project.  This thematic approach
              in labs  increases the student's ability to make connections and  increases
              crossdisciplinary interactions between programs by the development of an
              on-campus environmental laboratory site, the Cullowhee Creek Environmental
              Field Station.  Students adapt a variety of geophysical and hydrological tools
              to characterize and monitor earth materials, and ground and surface water
              systems. The site includes wells, a weather station, and a stream gage and is
              characterized by using hydrological and geophysical methods. Geophysical
              equipment will include resistivity, seismic, and ground penetrating radar,
              three techniques used in the environmental industry. Four courses,
              Environmental Geology, Soils & Hydrology, General Physics and Geophysics,
              ranging from introductory to advanced, are restructured to include integrated,
              site-based laboratories. The site is used in other courses and student research
              projects. A field-station website allows dissemination and evaluation of data
              and results are presented at meetings and published in the Journal of
              Geological Education and the American Journal of Physics.
