Title       : Infusing Quantitative Reasoning Across the Disciplines: Textbook Supplement in
               Business, Criminal Justice, Economics, History and Visual Arts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a9950615

Award Number: 9950615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank A. Cerreto   (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Quinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Melaku Lakew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maryilyn Vito  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Renganathan Iyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : R Stockton Coll of NJ
	      PO Box 195
	      Pomona, NJ  08240    609/652-1776

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Many students enter college underprepared to reason quantitatively. Even those
              students with strong backgrounds in mathematics have difficulty applying the
              mathematical ideas they have learned to situations in other disciplines. The
              dearth of quantitative resources in the curricula and textbooks of other
              disciplines exacerbate this dilemma.

Our objectives are to assist students
              in establishing the connections between mathematics and other fields of study
              enable faculty members to effectively integrate quantitative reasoning into
              their courses, and enrich the curriculum with useful educational
              materials.

In order to achieve these objectives, we propose to gather a
              group of faculty members who will create textbook supplements to be used in
              introductory courses in Business, Criminal Justice, Economics, and Visual Arts.
              The supplements will be keyed to the most popular textbooks in each
              discipline.

Each writing team will include at least one disciplinary
              specialist and one mathematician. As they develop the material, the authors
              will collaborate closely with site testers at approximately 10 colleges. The
              site testers will provide developmental feedback on the supplements. In turn,
              the authors will act as mentors, assisting the site testers with appropriate
              pedagogies.

We expect that the supplements will be commercially published
              and disseminated to a national audience. In addition, we will create a Web page
              containing information regarding the integration of quantitative reasoning and
              these disciplines.

