Title       : Gadsden State Community College: A Regional Center for Integrating Aquaculture
               Technologies in Secondary and Two-year Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9950063

Award Number: 9950063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47682              (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Simpson jsimpson@gadsdenst.cc.al.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Meeks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Cline  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward T. Donlon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard J. Vining  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gadsden State Com College
	      George Wallace Drive
	      Gadsden, AL  35903    205/546-0484

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Aquaculture is the fastest growing segment of the agriculture industry in the
              United States. In the southeastern US, production of catfish contributes nearly
              $3.5 billion to each of the four major production states (Alabama, Arkansas,
              Louisiana, and Mississippi). Advances in aquaculture technologies during the
              last decade have further increased the productive capabilities of the US.
              Although aquaculture curricula exist, few secondary or two-year educational
              programs introduce students to the field of aquaculture and the potential
              career opportunities that exist within this industry. Of the existing programs,
              few provide students with those hands-on, laboratory experiences necessary to
              meet industry standards for skilled technicians.  One goal of this project is
              to develop an educational partnership between Gadsden State Community College
              (GSCC) and three Alabama secondary schools in order to provide experiences in
              aquaculture sciences for high-potential students. Faculty from GSCC and Auburn
              University are providing technical expertise to secondary schools so they may
              set up and maintain demonstration aquaculture systems--mini-fish farms--in the
              schools.  GSCC is also developing a partnership with Auburn University and
              local industry in Alabama to offer educational experiences in aquaculture
              sciences for secondary and two-year school students and secondary teachers.
              This partnership is introducing technical curricula in aquaculture technologies
              at secondary and two-year schools, (2) providing information to students about
              potential careers in aquaculture, and (3) giving students an opportunity to
              participate in the "Intern and Learn" program--which places students on working
              fish farms.  The project's program methods and materials will be disseminated
              to other secondary and two-year schools in Alabama that have recently been
              encouraged by the aquaculture industry to begin aquaculture programs.
              















	
