Title       : Psychology Laboratory Courses and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9950913

Award Number: 9950913
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27526              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Durnam mrdurnam@adams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leola A. Alfonso-Reese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Adams State College
	      208 Edgemont Blvd.
	      Alamosa, CO  81102    719/587-7341

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to incorporate laboratory equipment and
              technology necessary to 1) effectively teach empirically-based undergraduate
              psychology and sociology courses, 2) encourage undergraduate students to pursue
              research interests, and 3) increase psychology - sociology interdisciplinary
              projects. 

The project establishes an undergraduate experimental psychology
              laboratory at the College, comprised of 12 PCs, Biopac student lab, Eprime, and
              SPSS.  Adams State College is a small institution with a very diverse
              undergraduate population (28.8% Hispanic, 2.2% African American, 1.5% Native
              American, and 1.5% Asian American).  The new equipment is being used to
              increase teaching effectiveness by allowing students to critically evaluate
              scientific findings by replicating and modifying classic experiments in the
              laboratory. This "hands-on" experience is providing elaboration of textbook
              material and making classic psychology experiments meaningful to the students.
              The laboratory is serving also to encourage undergraduate students to pursue
              research interests by exposing them to the research process. 

At Adams State
              College, the psychology department is the second largest undergraduate
              department with 123 majors, including approximately 41 double majors in
              sociology. These double-majors are now learning to perform quantitative and
              qualitative research in field-based psychology and sociology research projects.
              Altogether, these changes are expected to enhance student learning, motivate
              undergraduates to pursue graduate studies in experimental psychology, and
              increase cross-disciplinary research between psychology and sociology faculty
              and students. 

Effectiveness of this laboratory is being assessed using two
              separate measures. Results will be posted on the web and disseminated to other
              schools through regional meetings and conferences.



