Title       : Integrating a Laboratory Experience into the Undergraduate Communication &
               Computer Network Administration (CCNA) Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2001      
File        : a9950590

Award Number: 9950590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113171             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Bozik dbozik@saunix.sau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark McGinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Loftus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Wastyn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Grenier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Ambrose University
	      518 West Locust Street
	      Davenport, IA  528032829    319/383-8765

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Saint Ambrose University is one of a few schools nationally to take an
              integrated approach to computer network education in a baccalaureate degree
              program. Already, the number of qualified network administrators is lagging
              behind demand; network management is one of the fastest growing occupations
              nationwide and among the top new job opportunities. St. Ambrose prepares
              qualified network managers with a strong, consistent, and integrated education.
               

The interdisciplinary communication and computer network administration
              (CCNA) program is being adapted from several programs that have been started
              recently in other institutions.  This project is building on MIT's new
              undergraduate Communication Requirement, Walla Walla College's new flexible
              Network & Systems Administration Program, and Drexel University's undergraduate
              Information Systems program.  The developing program at Saint Ambrose offers
              students both a solid technical background as well as the "people skills" to
              work effectively with co-workers and technology users.  CCNA graduates will
              have acquired theoretical and hands-on experience with networking technology
              along with communication theory and practice in problem-solving,
              decision-making, teambuilding, writing, and making presentations. 

The CCNA
              program was planned in collaboration with regional industry leaders and
              designed specifically to meet the needs of working adults in the accelerated
              degree completion program and the traditional undergraduates. The objectives of
              this proposal are three-fold: (1) to equip two networking laboratories in which
              students gain practical experience, (2) to better integrate communication into
              the networking curriculum, and (3) to develop an interdisciplinary course that
              examines the relationship between technology and communication. The new
              laboratories allow students to apply the computer and communication theories
              learned in the classroom to "real-world," open-ended networking problems to
              hone their technical knowledge and their problem-solving, team-building and
              communication skills. 


