Title       : Cooper Union's Leadership Initiative for Undergraduate Engineers: Leadership in
               Engineering Advancing the Profession (LEAP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9950388

Award Number: 9950388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith Lyczko lyczko@cooper.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Stock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea R. Newmark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent Gallogly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cooper Union
	      Albert Nerken School of Engrg
	      New York, NY  100037120    212/353-4177

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Cooper Union's School of Engineering Leadership in Engineering Advancing the
              Profession (LEAP),addresses the issue of leadership in engineering today and
              cultivates the so-called "soft skills" encouraged by ABET 2000 criteria.  In a
              series of innovative, learner-centered LEAP workshops, recommended courses, and
              selected experiences, undergraduates are provided a structured, yet flexible,
              "menu" of participatory leadership opportunities in six key areas: diversity
              and gender, communication, experiential learning, professional and global
              experiences, arts and humanities perspectives, teaching and service. 
              Culminating in a LEAP Certificate or experienced through a LEAP Passport, LEAP
              focuses on interactive experiential workshop approaches to learning.  In
              addition to the exemplary educational products of the LEAP menu, Certificate,
              Passport, and workshops, LEAP is documented digitally on videotape to use for
              review, instruction, curriculum integration, and dissemination.  Six workshop
              video modules, an informational videotape, a handbook (combining worksheets,
              readings, improvisations, film and literature modules, role-playing scenarios,
              physical challenges, problem-solving initiatives, case studies, and evaluation
              tools), and a downloadable website are planned to provide short- and long-term
              electronic and hard copy portfolios for students and faculty, program
              evaluation, dissemination and learner assessment.  Substantial curriculum
              integration has already taken place and is planned for the future, with
              unanimous faculty and administration support. Overseen by an Advisory Panel,
              LEAP collaborates with Outward Bound7, NACME, FIPSE, NCIIA, Con Edison, NSF's
              Gateway Coalition, and the Engineering Information Foundation.  

