Title       : Consortium for the Advancement of Process Technology (CAPT)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9950071

Award Number: 9950071
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $898493             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanna L. Kile jkile@mail.mainland.cc.tx.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Raley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cathy Williams-Foster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of the Mainland
	      8001 Palmer Highway
	      Texas City, TX  775912447    409/938-1211

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The College of the Mainland, Texas City, Texas, in partnership with the major
              petrochemical and refining industries, two-year colleges and four-year
              universities of the Gulf Coast region of Texas and Louisiana (Gulf Coast
              Process Technology Alliance), is developing an industry sanctioned and driven
              standardized curriculum in process technology. The project encompasses four
              categories of activities to support this goal: curriculum development and
              improvement; instructional materials development; faculty enhancement; and
              dissemination and collaboration efforts.

This project builds upon the
              significant accomplishments of the Gulf Coast Process Technology Alliance
              including the finalization of competencies for eight common core courses in
              process technology. These common core courses are required for all newly
              approved programs in Texas that implement the A.A.S. degree in process
              technology and have been recently adopted by Louisiana. Initiatives in other
              states such as Kentucky, Oklahoma, Tennessee, and West Virginia support the
              Alliance's effort to develop an industry-sanctioned curriculum in process
              technology and are actively pursuing the adaptation and adoption of said
              curriculum. Other accomplishments of the Alliance include the first
              international Process Technology Education Conference sanctioned by the
              American Petroleum Institute and a Process Technology Career Fair designed to
              enhance the recruitment of women and minorities into this occupation. This
              project and its proposed initiatives are a logical extension of the Alliance's
              vision and will build upon established relationships between industry,
              business, government and education. This existing foundation ensures the
              immediate initiation of the proposed activities and uniquely positions this
              project to serve as a national model for forming industry/education
              partnerships and for the advancement of process technology education.

