Title       : A Regional WWW-Based FT-NMR for Chemistry Curriculum Improvements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1999     
File        : a9950554

Award Number: 9950554
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Moehring ggmoehri@govst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Salim M. Diab  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen A. D'Arcy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Soon-Ok Park  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph T. Selbka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph B. Addison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shailendra Kumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Governors State University
	      
	      Park Forest South, IL  60466    312/534-5000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Regional undergraduate instruction is being improved through use of a Fourier
              transform nuclear magnetic resonance (FT-NMR) spectrometer. Students are
              provided with a single set of knowledge and skills through a set of core
              lecture and laboratory courses. Fundamental aspects of FT-NMR spectroscopy (the
              acquisition and interpretation of I H and 13 C NMR spectra plus the nature of
              the FT-NMR experiment) is taught in the earlier courses of the set, the
              year-long organic sequence and instrumental analysis. Advanced aspects of
              FT-NMR spectroscopy (heteronuclear coupling, the relationship between
              temperature and fluxioniality, and multidimensional NMR structural analysis)
              are taught in a later course, advanced inorganic chemistry lab. An open-ended
              research problem, calling on students to creatively integrate their knowledge
              of NMR spectroscopy, provides a capstone NMR experience, in a senior lab course
              in organic chemistry.

The tools used to implement the curricular
              developments are a FT-NMR spectrometer and the World Wide Web (WWW). The FT-NMR
              is located at Governors State University, and is connected to the University of
              St. Francis and to South Suburban College, and eventually to all members of the
              South Metropolitan Regional Higher Education Consortium (SMRHEC), via the WWW.
              Faculty development, to support FT-NMR users, includes: an initial meeting of
              SMRHEC faculty devoted to a demonstration of the instrument and its
              capabilities, the establishment of a regional FT-NMR users' group, and annual
              meetings of the users' group. The annual meetings provide a forum for
              curriculum development, facilitate the transfer of curricular materials between
              institutions, provide a forum for the presentation of student research, and
              allow for discussions with invited speakers who use advanced applications of
              FT-NMR.



