Title       : Modern Physics Laboratory for Instrumentation Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9950519

Award Number: 9950519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35778              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Wieliczka wieliczkad@umkc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerzy M. Wrobel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer L. Snyder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              One of the weaknesses of present day physics graduates, beginning their
              professional career with a bachelor's degree, is a lack of appropriate research
              and communication skills and experience with modern scientific equipment.
              Identifying this weakness,  this project focuses on integrating inquiry-based
              learning in our bachelor degree program in physics with an emphasis on
              Instrumentation.  In this program, the students are required to take an
              upper-level instrumentation course  involving a research experience in faculty
              laboratories.  The program fills the gap between the low-level skills taught in
              the introductory physics labs and the more advanced research skills needed in
              the Instrumentation Course.  A review of the literature makes apparent that
              inquiry-based approach to the laboratories can provide the students the
              opportunity to learn necessary research skills.  Multiple NSF-funded projects
              that have developed laboratories in spectroscopy, modern physics, and material
              science are the basis of the adaptation and implementation efforts in this
              project. Elements of these projects are  incorporated into a single semester
              course where the students work in three broad areas of interest:
              1)interference, 2) spectroscopy, and 3) materials science.  This modern physics
              lab combines theoretical mastery of physical concepts with practical mastery of
              the skills necessary to work with modern scientific equipment and solve
              research problems using an inquiry approach.  Specifically, after a guided
              introduction to the techniques, relevant literature, and available equipment,
              the students are responsible for developing their own research problems
              concerning the topic. This requires researching the literature and writing
              brief proposals for the three projects. The time scheduled for each project
              allows the students flexibility to change their proposed procedures dependent
              on the incoming results. At the end of each project the students submit written
              reports, and at the end of the semester they select one project for a seminar
              presentation.  The effectiveness of this course is evaluated through several
              mechanisms: student surveys, analysis of the students' coursework, surveys of
              employers to evaluate the long-term effect of the course. 
