Title       : A Computer-Based Laboratory-Classroom for Active Learning In Introductory
               Physics and Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9950415

Award Number: 9950415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27956              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Riedesel mriedesel@austinc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald C. Salisbury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              E. Larry Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Austin College
	      900 North Grand
	      Sherman, TX  750904440    214/892-9101

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Austin College Department of Physics is adapting active-learning techniques
              from several sources for use in a new small multipurpose classroom-laboratory
              in the teaching of introductory physics and astronomy. In our two-semester
              calculus-based Introduction to Physics we are adapting and implementing
              Workshop Physics developed by Priscilla Laws at Dickinson College. The same
              classroom-laboratory space, equipped with seventeen networked Macintosh G3
              computers accommodating a maximum of thirty-two students, is the site of an
              algebra-based introductory physics course in which we are implementing and
              adapting the Peer Instruction technique (Mazur, 1997). Real time student
              interactivity is achieved through a trial networked version of Classtalk 
              developed by Better Education Inc.  We are adapting experiments from the
              RealTime Physics suite developed by Sokoloff, Thornton and Laws for use in this
              course so as to bring them into synchrony with the Workshop Physics weekly
              schedule. We use appropriate evaluation instruments, such as the widely-used
              conceptual assessments, to monitor our efforts making the results available via
              physics meetings, web pages, and articles in appropriate periodicals. The same
              facility is used to adapt and implement activity-based materials in a
              one-semester introduction to astronomy for non-scientists. Specifically, we are
              adapting and expanding upon the peer instruction techniques developed by  Paul
              Green at the Harvard Center for Astrophysics, the discovery based astronomy
              activities (Robbins, et. al., 1995), and astronomy modules developed by Project
              CLEA (Marshall at Gettysburg College).

