Title       : A Laboratory For State -Of-The-Art Education Of Electrical And Mechanical
               Engineering Students in Dynamic Systems and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9950723

Award Number: 9950723
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50210              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bill M. Diong bdiong@ece.utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rick Zadoks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ryan B. Wicker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project expands the area of Dynamic Systems and Control in the Electrical
              and Mechanical Engineering disciplines at The University of Texas at El Paso. 
              Student learning is to be enhanced by:
1.  incorporating laboratory
              experiments into the present lecture-only Electrical Engineering (EE) Controls
              course, and 
2. by updating the current set of Mechanical Engineering (ME)
              Controls laboratory experiments. 

The new laboratory is adapted from a
              Controls laboratory concept that was originally implemented  at The University
              of Texas - Pan American.  Several changes to the original formulation result in
              an improvement in the laboratory's functional and cost effectiveness.  Students
              in the two (EE and ME) Controls courses will use state-of-the-art software and
              hardware in this lab to:
1. practice a model-based simulation-oriented
              approach to control systems design and development, and 
2. implement Digital
              Signal Processor (DSP)-based controllers and physically demonstrate their
              implemented controllers on both educational and industrial hardware, such as
              electromechanical actuators, inverted pendulums and simple robots.  

The
              project aims to increase the number of underrepresented minority students and
              graduates in the field of Engineering.  Actual and/or videotape demonstrations
              of the more 'exciting' experiments as well as dissemination on the World Wide
              Web will be carried out to motivate lower-level Engineering students and to
              influence pre-college students in the region (the majority of whom are
              Hispanic) to study Engineering.  Finally, this project serves as an improved
              Dynamic Systems and Control model for other schools.

