Title       : The Establishment of a Robotic Telescope Facility for Undergraduate Astronomy
               Laboratory Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a9950630

Award Number: 9950630
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94734              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Fanelli fanelli@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Duncan L. Weathers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher L. Littler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A remotely-operated robotic observatory creates an exemplary laboratory science
              curriculum in undergraduate astronomy education by implementing a student
              observatory that actively collects data in the form of digital (CCD) images. 
              We intend to model this observatory after the successful Iowa Automated
              Telescope Facility (funded in part through the NSF-ILI Program,  
              http://denali.physics.uiowa.edu/).  Laboratory exercises described in the
              University of Iowa Laboratory Manual, "Imaging the Universe" (Mutel and  Palen
              1997) are adapted for the our program.  These exercises, combined and
              implemented with locally developed laboratories, are an integral component to
              the astronomy laboratory experience.   The observatory is located approximately
              thirty-five miles north of the our campus, at the nearest dark-sky site to the
              Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex.  Remotely-operated telescopes linked to the
              Internet are highly valuable for astronomy education since they permit students
              to conduct individualized experiments and retrieve data via a personal
              computer.  With the assistance of an attached weather station to monitor
              observing conditions throughout the night, a fully autonomous telescope
              provides flexibility to the laboratory program by allowing queue-scheduled
              observing making the most use of good weather without the need for an on-site
              operator.  The technology for robotic telescopes has matured rapidly and is at
              present in use in programs involving students from K-12 through graduate
              school.   The proposed observatory is used for astronomy laboratories that
              accompany introductory courses, populated largely by non-science students.  Our
              goal is to provide students with a solid understanding of the scientific
              research process by implementing an experimental format into the laboratory.
              Using digital images from the robotic telescope, students conduct experiments
              in a manner similar to those employed in astronomical  research.  Students are
              motivated by having a sense of  ownership of their data.  A secondary focus is
              to enhance upper-level research opportunities for physics students through
              directed  projects using the observatory.  We are adapting instrumentation,
              software, instructional practices and procedures, and applicable exercises from
              the University of Iowa facility (Downey and Mutel 1996, ASP Conference  
              Series, Vol. 101, pg. 380).  These exercises are the centerpiece of the
              laboratory curriculum.  Our final product is an automated student observatory
              and a set of published introductory  astronomy laboratories suitable for any
              program with acce
