Title       : A Multidisciplinary Control System Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9950882

Award Number: 9950882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46433              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ravi P. Ramachandran ravi@rowan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie Farrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jawaharlal Mariappan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rowan University
	      201 Mullica Hill Road
	      Glassboro, NJ  080281701    856/256-4057

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty-of-Engineering project leads to the configuration of a hands-on
              method of teaching control systems from a multidisciplinary point-of-view. This
              project addresses the demand of industry for acquiring control engineers with a
              broad set of technical skills and a comprehension of the diverse practical
              applications of control. In addition, it is expected that the graduate is able
              to move across rather artificial program boundaries with great ease.

Twelve
              multidisciplinary experiments that integrate hands-on experience and software
              simulation are proposed. The first four experiments deal with different first
              order systems and emphasize their mathematical equivalence. The next two
              experiments expose the students to Proportional, Integral and Derivative (PID)
              control using both a DC motor and feedback process control. Performance
              analyses and the use of instrumentation in control are the fundamentals of the
              next two experiments. The last four experiments deal with real systems like an
              engine, helicopter, ball and beam and an antilock brake system. Software is
              integrated with the experiments through MATLAB and SIMULINK. Digital control
              will be part of some of the experiments.

The multidisciplinary nature of
              control theory is motivated by system equivalence, an existing theme that we
              are adapting into our curriculum. This theme is well emphasized at various
              universities from which classic textbooks have been written. Examples include
              the University of California (Davis), University of Texas (Austin), State
              University of New York (Stony Brook), Stanford University and Rutgers
              University. We are also seeking to implement computer and microprocessor based
              control in our project as is done at Bucknell University, Purdue University and
              the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology.


