Title       : Adressing Different Learning Styles in Thermodynamics with Graphical
               Simulations: Proof-of-Concept
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1999       
File        : a9950869

Award Number: 9950869
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis E. Davenport                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74675              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christa M. Weisbrook weisbrookc@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Laffey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick A. Tebbe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Traditional instruction methods in engineering do not address all types of
              learners. This is particularly true for the thermodynamics curriculum, which is
              poorly suited to visual and active learning types. The goal of this
              proof-of-concept project is to develop an educational software material, which
              combines computer simulation and visualization to improve learning
              effectiveness for students in thermodynamics. The proposed software will be
              modular and expandable over time. The programming structure will take advantage
              of graphical programming methods in the G language of LabVIEW. The user
              interface will be completely graphical as well. Indicators and controls will
              mimic real-life devices for ease of student use. The specific learning
              objectives are: 1) improvement in instruction for different learning types, 2)
              an increase in the amount of course content which can be covered in a semester,
              and 3) facilitation of student exploration/design. Material, which simulates a
              basic thermodynamic power cycle, will be created to evaluate the concept. Trial
              implementation in an Engineering Thermodynamics classroom will be performed to
              allow evaluation of the project concept and outcomes in meeting objectives. The
              evaluation will emphasize the effectiveness of the material for different types
              of learners, including, relevance to underrepresented groups. Program
              documentation will be produced, as well as curriculum development plans for
              thermodynamics courses in Mechanical, Nuclear, and Chemical Engineering.
              Results will be disseminated primarily through electronic means and technical
              publication.
