Title       : LabWrite: Instructional Modules Utilizing the Lab Report to Help Students Write
               and Visualize Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1999    
File        : a9950405

Award Number: 9950405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87260              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Carter mpc@unity.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Wiebe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ann M. Penrose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn R. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              An interdisciplinary faculty team from the University is leading a 12-month
              planning effort to lay the basis for developing four commercially publishable
              instructional modules that better utilize the lab report to prepare
              undergraduates in the practice of scientific thinking and communication, both
              verbal and visual. In different combinations of hard copy, web-based, and/or
              CD-ROM format, each module is aimed at a specific population concerned with the
              lab report assignment: undergraduates (including pre-service teachers),
              graduate teaching assistants, faculty, and their respective institutional
              centers for teaching and learning. 

During this 1-year effort, the PIs are
              engaged in: 
(1) characterizing the precise national need for these materials
              in order to refine the approach most suitable to meet those needs; 
(2)
              creating, piloting, revising, and field-testing a prototype of LabWrite for
              Teaching Assistants; 
(3) building relationships with potential commercial
              publishers; and 
(4) seeking further funding for full-scale development.
              

Most of the content for this module will be developed during the Summer
              1999, piloted in introductory Chemistry sections and transformed into web-based
              prototypes during the Fall 1999, and field-tested in this web-based format in
              introductory Chemistry, Engineering, Geology, and Zoology sections in Spring
              2000. PIs include three nationally recognized researchers in the rhetoric of
              science and technology and writing across the curriculum as well as a graphics
              communication researcher from the Department of Mathematics, Science, and
              Technology Education. 

The project team will work with an advisory committee
              of science, engineering, and design faculty from the University and with two
              distinguished faculty from MIT (Leslie Perelman) and University of Michigan
              Leslie Olsen who are leading efforts (one NSF-funded) at their own institutions
              to reform instruction in scientific and technical communication. 

The
              LabWrite Series is being designed to reach all majors in lab-based science and
              engineering courses, including pre-service teachers and graduate teaching
              assistants preparing to become faculty.  Much of their content of LabWrite is
              intended to be designed for web- and CD-ROM-based delivery.  

