Title       : Introduction of Optical Microscopy into the Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1999    
File        : a9950765

Award Number: 9950765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46185              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia S. Hill pshill@marauder.millersv.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Iannone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lyman H. Rickard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Edward Rajaseelan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millersville University
	      
	      Millersville, PA  17551    717/872-3024

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is fourfold: (1) to use stereomicroscopes, polarized
              light microscopes and digital image capturing equipment in chemistry, earth
              science and occupational safety and hygiene management majors at Millersville
              University; (2) to provide professional development for university faculty in
              the use of optical and polarized light microscopy in undergraduate teaching;
              (3) to enhance the interdisciplinary collaboration between several departments
              at Millersville University of Pennsylvania; and (4) to serve as a model program
              for the introduction of optical stereomicroscopy and polarized light microscopy
              as a part of analytical problem-solving in the chemistry curriculum. This
              project is a direct result of the collaboration with colleagues supported
              through several NSF grants in both course and curriculum development (NSF-DUE
              92-54291 and 96-53252) and in laboratory instrumentation (NSF-DUE 9153695), as
              well as the PI's work on a current NSF-DUE grant (9752769). 

This project
              establishes six (6) optical microscopy "stations", composed of a stereo
              microscope and a polarized light microscope with light sources, within new
              general chemistry lab facilities.  In addition, a color video camera, a
              Windows-based digital imaging system and an SVGA projector, is made available
              so that microscopic images can be both projected onto a classroom screen for
              teaching purposes, as well as digitized, captured and archived for inclusion in
              reports, publications and presentations by students and faculty.  Five (5)
              chemistry faculty are being trained in PLM and optical microscopy through this
              project, and as a result, optical microscopy and PLM are being introduced in
              the following chemistry courses: general chemistry; analytical chemistry;
              polymer chemistry; introductory and advanced inorganic chemistry; environmental
              chemistry; and a non-science majors course on chemistry and art. The microscopy
              lab is available for use by the earth science department in teaching
              geochemistry and mineralogy courses.  Faculty and students in the occupational
              safety and hygiene management program in the department of industry and
              technology have access to the equipment.

The impact of microscopy-based
              laboratory activities on student learning and conceptual understanding is being
              evaluated throughout the project in accordance with the model of Nurrenbern and
              Pickering, (J. Chem. Ed, 1987).  A materials package including laboratory
              experiments, demonstrations, equipment specifications, reference materials, and
              sources of training is being compiled and distributed. 

