Title       : An Integrated Polymer Synthesis, Processing, and Characterization Laboratory for
               Physics and Chemistry Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9950242

Award Number: 9950242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91935              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Tyler dtyler@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael M. Haley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D. Kevan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In response to the requests of local industrial partners, the University of
              Oregon is adapting their curriculum in polymer science to better prepare
              undergraduate students for careers in the polymer sciences. This change in
              curriculum involves the creation of an internship program for our undergraduate
              students with local polymer industry and the implementation of a new
              undergraduate polymer laboratory. The intern program is modeled after a NSF
              funded internship program for undergraduate students with the semiconductor
              industry. In our program, students spend three terms (an academic year) working
              as interns.  To prepare their laboratory skills in polymer synthesis and
              characterization, a polymer characterization laboratory is introduced into the
              curriculum.  Students must successfully complete the laboratory before entering
              the intern program.  The laboratory course constitutes an essential component
              of the program since it exposes physics and chemistry majors to cutting edge
              issues in polymer science using state of the art instrumentation. Our work
              involves: 1) facilities that enable cutting-edge synthetic techniques such as
              synthesis in microemulsions and air-sensitive anionic synthesis, 2)
              capabilities for molecular weight and size distributions that facilitate the
              connection between synthesis, processing, and properties, 3) a differential
              scanning calorimeter for characterization of polymer thermal properties, and 4)
              a testing station for characterization of polymer mechanical properties.  These
              facilities serve to delineate the underlying goal of our program which is also
              coincident with that of our industrial affiliates: to help students develop an
              understanding of the overall process of polymer material production, from
              state-of-the-art synthetic techniques through detailed microscopic and
              macroscopic characterization.
