Title       : BIRDD Digital Library: Enhancing Evolution Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a9950740

Award Number: 9950740
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193565             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Jungck jungck@beloit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank Price  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sam Donovan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beloit College
	      
	      Beloit, WI  53511    608/365-3391

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Beagle Investigations Return with Darwinian Data (BIRDD) Digital Library is
              an "alpha" prototype of a groundbreaking curricular resource for teaching
              evolution. BIRDD makes accessible a tremendous variety and quantity of data
              that have been collected from numerous scientific expeditions to the Galapagos
              ever since Darwin's classic visit. Even though this prototype has received
              enthusiastic response from students, professors, and research biologists, BIRDD
              is being significantly improved and extended.  The alpha prototype had limited
              bio-diversity (it only contained information on finches not tortoises, iguanas,
              lizards, boobies, frigate birds, penguins, or any plants, fungi, invertebrates,
              or prokaryotes), it was difficult for novices to navigate, had limited linkages
              between data sets, contained no videos for behavioral or other temporal
              analyses, and data were difficult to export to other software packages except
              as tab delimited data.  Thus, BIRDD is being expanded through (1) new software
              development, (2) acquisition of important new resources of biological,
              geological, meteorological, and oceanic data, (3) construction of
              inter-linkages and more export functions so that the data can be analyzed
              phylogenetically, spatially, and temporally, (4) participatory design through
              intensive workshop and classroom field testing and formative evaluation, and
              (5) the development of student research problems using the BIRDD Digital
              Library.  The materials are being field-tested with formative evaluation with
              dissemination to other educators to improve BIRDD's availability and
              pedagogical potential.  We make a case that the quality of biology education
              for general and pre-professional students alike is directly related to how well
              we help them understand fundamental concepts of evolutionary biology. The
              general level of understanding of evolution by citizens is inadequate. To
              improve this situation, students need to have access to extensive data and
              tools that support laboratory and fieldwork, and educators need to have access
              to pedagogical models of laboratories for evolution. BIRDD provides both.
