Title       : Science Education for New Civic Engagement & Responsibility (SENCER)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a9950908

Award Number: 9950908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199160             (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Burns burns@aacu.nw.dc.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assn. of American Colleges
	      1818 R Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20009    202/387-3760

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing a platform from which to engage in national
              dissemination in which faculty will learn about the effective teaching of
              science through special courses that examine public issues and teach rigorous
              science within the framework of those issues.  The initial model is to teach
              rigorous biology within the framework of a course focused on HIV & AIDS.  Other
              models are being prepared during the grant period to offer a broad menu of
              public issues with important underlying themes of science related phenomena. 
              The dissemination model will use the Association of American Colleges &
              Universities (AAC&U) network of institutions and meetings to offer faculty
              workshops to teams of faculty and a graduate student that will use the workshop
              as a springboard to offer spin-off courses on their own campuses.  

Each
              model employs the most sophisticated, hands-on pedagogy and technology, and
              offers the possibility of featuring a series of "wrap-around' courses in a
              variety of other science, social science, humanities, and pre-professional
              disciplines.    

Each workshop team will consist of at least one member of
              the faculty in a science department, in a pre-professional or professional
              school, a social science department, and a graduate student.   Participants
              will be selected to participate in an intensive, residential faculty
              development institutes.  The most promising and effective local spin-off
              initiatives and reforms that are developed as a result of attendance at these
              institutes will be highlighted and presented to AAC&U members and other
              interested parties through AAC&U's extensive communications and meeting
              infrastructure.  
