Title       : Implementation of a Writing-Intensive Chemistry Laboratory Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9950674

Award Number: 9950674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128734             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Mosher mosherm@unk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. D. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher L. Exstrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska Kearney
	      25th Street & 9th Avenue
	      Kearney, NE  68849    308/865-8441

NSF Program : 7426      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND ADOPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7426,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Guidelines at our institution require students to complete 12 credit hours in
              writing-intensive courses.  The original intent was to incorporate
              writing-intensive status into lower division courses.  Instead, it has been
              applied to upper division lecture courses where student populations require
              less instructor work, defeating the purpose of the writing-intensive
              guidelines.  Since we have noticed deficiencies in writing skills, defined as
              writing, reading, comprehension, and critical thinking, in our graduates in
              chemistry, we are implementing a curriculum reform that corrects this
              deficiency.  The Molecular Science project has developed software, Calibrated
              Peer Review (CPR), that improves student writing skills without increasing
              instructor workloads.  Our adoption of this program begins the writing
              education of science majors early in their careers by allowing instructors the
              option to offer writing-intensive courses at the freshman and sophomore level. 
              More importantly, adaptation of CPR to the laboratory courses removes the
              "fill-in-the-blank" approach to teaching large sections of chemistry
              laboratories.  Such an approach provides students with skills in data
              manipulation and technical writing at all levels of the
              curriculum.

Incorporation of CPR into the chemistry curriculum is occurring
              in stages.  The first two stages require pilot studies in chemistry courses and
              laboratories and assessment of the results.  The third phase incorporates CPR
              into the entire chemistry curriculum.  Subsequent phases integrate CPR into the
              entire science curriculum, including laboratories, at our institution and at
              area schools.

Implementation of this plan is expected to produce students
              with greatly improved science writing skills.  Undergraduate students should
              gain an understanding of how to write technical reports, think about data
              critically, and integrate the data into the preparation of a justified set of
              conclusions.  The ease with which this can be done by using CPR should free
              students to take interest in the science behind the experiments.
