Title       : A Laboratory for Compter Organization and Architecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 2,  2002    
File        : a9950364

Award Number: 9950364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65097              (Estimated)
Investigator: Seymour Goodman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Vickery  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Research Foundation
	      555 West 57th Street
	      New York, NY  10019    212/417-8423

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Students who currently graduate with a major in Computer Science have an
              unrealistic picture of the methods of modern digital hardware design and in
              most cases lack any hands-on experience in working with digital circuits. Even
              people who intend to work only with software need knowledge of this material.
              There is, for example, an increasing tendency to use retargetable compilers,
              which require as input a high-level description of the hardware on which the
              software will ultimately operate. In order to use the hardware effectively, a
              programmer should understand something about the architecture of the processor
              on which the code will operate. Many new architectures are being developed as a
              result of advances in VLSI (Very Large Scale Integrated circuit) design. It is
              the objective of this proposal to give all of our students some knowledge of
              the methods that are used in designing modern digital circuits. We also wish to
              provide those students who are interested with hands-on experience in designing
              and using digital logic as a method of teaching them about computer
              architecture.

All students will be taught about VHDL (VHSIC (Very High-Speed
              Integrated Circuit) Hardware Description Language) and will use CAD (Computer
              Aided Design) tools to design and simulate circuits. A lab will be used in
              teaching computer architecture to enable interested students to work with the
              hardware. Students who take the new architecture course will have the
              opportunity to design, interface, and test a working processor, The intended
              outcome of this project is not to produce highly skilled computer designers,
              but rather, to turn out computer scientists who can make maximum use of
              architectures that are produced by them and who can work in the area of
              developing the tools that they use. The project should also generate teaching
              materials that can be used by other institutions. The results will be
              disseminated both over the Internet and through conventional publication.

