Title       : A Hybrid Solution to the Human/Machine Inspection Systems Design Problem in
               Manufacturing and Service Industries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9800817

Award Number: 9800817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204576             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anand K. Gramopadhye agramop@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian J. Melloy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Darren M. Dawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9800817
Gramopadhye  
     The research addresses issues related to
              human-machine systems design specifically as it applies to inspection system
              design. As part of the research three different types of inspection systems
              will be developed: the human, the automated and the hybrid (human + machine)
              inspection. Following this step, controlled studies will be conducted which
              will evaluate the performance of the inspection systems for various
              experimental factors (e.g., number of defects, defect types, defect contrast,
              etc.).  Performance on the inspection task will be measured using speed,
              accuracy, signal detection theory measures, and subjective evaluation measures.
              The development of the different inspection systems and the follow up studies
              conducted on the three systems will lead to an evaluation of the relative
              merits of the human, automated and hybrid inspection systems. Moreover, the
              research will also investigate issues related to dynamic function allocation in
              hybrid inspection systems. As part of this step, various human-machine
              communication alternatives will be considered. Specifically, explicit and model
              based communication will be considered.  Finally, it will lead to the
              development of a framework for human-machine function allocation in an
              inspection system as a step toward establishing the best system performance.
 
                 It is anticipated that the results of the research will lead to a better
              understanding of the issues related to human/machine inspection system design.
              This will provide system designers to make the best use of the respective
              advantages of humans and machines in designing  the best performance inspection
              systems, ultimately leading to improved inspection performance, and therefore,
              improved quality. The generic nature of this research will facilitate in
              applying the results not only to a wide variety of inspection tasks within the
              manufacturing environment such as printed circuit board inspection,  etc., but
              also to other tasks with significant visual search and decision making
              components (e.g., real-time military target acquisition, display
              monitoring).







