Title       : PPD/R&D: Design of Physical Models in Biology and Chemistry for Blind University
               Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a9800281

Award Number: 9800281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388698             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis M. Fantin dfantin@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul J. Fonteyn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The primary objective of this project is to design and fabricate 
              three-dimensional models that illustrate key structures and  relations in
              biology and chemistry for use by visually-impaired  students and scientists. 
              The principal subject areas of focus  are cellular physiological properties and
              biochemical/molecular  processes of the cell.  Ten stand-alone physical models 
              representing key processes will be created and evaluated during  the course of
              the project.  An eleventh model that combines the  periodic table of the
              elements and the chart of the nuclides into  a three-dimensional tactile array
              will introduce students to  fundamental principles in chemistry and physics and
              thus give a  context for understanding more complex biological processes.  The 
              models created will be used as central study aids for  visually-impaired
              students in beginning and intermediate level  courses in general biology, cell
              biology, biochemistry, molecular  biology, genetics, biophysics, and chemistry.
               Model design and  fabrication will be carried out by a team of individuals
              from the  scientific disciplines and specialists from the Department of  Design
              and Industry.  Audio tape descriptions and a research  guide for each model
              will be developed to introduce the student  both to the model and to its
              broader scientific implications.  In  addition, a speech recognition program
              that runs on a PC will be  used to access and retrieve spoken information about
              individual  model components.  Prototype models will be fabricated, and a 
              strategy will be developed to reproduce them inexpensively to  enable blind
              students and scientists to acquire these models  without significant financial
              hardship.
