Title       : Logic-Based Approaches to Learning and Knowledge Discovery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9800070

Award Number: 9800070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gyorgy Turan gyt@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. Sloan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Logic forms a basic framework for artificial intelligence,  including machine
              learning and knowledge discovery in  databases. Predicate logic, which is used
              by several machine  learning systems, poses both open problems of learning 
              complexity and questions that do not arise in other  approaches to learning.
              There are algorithmic approaches to  knowledge discovery in databases that
              suggest several open  problems for propositional and predicate logic, and 
              complexity theory. Some of the learnability issues specific  to predicate logic
              that will be studied are the role of  background knowledge, the efficiency of
              the algorithmic  techniques of logic learning, such as least general 
              generalizations, the complexity of learning multiple  predicates, and types of
              noise that either are specific to  predicate logic, or appear to behave
              differently for  predicate logic. The first two issues will be studied using 
              the producthomomorphism method.  This technique, introduced  by one of the PI's
              and developed further by both PI's,  enables the use of combinatorial tools in
              constructing  learning algorithms.  One extension to be studied is  learning
              certain broader classes of logic programs, which  are useful for practical
              applications.  The complexity of  the general product-homomorphism problem will
              also be  investigated. In the area of noise-tolerance, one topic to  be studied
              is the complexity of learning Boolean  conjunctions in noise models that are
              more difficult for the  learner than random classification noise.  This could
              lead  to extensions of previous work of the PI's on learning noisy  logic
              programs. Expanding the scope of learning problems  studied in learning theory,
              the project will construct  algorithms for relations definable in a finite
              model by  restricted classes of formulas, such as formulas with a  bounded
              number of variables.  This continues the model  theoretic approach to learning,
              studied earlier by one of  the PI's.  Another, related family of problems
              involves  classes of atomic f ormulas satisfying first-order  constraints. In
              knowledge discovery in databases, a logic-  based approach is to find the
              theory of the database, which  means identifying all interesting statements
              that hold in  the database, using an appropriate notion of interesting 
              statement.  Algorithmically, this requires polynomial-delay  listing algorithms
              for different classes of objects, such as  the maximal frequent sets of a 0-1
              matrix.  The project will  study the possibilities of gaining efficiency by
              taking into  account the structure of the database.  This leads to  questions
              about restricted classes of threshold circuits,  and generalized versions of
              the minimal hitting set listing  problem. The methods to be used are primarily
              combinatorial,  such as products and homomorphisms of graphs, and model- 
              theoretic games. This project will contribute to the  understanding of the
              limits of efficient learnability in  predicate logic.  It will also develop new
              algorithms that  may be useful for practical machinelearning systems, and 
              contribute to the methodology for tolerating noisy data.  The overall goal of
              this work is to gain a better  understanding of the computational complexity
              aspects of  learning using logic.
