Title       : PPD/DP: Demonstration Project to Promote Opportunities in Science, Mathematics,
               and Engineering to Students with Disabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  2000  
File        : a9800210

Award Number: 9800210
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449997             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Lovelock dsl@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Glen C. Gerhard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Boyless  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Georgia L. Ehlers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kent B. Kloepping  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this three-year project is to create a model program that targets
              students with  disabilities from middle school through graduate school to
              increase the number studying  science, mathematics, engineering, and technology
              (SMET).  The project will promote  educational opportunities for SMET middle
              school, high school, and university students with  physical disabilities
              through various approaches.  To achieve both academic and professional 
              success, these individuals will require the removal of architectural,
              technological, and  societal barriers that presently exist.  This project has
              the following objectives:  To increase  the proportion of the middle school
              students with physical disabilities throughout Arizona  who will pursue SMET
              subjects for college preparation when they become high school  students.      
              To increase the proportion of the high school students with physical
              disabilities who will     pursue SMET subjects when they become college
              students.     To increase the proportion of the college undergraduate students
              with physical disabilities     who will pursue SMET subjects when they become
              graduate students to establish a     mentoring and role model system between
              SMET middle and high school students,     college students, and SMET
              professionals in industry and in education, all with physical     disabilities.
                   To educate school teachers and college faculty--particularly international
              faculty and     teaching assistants--peers, co-workers, and parents, resulting
              in the elimination of     stereotyping and the encouragement of self-esteem
              among students with disabilities.     To assess existing SMET laboratories at
              the University of Arizona (UA) with a view to     transforming them into
              barrier free environments allowing full access to all equipment     contained
              therein.    Their approach consists of eight interrelated components:  1. 
              Middle/High School Student Outreach.  This component is designed to increase
              the  interest in SMET fields by middle and high school s tudents with
              disabilities.  It is  accomplished through mentoring by current UA SMET
              students with disabilities and faculty,  who travel to schools throughout the
              state meeting with students.    2.  Middle/High School Counselor/Teacher
              Training Workshops.  UA will host workshops  for school counselors and teachers
              focusing on strategies to encourage students with  disabilities to pursue a
              career in a SMET field.  The two -hour workshops will be conducted  by UA SMET
              faculty and UA students who are physically disabled.    3.  Encouragement
              grants.  We will award 15 grants, of $ 1,500 each, through a competitive 
              process to science/math teachers who attended the workshops for middle/high
              school teachers  and counselors.  These grants will encourage the design of
              projects to promote continued  study in SMET among students with physical
              disabilities.    4.  Summer Institute.  This is a five-week long summer
              institute held at UA for 15 middle  school students with physical disabilities.
               Topics will be drawn from Biology, Chemistry,  Computer Science, Engineering,
              Mathematics, and Physics.    5.  Mentoring Undergraduates.  At UA, SMET
              graduate students with physical disabilities  will mentor SMET undergraduates
              with physical disabilities.    6.  Industry Outreach.  We will establish
              contacts and match professionals with physical  disabilities in industry and
              education with middle school, high school, undergraduate, and  graduate
              students with disabilities.    7.  Lab Facilities Survey. Assessments of
              existing UA SMET laboratory facilities will be  performed and changes needed to
              make each laboratory barrier free will be specified.    8.  Faculty Development
              Workshops.  Workshops for UA faculty and Graduate Teaching  Assistants will be
              held on disability awareness and alternative teaching methods.
