Title       : Dissertation Research: Elite Control and Chiefdom Development in the Eastern
               Caribbean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1998   
File        : a9800289

Award Number: 9800289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11905              (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Richardson, III JBR3+@PITT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. James Richardson, Mr. John Crock will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological research on
              Anguilla, a small relatively flat limestone island with an area of 55 square km
              and a maximum elevation of 65 m. It is the northernmost island in the Lesser
              Antillean chain and has been the subject of intensive archaeological survey.
              Because deposition rate is low and arable land extensively plowed it is likely
              that all archaeological sites are known. Most Caribbean islands were occupied
              as early as the first millennium BC and underwent significant change at roughly
              the end of first millennium AD. The post Saladoid cultures are characterized by
              larger populations who inhabited both more and larger sites in comparison to
              their earlier counterparts. The appearance of large numbers of exotic and rare
              items such as ground stone axes and copper ornaments and their unequal
              distribution over space suggests the emergence of a hierarchical chiefly
              society. On Anguilla Mr. Crock has located several sites which span the pre and
              post Saladoid period as well as many others which follow the transition. The
              goal of his research is to search for the mechanisms which underlay the change
              and which allowed power to become concentrated in chiefly hands.  Because the
              island is both small and poor in natural resources it is relatively easy to
              determine what was imported and thus constitutes a high status good. This gives
              Mr. Crock the ability to characterize with relative ease the status differences
              both between sites and between different habitation areas within a single site.
                Because islands have clearly demarcated boundaries they have formed the basis
              for many comparative studies in both anthropology and may subfields of biology.
              The Caribbean provides an almost laboratory setting since many islands were
              inhabited at roughly the same time by relatively few linguistic groups and thus
              started their prehistories with a relatively homogeneous population. Across the
              region islands vary greatly in terms of size, geology, arable land and other
              natural resources. It is therefore possible to compare differences in cultural
              sequences between islands and then attempt to relate these to environmental
              variables. Archaeological research is considerably more advanced in Puerto Rico
              and windward islands compared to Anguilla and other leeward island
              counterparts. This research should help to provide the necessary
              counterbalance. It is important because it will provide insight into the
              emergence of hierarchical societies and it will also contribute to training a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
