Title       : Almost Periodic and Multivariable Periodic Matrix Functions: Extensions,
               Factorizations, Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1999   
File        : a9800704

Award Number: 9800704
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120522             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leiba Rodman lxrodm@math.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hugo J. Woerdeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ilya M. Spitkovsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9800704  PI: L. Rodman, I. M. Spitkovsky, H. J. Woerdeman.     For periodic
              matrix functions of several variables, the positive   extension and contractive
              extension problems will be studied.The positive extension problem arises in
              signal processing when spectral estimation of stochastic processes are
              required. The contractive counterpart arises in   such fields as the worst-case
              control, e.g., in the model-matching problem.   New support sets with the
              positive extension property will be identified,   and a description of all
              solutions (including a maximum entropy solution)   of the respective extension
              problems will be given. For this purpose, new   versions of the band method,
              suited for the multivariable setting and   including dual norm results, will be
              formulated. For finite sets which do   not have positive extension property,
              numerical algorithms based on the reduction to matrix completion problems will
              be developed. The results obtained will be related back to their
              applications.The principal investigators will continue a systematic study of
              almost periodic factorization. This factorization arises naturally in
              diffraction theory, distributed parameters control systems, and the spectral
              estimation problem for a class of stochastic processes. New existence results
              will be obtained and then used in applications to almost periodic versions of
              the Corona problem and stable rank one property, Krein's theorem on orthogonal
              matrix polynomials, the Beurling-Lax theorem and   the geometry of
              shift-invariant subspaces of the Besicovitch space.   Almost periodic
              factorization will also be used in the spectral   theory of various operators
              (including Toeplitz, Wiener-Hopf and other   convolution type operators) with
              matrix almost periodic and semi  almost periodic symbols on weighted Lebesgue
              spaces, and in almost periodic   extensions and interpolation problems.
              Connections with the   respective problems for periodic functions of several
              variables   will be exploited. New procedures for explicit  almost periodic
              factorization will be developed and applied to a constructive solution of
              convolution type (in particular, difference) equations on finite intervals.
              These results will be further applied in the scattering theory for the
              generalized Schrodinger equation.    The proposed research aims to develop new
              mathematical tools and   techniques, motivated by potential uses in diverse
              areas of   science and technology. A typical application in   medical sciences,
              seismology, signal processing, or physics involves    reconstruction (as much
              as available data allows) of the intrinsic   structure of an object of study,
              given only a few surface measurements.   Statistical applications involve
              prediction, or prognosis, of a process   in probabilistic terms, when only a
              brief history is known.    There are currently available mathematical
              techniques that underlie   many recent technological advances in these areas.
              However, the   existing techniques deal mostly with the case when there is only
              one   variable (typically time or distance along a line) involved. The  
              immense complexity of real-life systems calls for new mathematical  
              developments, in particular it calls for an extension of the existing   theory
              to the case of more variables (allowing for instance for planar and   spatial
              variables). The proposed research seeks to make substantial   contributions in
              this direction. Interaction and collaboration with many   researchers in
              different fields is an integral part of the proposal. The   principal
              investigators also plan to involve undergraduate students in   parts of their
              research.
