Title       : RUI: Learnability: Framework, Concepts, Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9800029

Award Number: 9800029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56829              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey C. Jackson jackson@mathcs.duq.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duquesne University
	      Administration Bldg
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15282    412/434-6000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project encompasses three lines of research, all related to  computational
              learning theory.  (1) The well-known ``probably  approximately correct'' (PAC)
              model of learning---and other  models---have provided a robust framework within
              which various  notions of learning have been formally analyzed.  However, 
              learning is a broad concept, and some senses of learning have not  been
              captured well by existing models.  This project develops a  framework for
              analyzing one such type of learning, that of  learning search-control rules
              within the context of task  planning.  In addition to developing this
              framework, lower and  upper bounds on learnability within the framework will be
              sought.  Based on preliminary work, graph-theoretic approaches appear to  be
              particularly promising in producing such bounds.  (2) Several  fundamental
              questions within existing learning models still  remain open.  Some of the best
              answers to related questions have  been obtained using Fourier analysis of
              function classes along  with associated Fourier-based algorithms. Thus, Fourier
              and other  techniques will be applied to several of these remaining  questions.
               (3) Fourier-based algorithms that have been produced  thus far, while
              efficient in the sense of running in polynomial  time, are not used in practice
              in part because of somewhat large  exponents in the running time.  This project
              seeks to produce  algorithms with noticeably better running times.
