Title       : Density-Graded and Texture-Graded Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a9800257

Award Number: 9800257
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine T. Faber k-faber@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9800257  Faber    Graded materials, by definition, have properties that vary  as
              a function of position.  This project offers a novel  means to
              microstructurally grade the properties of  single-phase materials.  A
              recently-developed processing  method, gelcasting, in which ceramic powders are
              suspended  in a polymerizable liquid is used to form the material.  At  the
              onset of polymerization, the ceramic particles are no  longer free to rotate or
              move in the gel, thus "freezing in"  the desired structure.  The gelcasting
              process has a  characteristic "idle time" defined as the time prior to 
              polymerization and gelation. Taking advantage of that idle  time allows for
              gradation of the microstructure.  The  project will use the idle time to grade
              single phase oxides  in two ways.  First, graded-density solids will be made by
               making use of gravity or enhanced settling through  centrifugation.  It is
              anticipated that these materials can  be configured to have dense,
              wear-resistant surfaces, or  porous, flaw tolerant surfaces, as demanded by the
               engineering application.  Aluminum oxide known for its  hardness and chemical
              inertness is the model graded-density  solid.  Second, graded-texture solids
              will be produced by  performing gelcasting in a magnetic field gradient.  The 
              hexagonal ferrimagnetic, barium hexaferrite, will be  texture-graded due to its
              high magnetic anisotropy. Since  its crystallographic texture is coupled to
              morphological  texture, barium ferrite is also expected to have gradients  in
              mechanical properties.  The field-assisted gradation  technique is applicable
              to ferromagnets, paramagnets, and  ferro- and paraelectrics, the latter in an
              electrical field  gradient. The properties of these solids will be simulated 
              using an object oriented finite element program (OOF) for  actual
              microstructures.  The simulation work will be done in  conjunction with the
              National Institute of Standards and  Technology.  Simulations coupled with
              experimental findings  will form the basis for materia ls design of density-
              and  texture-graded solids.  %%%  As ceramics are considered for more complex
              and  sophisticated applications, one component must serve several  functions
              and meet seemingly disparate materials  requirements.  Conflicting materials
              requirements beg for  graded microstructures.  Considerable emphasis has been 
              placed on functionally gradient materials in recent years.  This project will
              explore a new method for grading materials  and novel gradation architectures,
              that may provide  materials engineers with a low-cost, reproducible method of 
              producing functionally gradient materials.  ***
