Title       : RUI: Truncated Multivariable Moment Problems and Application: An Operator
               Theorectic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1998  
File        : a9800805

Award Number: 9800805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57420              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Fialkow fialkowl@newpaltz.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY New Paltz
	      
	      New Paltz, NY  12561    914/257-2121

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Fialkow.Abs    Abstract    Proposal: Dms-9800805  Principal Investigator:
              Lawrence Fialkow      Professor Fialkow will study several significant problems
              concerning an operator-theoretic approach to multivariable moment problems. The
              principal focus of this research is an approach to multidimensional truncated
              moment problems based on an extension theory for the associated moment matrix.
              When this matrix admits an infinite, positive, finite rank moment matrix
              extension, this method yields an explicit formula for a finitely atomic
              representing measure supported on the joint spectrum of a normal tuple of
              operators corresponding to the extension. The aim of this research is to
              determine concrete conditions on the moment data which permit the desired
              extension. Existence theorems for representing measures can also be interpreted
              as subnormal completion criteria for multivariable weighted shifts. Another
              facet of this research concerns the multidimensional K-moment problem, where
              the support of a representing measure is required to be contained in a
              prescribed closed set K. A direct application of this study concerns the
              Multidimensional Quadrature Problem in Numerical Analysis. By applying the
              matrix extension technique in the context of quadrature, this research seeks to
              construct minimal quadrature rules for such sets as the disk, square, triangle,
              or annulus. The algorithms that we develop can be explicitly implemented as
              computer programs.    Mathematical moments are used to model many real-word
              phenomena, such as area, velocity, momentum, weighted averages, probability
              distributions, etc. In the evaluation of moments using integrals, the greatest
              computational costs are associated with function calls. It has long been of
              interest to scientists, mathematicians, and engineers to devise efficient
              computational methods for evaluating integrals, methods which minimize the
              number of expensive function calls. For classical moments, computed as
              integrals over a straight line, this problem is solved by  classical tools of
              Numerical Analysis, particularly Gaussian Quadrature. In the present study we
              seek to devise highly efficient computational algorithms for integrals over
              sets in the plane (such as a triangle, disk, or square.) We use a new matrix
              extension method to develop concrete computational rules for efficient
              evaluation of two-dimensional moments over planar sets. These rules can be
              coded into computer programs which enhance the ability of scientists and
              engineers to evaluate integrals efficiently.
