Title       : Research on Dispersive Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1998      
File        : a9800879

Award Number: 9800879
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71880              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gigliola Staffilani gigliola@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9800879  Gigiola Staffilani  Abstract of the Research Project    My research
              involves the study of certain  Dispersive Partial Differential Equations.    I
              concentrate my work on the Cauchy problem for two particular dispersive
              equations:   the nonlinear Schr\"odinger equation and the generalized
              Korteweg-de Vries equation.   The first question I address in my project is the
              following:  given a dispersive equation,   how much regularity does one have to
              assume for the initial profile (initial data condition)   in order to be able
              to insure existence and uniqueness of the wave solution at later times?   Such
              a question becomes more complicated to answer when one also imposes boundary
              conditions.  At the moment, the techniques available (Harmonic and Fourier
              Analysis)   only apply to the case of periodic boundary conditions. The second
              question I address is how certain regularity properties of the wave solution
              are preserved in time, once it is assumed that the wave ``lives'' for all times
              and it is smooth. More precisely, under these conditions, I study the
              asymptotic behavior of the size of the wave measured taking into account the
              order of differentiability. This is a very different problem than the one
              described above. Nevertheless the techniques I rely upon to answer both
              questions are very similar in their nature.    Dispersive partial differential
              equations are introduced to model many wave phenomena that occur in nature.
              Some examples are, for instance, propagation of signals in optic fibers,
              nonlinear  ionic-sonic  waves in plasma in a magnetic field and long waves in
              plasma.  In my work I improve and develop some  abstract  mathematical tools in
              order to obtain from general properties of the initial profile of the wave
              information about the evolution of the wave itself.  This information regards
              the time of existence of the wave, the persistence of certain properties,   the
              behavior near singular points, and the energy carried by the wave.  In some
              cases part of this information can  be recovered by conducting experiments in
              laboratories. Conversely, the results I obtain provide mathematical
              justifications for certain empirical observations.
