Title       : Effect of Finite Size Joints on Strength and Deformability of Rock Masses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a9800407

Award Number: 9800407
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: P.H.S.W. Kulatilake kulatila@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,9251,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9800407  Kulatilake    "Effect of Finite Size Joints on Strength and
              Deformability  of Rock  Masses"    Civil and mining engineers face design and
              construction  tasks  associated with geotechnical systems which are in or on 
              discontinuous  rock masses.  Rock mass strength and deformability depend on  a)
              the  discontinuity (e.g., joints, fractures, faults) network, b)  the 
              geomechanical properties of the discontinuities, c) the  geomechanical 
              properties of the intact rock, d) the in situ stress system,  and e) the 
              loading/unloading stress path.  Due to the complex nature of  natural 
              discontinuity patterns in rock, and uncertainties associated  with  estimating
              factors a) through e) above, the prediction of  mass  properties of rock at a
              large scale using the available  stress analysis  techniques and a limited
              field and laboratory investigation  presents a  great challenge for the rock
              engineering profession.      This research focuses on the effect of joints on
              strength  and  deformability of rock masses.  Primary objectives of this 
              research are  to establish the following relationships for jointed blocks  made
              out of  two model materials:  a) the modulus of deformability in any  direction
               as a function of the fracture tensor (a combined measure of  joint  geometry
              parameters component in that direction,  deformational  properties of the
              intact model material and joints, and the  confining  stress, and b) the
              strength in any direction as a function  of the  fracture tensor component in
              that direction, strength  properties of the  intact model material and joints,
              and the confining stress.  Biaxial  loading tests will be performed on jointed
              block samples  having  numerous joint geometry configurations.  Model materials
               will be chosen  to satisfy the similitude requirements compared to soft 
              brittle rocks.  Secondary objectives are to establish some guidelines to 
              estimate  equivalent continuum properties for jointed model material  and rocks
               with respect to both strength and deformabilit y properties..  ***
