Title       : PPD/IEP: Project SMART
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9800021

Award Number: 9800021
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899016             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard Kimmel kimmel@admin.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The "Institutionalization of Project Smart" is designed to test, refine, and
              disseminate the activities and  strategies developed over the past three years.
               The goals of the project are: (1) to promote positive and  permanent changes
              in the educational environments of New Jersey school districts to ensure full 
              participation and inclusion of children in the learning of science and
              mathematics, so that all students,  especially children with disabilities, have
              the knowledge and skills necessary to meet challenging  standards and prepare
              for inclusion into general education classrooms; (2) to establish a
              professional  development model for educators; (3) to provide training to
              counselors and other educational  professionals, and parents of youngsters with
              disabilities; (4) to make the professional development model  and accompanying
              support materials available regionally and nationally; and (5) Establish an
              Educational  Resource Center (ERC) for all stakeholders at New Jersey Institute
              of Technology (NJIT)'s Center for  Pre-College Programs.    To meet these
              goals, staff will evaluate, refine and disseminate model materials that will: 
              . provide training and resources for centers of staff development that serve
              elementary/middle grade  school teachers in New Jersey who will have students
              with disabilities in their classrooms;  . provide training and resources for
              families of children with disabilities, so they can provide the proper  support
              for them;  . acquaint guidance counselors with resources and procedures for
              assuring full access and needed support  in science and mathematics education
              to children and youth with disabilities;  . create an atmosphere of
              collaboration among educational professionals, parents and others interested 
              in building effective schools for all children.    The project will establish
              partnerships with state and regional organizations and agencies to develop a 
              network by which services and resources will continue to be provided to
              educators and serve as a regional  mo del.    Focus will be placed on classroom
              implementation of state content standards in science and mathematics  for all
              children by addressing:  classroom implementation of a standards-based
              curriculum in science and  mathematics in inclusionary and special education
              settings; refinements of a training model that includes  practicum experience;
              translation and implementation of the professional development model to provide
               training and support at the school district level; development and testing of
              guides and manuals to use  in support of professional development and classroom
              implementation; implementation of demonstration  sites for classroom
              implementation models; dissemination of the professional development model and 
              resources, including guides and manuals regionally and at other sites across
              the country.    Efforts will be made to develop educational resource centers at
              schools.  The professional development  model includes a practicum experience
              and intensive in-service training in the implementation of content  standards
              and instructional planning that allows for accommodations and adaptations for
              students with  special needs.  It will be modified and translated to the school
              district environment.  Selected participants  in Project SMART will be trained
              as professional developers to expand on the impact of the project.
