Title       : General-Purpose Modeling Environments for Discrete Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1998       
File        : a9800077

Award Number: 9800077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339248             (Estimated)
Investigator: Collette R. Coullard coullard@iems.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Fourer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9800077
Coullard
     This projects provides funding for two complementary
              projects on broadly applicable methods and interfaces in combinatorial
              optimization.  One project will investigate general-purpose combinatorial
              extensions to the concept of an algebraic modeling language.  New forms of
              discrete variables and constraint operators will be designed through a study of
              optimization models in production control, location, routing, cutting, and
              other highly combinatorial applications; a general solver that can deal with
              these new forms will be constructed with the help of recent advances in
              software for constraint logic programming.  Extensions to partly combinatorial
              problems will be studied, and possibilities for algebraic directives that
              assist in the solution of very large or hard problems will be considered. 
              Another project will investigate general-purpose graphical modeling
              environments for network optimization problems, based on the idea of an
              algorithmic toolkit. New developments in object-oriented system design will be
              applied to promote the toolkit's portability and extendability.  Additional
              features will be studied and developed to facilitate prototyping in new
              applications, by allowing new optimization approaches to be defined in a
              high-level pseudocode or to be built from combinations of existing tools.
    
              Results of this research are expected to lead to more productive use of
              combinatorial optimization techniques in manufacturing and service operations. 
              The primary goal of the projects is to bring such techniques to a greater range
              of users, by creating more accessible general-purpose facilities for
              development of new combinatorial optimization applications.  By reducing the
              time and cost associated with prototyping new models and methods, the projects
              will also help to extend the variety of applications for which a discrete
              optimization approach is a practical alternative to heuristic search.  The
              results are expected to be of greatest benefit for problems that are highly
              combinatorial by nature, such as scheduling, sequencing, assignment, and
              network design, or that have significant combinatorial aspects due to such
              factors as fixed costs and capital spending alternatives.



