Title       : Theoretical Astrophysics and Gravitational Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a9800977

Award Number: 9800977
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70211              (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Ipser   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard F. Whiting  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***
9800977
Ipser
Diverse aspects of black hole physics will be studied by
              Whiting.  These include thermodynamics, the results of quantum effects, and the
              interaction of black holes with matter, which give rise to the most exotic
              disturbances induced on spacetime.  Principally, analytic means will be
              employed, and particular emphasis will be placed on what can be learnt about
              spacetimes involving gravitational collapse.  This investigation will build on
              previous work and will include a focus on the impact of Hawking evaporation on
              the global structure of black holes which form during
              collapse.

Astrophysical sources contain matter in extreme states which are
              not normally reproducible for direct study here on earth.  In this project,
              Ipser will investigate the physical properties of matter in very compact
              objects (stars), including in the limit where the objects become unstable.  The
              state of rapid rotation, and the presence of accretion disks affect the
              observable characteristics of these objects.  A variety of recently developed
              techniques, both analytic and numerical, will be used to interpret observations
              of the astrophysical systems under study, especially their associated emissions
              in the x-ray part of the spectrum and including their gravitational radiation. 
              The work on black holes and quantum effects will contribute to our fundamental
              understanding of nature, with emphasis on the connection between the areas of
              quantum physics and gravitational physics.  The work on stellar models will
              provide insight into the connection between the observed features of such
              configurations and the behavior of extreme states of (nuclear) matter; and also
              into the likelihood of using modern detectors to observe the gravity-wave
              emissions from these configurations.  The work on accretion disks will lead to
              an understanding the time behavior of the luminous and x-ray emissions from
              compact objects such as accreting black holes.  As well as having a direct
              impact through the venue of international scientific meetings, this combined
              work will enrich the education and advanced training of students through access
              in lectures, seminars and colloquia.
***

