Title       : Localization of Classical Waves and Phenomena in Disordered Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a9800883

Award Number: 9800883
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179592             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abel Klein aklein@math.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:DMS-9800883  Principal Investigator: Abel Klein    Abstract: The
              subject of this research proposal is the study of localization of classical
              waves and related phenomena, and of phenomena that occur in disordered systems.
              Classical waves can exhibit phenomena normally associated with quantum
              mechanical electron waves. The quantum mechanical wave nature of electrons is
              based on an analogy with the scattering and interference of classical waves.
              But only recently has the analogy been reversed and the possibility of the
              localization of classical waves started to be investigated. Localization is a
              generic wave phenomena, not specific to electron waves.  The primary objective
              of this proposal is to establish a solid mathematical basis for the
              investigation of the phenomena of localization of classical waves. The
              following subtopics will be studied: localization effects in complex media,
              nonlinear effects in photonic crystals, exactly solvable models, a general
              framework for the localization of classical waves, dynamical localization of
              classical waves, internal Lifshitz tails, absolute continuity of the spectrum
              of periodic Maxwell operators.  Other topics to be investigated are random
              Schroedinger operators (a model for the motion of an electron in a crystal with
              impurities) and long range spin glasses.    New optical materials and devices
              will lead to "lightronics" (electronics for light), presently a subject of
              intensive research. Optical transistors are examples of such new optical
              devices, and their fabrication will require new optical materials. The
              development of lightronics will have tremendous technological implications.
              Electronic devices (e.g., transistors) are based on quantum mechanical
              phenomena. Electronic bound states, the simplest example of a localized
              electron wave, are ubiquitous in nature. But the analogous phenomena for light
              are not commonly observed in nature, even if theoretically possible. Nature
              provides a variety of readily available materials for electronic locali zation.
              But the corresponding materials for the localization of light and other
              classical waves have to be fabricated. This requires a fundamental
              understanding of how classical waves (e.g., light) can exhibit phenomena
              normally associated with quantum mechanical electron waves. One of these is
              localization, a subject that the present proposal addresses. This is a new area
              of research in both basic and applied sciences, with a potentially huge payoff
              to society.
