Title       : Trees and Group Actions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1998        
File        : a9800604

Award Number: 9800604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84768              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa J. Carbone   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CARBONE, DMS 98-00604


The proposer is studying automorphism groups of
              locally finite trees, which are locally compact groups, and their discrete
              subgroups of finite covolume, which are called tree lattices.  The proposer has
              recently discovered how to construct non-uniform tree lattices (and their
              quotients); these were conjectured by Hyman Bass and Alex Lubotzky to exist. 
              Of particular interest is the case where the tree is homogeneous of two
              possible degrees,each a power of a prime plus one.  For certain degrees of
              bi-homogeneity, the tree is then the Bruhat-Tits building of a rank 1 simple
              Lie group over anon-archimedean local field.  Broadly speaking, we are
              interested in constructingnon-uniform lattices contained within such rank 1 Lie
              groups, comparing them with general tree lattices, further questions of
              existence of non-uniform lattices, their covolumes and questions of
              arithmeticity. The proposer is also studying the edge-indexed quotient graphs
              of non-uniform tree lattices, which give new examples of infinite expanding
              diagrams.

This is a study of infinite 'trees', which are connected graphs in
              which there are no closed circuits, and the algebraic structure of their
              symmetries.  The proposer has recently discovered that there exist certain
              symmetries of trees which are locally finite, called 'non-uniform tree
              lattices', that allow us to collapse the infinite tree into an infinite
              'quotient graph' that has finite volume in an appropriate sense.  The
              symmetries of locally finite trees that give finite quotient graphs have been
              understood for some time, and it is also known that these give rise to infinite
              families of finite expander graphs, which are fundamental building blocks for
              certain  communication networks in computer science.  The construction of
              non-uniform tree lattices and their quotient graphs, as well as being  natural
              from many mathematical points of view, is desirable in order that there may be
              new practical applications in the construction of communication networks.

