Title       : Process Optimization of Solid Freeform Fabrication Using Experimentation,
               Simulation, and Adaptive Statistical Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1998  
File        : a9800565

Award Number: 9800565
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $569057             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cristina H. Amon camon@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee Weiss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Finger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Isabella Verdinelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1338,9102,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The objective of this research is to create a methodology for optimizing
              manufacturing processes using statistical models.  These models will be created
              from knowledge acquired from different sources, including heuristics, expert
              knowledge, physical experimentation, first principle relationships and
              large-scale computer simulations of physical models.  Optimizing a
              manufacturing process requires an understanding of the influence and
              interactions of design and process variables on the final quality of the
              manufactured artifact -  Variables are properties of the material (or
              combinations of materials) selected, of the physics of the process, of the
              geometry of the part, of the equipment settings, and of the manufacturing
              environmental conditions.  The process modeling framework must be flexible and
              adaptable, so that models for subprocesses can be updated and adapted as
              processes evolve and new knowledge is acquired.  This research focuses on a new
              class of manufacturing processes called Solid Freeform Fabrication (SFF) or
              layered manufacturing, which are changing traditional approaches to design and
              manufacture of mechanical parts.       Better process models of SFF
              manufacturing processes will lead to faster development of rapid manufacturing
              processes and will accelerate their use and acceptance by industry.  Good
              models will also allow better identification of design possibilities so that
              manufacturing considerations can be brought into the early phases of the design
              cycle.  A methodology for creating and optimizing process models with differing
              levels of detail for different phases of the design cycle will remove
              impediments to the integration of design and manufacturing concerns.  This work
              will also contribute to statistical model building by enabling users to
              incorporate the active and critical constraints on design variables, to handle
              high-dimensional and irregular parameter spaces efficiently, and to assess
              model reliability, predictive capability and parameter sensitivity.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
