Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogeny of 'Tenrecoid' Insectivorans (Lipotyphla:
               Mammalia)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9800908

Award Number: 9800908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7804               (Estimated)
Investigator: Callum F. Ross cross@mail.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ross D. E. MacPhee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9800908 Ross  Insectivores, collectively, are among the oldest and most diverse
              groups of mammals.  Living mammals in the insectivore family Tenrecidae, which
              are found in Madagascar and eastern Africa,is a particularly diverse group. 
              The historical (phylogenetic) relationships of this group to other insectivores
              are not well known.  Moreover, it is not clear whether fossil and recent
              tenrec-like mammals found in continental North America, the Caribbean, and Asia
              belong to the Tenrecidae, and if so it is not clear what factors were involved
              in determining past and present distributions of these animals.  A well-sampled
              phylogeny of tenrecids and other recent and extinct insectivorans promises to
              shed light not only on questions of the taxonomic and biogeography of the
              Tenrecidae, but also on larger issues of mammalian phylogeny, including the
              historical relationships among insectivorous mammals and the origin and
              diversification of endemic African mammals.  In this doctoral dissertation
              research, Callum Ross, Ross D. MacPhee and student Robert J. Asher will collect
              morphological data on osteology of living and extinct insectivorans, as well as
              previously unknown aspects of soft-tissue morphology among Tenricidae and
              related mammals.  These data will be analyzed in tandem with molecular sequence
              data using parsimony-based computer programs.  Explicit assumption sets for
              phylogenetic analysis will be created that vary the use of character weighting,
              ordering, the choice of outgroups, and the treatment of characters with missing
              data.  Conclusions regarding tenrecid phylogeny will be based partly on
              consistencies across trees generated by these assumption sets.
