Title       : Arithmetic, Geometric, and Ergodic Aspects of the Theory of Lie Groups and Their
               Discrete Subgroups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a9800607

Award Number: 9800607
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $559840             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Margulis margulis@math.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Margulis

The problems addressed in this research proposal are in
              the area of the theory
of Lie groups and their discrete subgroups.  The common
              theme is to study this
theory in connection with number theory, geometry and
              ergodic theory.  One of
the main objectives is to continue the program of
              establishing a homogeneous
space approach as a powerful tool in number theory
              and, in particular, in the
theory of Diophantine approximations.  It is also
              proposed to study a variety of
questions about actions of Lie groups and their
              discrete subgroups on
homogeneous spaces, manifolds and general metric spaces.
               In particular the
principal investigator plans to continue his joint work
              with other
mathematicians on properly discontinuous groups of affine
              transformations and on
local rigidity for standard algebraic actions.  The
              technique of Lie group
theory, reduction theory, ergodic theory and the theory
              of dynamical systems
will be used throughout the proposed work.

The theory
              of Lie groups and their discrete subgroups is one of the central
fields in
              mathematics.  Historically this theory was mostly motivated by its
connections
              with geometry, mechanics and the theory of differential equations. 
During the
              last 15-20 years it was realized that some aspects of the theory can
be
              applied to solve certain problems in number theory and related topics,
              which
could not be tackled by other methods for several decades.  It is
              suggested in
the proposal to continue this development in order to obtain new
              applications in
number theory,  dynamical systems and geometry.  In general,
              the proposal should
establish new connections between discrete and continuous
              in mathematics.

