Title       : Combinatorial Representation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1998       
File        : a9800851

Award Number: 9800851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Halverson halverson@macalester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      9800851  Halverson      This project studies matrix representations of
              Coxeter groups and their Iwahori-Hecke algebras.  The study of these algebras
              has led to important discoveries in statistical mechanics, quantum groups,
              particle physics, and invariants of knots and 3-manifolds.  The main focus is
              to answer important questions from representation theory and geometry using
              discrete, combinatorial constructions. The primary example of a Coxeter group
              is the symmetric group of permutations of the numbers 1,2, ..., n.  This group
              arises naturally in many physical settings, such as the study of the chemical
              structure of molecules and the physics of subatomic particles. Many important
              questions regarding the representation theory  of the Iwahori-Hecke algebra of
              the symmetric group have recently been answered combinatorially.  These
              questions extend naturally to general Coxeter  groups, their (finite)
              Iwahori-Hecke algebras, and the (infinite) affine Hecke algebras. A main thrust
              of this project is to answer these questions in these general settings. One
              focus of this research is to understand the relationship between different
              bases of the irreducible matrix representations of these algebras, in
              particular to produce explicit combinatorial descriptions of the transformation
              matrices between these bases.  A second focus is to explore a representation of
              the Hecke algebra on cosets of a Borel subgroup of a finite Chevalley group. 
              The trace of this representation counts fixed points in the flag variety of the
              group, determines a Frobenius formula for characters of the Hecke algebra, and,
              at least in type-A, provides a natural pairing between conjugacy classes of the
              underlying Weyl group and unipotent classes of the Chevalley group. This
              project incorporates a collection of undergraduate research projects that study
              algebras that are generalizations of the symmetric group.  Students will derive
              character algorithms and compute characters relations for these algebras.  They
              will implement and  analyze character algorithms for the Hecke algebras and use
              the implementations to study further questions in character theory.     This
              research is in the general area of combinatorics. One of the goals of
              combinatorics is to find efficient methods of studying ways that discrete
              collections of objects can be arranged and used to concretely model abstract or
              complex phenomena. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely important in
              modern communications and is used in the design of large networks, such as
              those occurring in telephone systems.
