Title       : Dissertation Research: Social Relations and Ethnic Interactions in Post-Roman
               Britain: A DNA Analysis of Human Skeletal Remains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9800691

Award Number: 9800691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terence N. D'Altroy tnd1@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Terence D'Altroy, MS. Christine Flaherty will collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct DNA analyses on a series
              of human burials from the site of West Heslerton in North Yorkshire, England to
              determine the sex of the individuals and to reconstruct genetic relations among
              them. The late prehistoric inhabitants of Britain are included under the broad
              cultural designation of `Celtic.` The country was occupied by Roman political
              elite and troops who departed ca. 400 AD leaving a population termed `Briton`
              or `Romano-Britain.` In the following centuries Anglo-Saxons migrated from the
              European mainland into Britain and rapidly placed a strong new cultural stamp
              on British culture. Estimates indicate that the number of immigrants was quite
              small (perhaps fewer than 25,000 in comparison to a native population of  ca. 4
              million) and prehistorians wish to understand the interactions between the
              native and invading groups. MS Flaherty's research is directed towards this
              question.  The Heslerton site consists of a cemetery and a rural village with
              important Romano-British and Anglo-Saxon components. The cemetery (ca. 475-625
              AD) is about one hectare in size and contains about five hundred individuals of
              which 196 were excavated. The burials were partially arranged according to the
              social status or affiliation of the individuals. One row contains adult males
              with weapons; another juvenile burials, etc. Some of the dead were buried in
              coffins and about 130 of the burials contain grave goods. Thus the potential
              exists for detailed social reconstruction. Through a combination of grave good
              and DNA analysis MS Flaherty will be able to examine a number of questions
              which revolve around cultural interaction and the factors which govern
              relations between ethnic groups. The key questions include the following: how
              was the village settled in the 5th and 6th centuries? What were the relative
              proportions of native and migrant groups? How does the biological identity of
              individuals or groups compare to the representation of social identity in the
              burials? How, and in what ways, can these data be extrapolated to apply to the
              migration process in Britain at this time and elsewhere?  This research is
              important because it addresses a central anthropological question. It provides
              an excellent example of how DNA analysis can be used in social science research
              and it will assist in training a promising student.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
