Title       : Dynamics and Control of a Self-Reconfiguring Sphere Leading to the Design of a
               Spherical Mobile Robot
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2002  
File        : a9800343

Award Number: 9800343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184625             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ranjan Mukherjee mukherji@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project deals with the design and development  of a unique
              spherical mobile robot having a spherical exo-  skeleton, an internal mechanism
              for self-propulsion, and a  variety of sensors for motion control and
              reconnaissance.  Unique Features of the robotic system include its  retractable
              camera, retractable manipulators, and telescopic  limbs. The arms and limbs are
              deployed for manipulation and  support when the robot is at rest and retracted
              before the  robot resumes its motion. The robot is able to perform rapid 
              maneuvers and move over rough terrain with relative ease. In  the process of
              development of the spherical robotic system,  three fundamental problems in the
              areas of dynamics,  control, and design of mechanical systems are addressed.
              The  first problem relates to the development of a nonlinear  feedback control
              strategy for nonholonimic systems with  primary application to the rolling
              sphere. A smooth and time-  invariant controller will be developed for the 
              reconfiguration of the sphere. Despite significant progress  in nonholonomic
              control systems, the reconfiguration of the  rolling sphere is still an open
              problem. The second problem  of this research is to design an internal
              mechanism for self-  propulsion of the sphere and to construct a closed loop 
              controller for the effective operation of the mechanism. The  mechanism
              provides the sphere with the capability to  accelerate, move with constant
              velocity, or servo at a  point. The final problem relates to the development of
              the  spherical mobile robot, which is expected to achieve  autonomy thorough
              coordination between sensing and control.  This problem deals with design of
              the truss, choice and  placement of sensors, and design f the overall control 
              system through integration of the two controllers mentioned  above. The
              nonholonomic control strategy, developed as a  part of this research, is
              incorporated in the Advanced  Control Systems course, offered in the Department
              of  Mechanical Engineering at Michigan State University. The  internal
              mechanism for self-propulsion of the sphere and the  design of the spherical
              mobile robot are used as  motivational examples in a number of graduate and 
              undergraduate courses in design, structures, mechanics, and  controls.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
