Title       : Visualization as a Decision Support Tool in Multidisciplinary Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1998     
File        : a9800435

Award Number: 9800435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185917             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kemper E. Lewis kelewis@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christina L. Bloebaum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1338,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for the development of a numerical and
              visualization tool to assist designers in making decisions in industrial
              environments wherein numerous designers are interacting to develop the same
              product.  The key deliverable will be a decision support tool where designers
              can view local and non-local optimal design spaces (i.e. their own optimal
              design space or that of another discipline's or subsystem's), predict and
              visualize the effects of local and non-local decisions, and identify good and
              robust solution regions based on this information.  The foundations for the
              theoretical development and practical use of the tool are Graph Morphing (a
              visualization technique to view design spaces), Game Theory (a set of
              constructs that model the interactions among decision makers), and robust
              design techniques (which strive to minimize the effects of uncontrollable
              factors without eliminating the factors themselves).       If successful, the
              results of this research will lead to insights and improvements in using
              mathematical models to approximate the interfaces between subsystems and
              designers.  The primary goal of this work is to develop a robust visualization
              approach to allow multiple designers to view n-dimensional optimal design
              problems graphically.  This capability will allow multiple designers working on
              the same product to identify robust, insensitive regions in a local (for
              example, subsystem or disciplinary) or non-local (for example, other discipline
              or system level) design space, both numerically and graphically.  The primary
              advantage of the decision support methods and tools developed in this work will
              be to provide information about the effects of the decisions being made by
              multiple designers on the other subsystems and to help designers use this
              information to make intelligent decisions about the variables and subsystems
              over which they have control.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
