Title       : Quantum Phases in Condensed Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1998     
File        : a9800626

Award Number: 9800626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramamurti Shankar r.shankar@.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dmr-9800626  Shankar  This is a grant to fund research in theoretical condensed 
              matter physics, as well as educational activities.  The  research will focus on
              two areas of great current interest:  field theory of the fractional quantum
              Hall effect and  renormalization group for phase transitions.  A textbook is 
              also being written on the application of field theory to  condensed matter.   
              Since the remarkable discovery that the Hall conductance of  a two-dimensional
              electron gas is quantized to some  fractional values, there has been a steady
              stream of  theoretical work aimed at explaining many aspects of this 
              phenomenon.  While there is an impressive body of knowledge,  one still lacks a
              single microscopic theory that will  describe all these fractions, starting
              from just electrons  in a magnetic field, subject to Coulomb interactions and
              the  random substrate potential.  Chern-Simons field theories, in  which one
              maps electrons into either bosons or fermions  which, on the average, see
              either no field or a weaker field  in which they fill an integer number of
              Landau levels, are  one of the most promising options.  A framework based on 
              these theories has been developed.  It reproduces in a  coherent way many known
              results for some special fractions  (in which the net field vanishes) from the
              above mentioned  starting point and promises to yield more results for the 
              other fractions.  Being very different in many ways from  other techniques
              used, this analysis will either disagree  with some existing results or provide
              a totally independent  confirmation, especially for the half-filled case.   
              Some time ago a renormalization group scheme for fermions  was worked out in
              which one systematically eliminates modes  near the Fermi surface to extract
              the low energy physics.  In this scheme Landau's Fermi liquid appears as a
              fixed  point, while instabilities, to say, superconductivity emerge  as
              relevant flows.  Unfortunately, the method has been  limited to transitions
              that occur at zero couplin g.  Extension to finite coupling typically involves
              the fermions  one begins with as well as bosonic fields formed out of  them.  A
              scheme in which high energy modes of both are  eliminated side by side, and
              which has so far proven  elusive, will be investigated.  %%%  This grant will
              support research on condensed matter theory  as well as the writing of a
              graduate textbook.  The research  focuses on the application of field
              theoretical techniques  to problems of current interest in condensed matter
              physics.  These problems include the study of the fractional quantum  Hall
              effect - a new state of matter.  Successful completion  of the proposed work
              should have wide ranging impact on  condensed matter and materials physics. 
              ***
