Title       : Dynamics of the Statistical Mechanics Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a9800860

Award Number: 9800860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68819              (Estimated)
Investigator: Abel Klein aklein@math.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Senya Shlosman  (Principal Investigator former)
              Svetlana Jitomirskaya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9800860  Principal Investigator: Senya Shlosman    Abstract:
              Shlosman will study the behavior of a system subject to stochastic dynamics in
              the situation where the initial state of the system is far from equilibrium.
              The typical example is the Glauber dynamics of the model of statistical
              mechanics, which model is taken with parameters close to (but different from)
              those of the phase transition region. For a long time the system behaves as if
              it were in the "wrong" equilibrium, until it finally undergoes the transition
              to the "true" (and unique) one. The (non-equilibrium!) states of the model
              before transition are what should be considered the metastable states of the
              system. Shlosman shows that such family of states is a smooth continuation of
              the curve of equilibrium phases through the critical point. The transition
              happens because of the creation and growth of "droplets" of the equilibrium
              phase inside the non-equilibrium phase. The PI will study the lifetime of these
              metastable states. It is possible to write an explicit expression describing
              it. The formula is quite interesting and contains, in particular, a term
              corresponding to the surface energy of the Wulff droplet. The explanation is
              that the shape of the critical droplet is given by the Wulff construction. This
              settles a controversy on the subject that has existed in the literature.    The
              subject of this research project is the rigorous study of the phenomenon of
              metastability. A good example of the metastable state of matter is supercooled
              water (i.e., water cooled below its freezing temperature, yet remaining
              liquid). This state of water can indeed be observed in nature. The
              characteristic feature of supercooled water is that it cannot stay liquid for a
              very long time: after a while, it suddenly freezes. The concept of metastable
              state is well known in physics, where it plays an important role. What has
              hitherto been lacking is the rigorous understanding of this phenomenon on the
              level of microscopic statistical mechan ics. As one famous scientist put it,
              "The concepts of the metastable state and of fractional dimension are useful,
              provided they are not taken too seriously." Shlosman's research is aimed
              precisely at providing the tools to understand metastability one hundred
              percent "seriously." To this end, the concept of a "critical droplet" (which is
              a microscopic piece of ice in the case of water) is developed. Shlosman will
              study the process through which such a droplet is created and examine the
              process of growth of this droplet, until it eventually absorbs the whole sample
              (by coalescing with other growing droplets). The overall theory looks quite
              complete and satisfactory.
