Title       : Entangled-Photon Fluorescence Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1998      
File        : a9800300

Award Number: 9800300
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156849             (Estimated)
Investigator: Malvin C. Teich teich@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bahaa E. Saleh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander V. Sergienko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9800300  Teich    The proposed research pertains to the development of a new
              form of microscopy:  entangled-photon fluorescence microscopy.  The recent
              surge in the development of fluorescence microscopy based on two-photon
              excitation using classical (or laser) light has been driven by the principal
              advantages of this technique over single-photon excitation: a pair of
              low-energy photons can deposit as much energy as a single ultraviolet photon
              thereby exciting a fluorescent molecule within a sample with greater
              penetration depth, better resolution, and less risk of damage upon absorption
              along the optical path.  However, in order to obtain two-photon absorption with
              a classical light source such as a laser, a very large photon-flux density is
              necessary to place two photons within a small enough volume and within a small
              enough time window to effect the absorption.  In this case, a
              femtosecond-pulsed high-power laser is used directly &- the source of light,
              which can produce undesired phototoxicity and photobleaching.    On the other
              hand, entangled light generated by the process of spontaneous parametric
              downconversion in a nonlinear crystal comprises intrinsically paired photons
              within a very short time window and small volume.  Far smaller photon-flux
              densities can be used and the absorption of entangled-photon pairs is directly
              proportional to the photon-flux density, whereas for ordinary two-photon
              absorption it is quadratic in the photon-flux density.  The sum of the photon
              energies in each pair is a constant and equal to the energy of the
              downconverted pump photon, whereas the sum energy is far broader for photons
              from a femtosecond laser.  These features lead to unique advantages with the
              use of nonclassical entangled light when compared to classical light sources
              like a laser.  Simply put, at low photon-flux densities entangled light is a
              more efficient source of two-photon excitation than a conventional classical
              laser source.  The use of a weak entangled-light source is therefore expec ted
              to cause less damage than that caused by a direct laser source while providing
              the same amount of fluorescent light for detection.    An experimental
              investigation of the feasibility of entangled-photon fluorescence microscopy is
              proposed.  Entangled light for fluorophore excitation will be generated using
              nonlinear parametric downconversion.  A basic study of the two-photon
              absorption rate will be carried out using measurements of the induced
              fluorescence.
