Title       : Competitive Reaction Pathways
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2001  
File        : a9800761

Award Number: 9800761
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $567400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curt Wittig wittig@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports Curt Wittig of the  
              University of Southern California in his continuing studies of   photoinduced
              reactions.  He will focus on two sets of experiments:  (a)   reactions in the
              restricted geometries of dimers and (b) unimolecular   reaction rates at
              threshold.  In the former, he will use double resonance   techniques for
              cluster size selection.  Rotationally resolved states of   clusters will be
              selected and their photochemistries interrogated.    Wittig will study the
              hydrogen exchange reaction and inelastic scattering   in HF-HCl, HCl-HF and HCl
              dimer and its deuterated analogs.  The second   set of studies will focus on
              nitrogen dioxide, HNCO, water and HF.    An underlying theme of these studies
              is to challenge theoretical modeling   by providing benchmark data.  Thus, in
              some cases, existing models of the   associated gas phase phase processes will
              need to be reconsidered.  In   other cases, systems are studied for which the
              dynamics are believed to   be known for the associated gas phase processes. 
              The cluster experiments   to be carried out here will then display effects
              attributable to the   restricted entrance channel, i.e., effects due to the
              geometry of the   cluster.  Such work starts to bridge the gap between the
              gaseous and   condensed phases at a high level of precision, again with
              experimental   benchmarks, albeit in a microcosm that is neither the condensed
              nor gas   phase.   Results from these investigations will thus have a very  
              significant impact in advancing our knowledge and understanding in   reaction
              dynamics.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
