Title       : SBIR Phase II: A New Instrument for Surface Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a9800951

Award Number: 9800951
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399810             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth F. Willey willey@atom-sci.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Atom Sciences Inc
	      114 Ridgeway Center
	      Oak Ridge, TN  378306926    423/483-1113

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                ****  9800951  Willey  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project will develop a unique analytical instrument in which two types of
              surface analysis - sputter-initiated laser resonance ionization spectroscopy
              (SIRIS) and time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) - can be
              carried out simultaneously, without sacrificing the performance of either. The
              SIRIS selective laser postionization provides high efficiency and excellent
              sample utilization with much less matrix effects and mass interferences than
              SIMS or most other mass analysis methods. This leads to high sensitivity in
              small volumes, very high selectivity, high dynamic range, and good quantitation
              for the trace element of interest. The nonselective surface ionization of
              conventional TOF-SIMS has proven to be extremely useful for multi-element
              characterization. By integrating TOF-SIMS with SIRIS, the combined instrument
              will enable the best of both technologies, high  sensitivity and sample
              utilization with negligible matrix effects and insignificant interferences for
              single-element trace analysis, and multi-element material characterization from
              TOF-SIMS. With this combination of capabilities in a single instrument costing
              close to a stand-alone TOF-SIMS or SIRIS instrument (due to similarities in
              instrumentation), we expect that the proposed SIRIS/TOF-SIMS instrument will
              become a significant contribution to surface characterization.  The
              capabilities of the proposed instrument will crosscut the applications for
              TOF-SIMS and dynamic SIMS. It will be used in characterizations of interfaces,
              nano-structure devices, shallow implants and bio-materials where high
              sensitivity, high selectivity, high sample material utilization and matrix
              independence are required.
