Title       : PPD/DP: Increasing the Involvement of Persons with Disabilities in Higher SMET
               Education and Careers: An Investment for Greater Diversity thru Power of Role
               Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2000   
File        : a9800201

Award Number: 9800201
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449972             (Estimated)
Investigator: Olaf von Ramm mhr@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha S. Absher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9253,SMET,
Abstract    :
                        This project is developing a new outreach initiative using tiered role
              models, aimed to increase the involvement of persons with disabilities in
              higher engineering, science, mathematics, and technology (SMET) education and
              careers.  The goal is being achieved through an innovative outreach program
              which focuses on the critical need for and impact of role models in encouraging
              peers with disabilities to pursue SMET areas.  This innovative program will
              develop a tiered structure of role models of progressive age groups from K-12
              and into the undergraduate and graduate and professional levels, linking each
              younger group with slightly older groups of students.  Therefore, it will
              provide both age appropriate research exposure and vital links with role model
              students in SMET areas for interaction and encouragement.  It will specially
              target the deaf and hearing impaired, drawing on our extensive and successful
              history working with this population of disabled students.  At the
              undergraduate level, it will provide individualized research experiences,
              communications training and supportive follow-up.  At the high school and upper
              middle school level, it will provide a science and engineering summer
              experience on the Duke campus for these students, interacting with the
              undergraduate students with disabilities.  At the middle school and below
              level, it will provide these young students an introduction  to SMET
              emphasizing older students with disabilities as role models of what can be
              achieved.  At each level, students are being exposed to students of older age
              groups with whom to identify, and will also be exposed to successful role
              models of professionals pursuing their careers.  Identified individuals to
              serve as role models of deaf and hearing impaired professions include former
              students in the outreach Program of the National Science Foundation/Engineering
              Research Center for Emerging Cardiovascular Technologies (NSF/ERC), who are in
              SMET Ph.D. programs, and professional who are teaching in SMET areas and
              working in SMET-related industries.  These postgraduate alumni role models will
              come to campus to give presentations in their areas of SMET specialty, as well
              as lead open discussions on career and advanced studies issues, and on being a
              deaf professional.  The goal of this stepwise approach is to provide a
              realistic model for the student's next level of development, which will make
              the achievements of successful professionals seem more obtainable and through
              the power of role models, motivate more deaf and hearing impaired students to
              participate in SMET education and careers.
	The project has the full
              cooperation of the faculty and administration of the NSF/ERC and the School of
              Engineering.  Some presentations and outreach efforts for recruitment and
              follow-up will take place in the students' home institutions, the public
              schools of Durham County, the home county of Duke University.  Public school
              students from the K-12 level from the Durham County School System will be
              involved, as will deaf and hearing impaired students from Gallaudet University
              and other universities.

