Title       : PPD/IEP: Institutionalization of DO-IT
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  2000   
File        : a9800324

Award Number: 9800324
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $894201             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denice D. Denton denton@rio.engr.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Ray Bowen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald A. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheryl Burgstahler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The University of Washington (UW) has a grant from the  National Science
              Foundation (NSF) to identify and institutionalize  successful practices
              employed by DO-IT (Disabilities,  Opportunities, Internetworking, and
              Technology).  Implementation of  the Institutionalization of DO-IT project will
              increase the success  of people with disabilities in academic programs and
              careers in  science, mathematics, engineering, and technology (SMET).       In
              1992 the UW was awarded a three-year grant from NSF to  undertake activities to
              recruit and retain students with  disabilities in SMET.  The project was titled
              DO-IT.  In 1995  another three-year grant, called DO-IT Extension, was received
              from  NSF to continue and expand DO-IT activities.  Grants to extend  DO-IT
              efforts have also been received from the Telecommunications  Funding
              Partnership, the NEC Foundation of America, the Seattle  Foundation, the U.S.
              Department of Education, Honda, the White  House Office of Science and
              Technology Policy and the National  Science and Technology Council, Washington
              Services for the Blind,  and U.S. West Communications.    DO-IT helps:      
              children and youth with disabilities learn strategies for       participation
              in SMET and how to access computers and the       Internet using adaptive
              technology.       high school students with disabilities transition to college 
                   and careers in SMET.       SMET faculty become more receptive and capable
              of including       students with disabilities in their courses.       campus
              SMET programs become more accessible to individuals       with disabilities.   
                 library staff and administrators understand how to make their      
              electronic resources accessible to patrons with disabilities.       camp
              directors learn how to incorporate Internet activities       into their
              curriculum and accommodate campers with       disabilities.       adult
              students and professionals with disabilities mentor       students with
              disabilities.       parents, service providers, and the pu blic become more
              aware       of the potential contributions and special needs of students      
              with disabilities in SMET fields.       identify factors leading to college
              completion and employment       in SMET.    Specific DO-IT activities have
              included:       summer study programs which allow high school students with    
                disabilities to explore SMET fields and develop college and       career
              transition skills and strategies.       a mentoring program that matches high
              school students with       disabilities with successful role models in SMET
              academic       programs and careers.       Internet communication and
              information retrieval for students       with disabilities.       an electronic
              community for those interested in SMET and       disability-related issues.    
                disability awareness presentations to faculty and staff.       college
              transition, library access, Web page design, and       adaptive technology
              workshops.       dissemination of program and disability-related information   
                 through electronic resources, printed materials, and       videotapes.   
              The Institutionalization of DO-IT project follows logically from  DO-IT's
              previous activities.  It will continue efforts to empower  individuals with
              disabilities, make SMET programs and careers more  accessible, and explore
              strategies and implement activities to  institutionalize successful practices
              nationwide.  Project  strategies will include seeking state, Federal,
              corporate, and  private funding and sponsorship; selling project products; and 
              incorporating practices into existing services and publications at  the UW and
              elsewhere.
