Title       : PPD/IEP: DREAMS: Disabililty Research Encompassing American Indians in Math and
               Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9800634

Award Number: 9800634
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Backes john_backes@und.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary M. Harris  (Principal Investigator former)
              Carl A. Fox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ahmed Kazi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sue A. Schmitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leigh D. Jeanotte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The College of Education and Human Development at the University of North Dakota
              (UND)  is continuing the DREAMS program with the support of faculty from the
              College of Arts and  Sciences and the School of Engineering and Mines and of
              Native American Programs at UND  and in conjunction with parents and school
              personnel representing four reservations and two  Indian service areas in North
              Dakota.  DREAMS involves a group of 30 American Indian  students with
              disabilities, now ranging in age from 8 to 14, in a program of classroom-based
              and  informal activities in mathematics and science.  Summer institutes which
              involve parents,  educators, elders or culture teachers, university faculty,
              mentors, and role models, as well as  the DREAMS students, are an important
              feature of the project, which aims to provide curriculum  which meets national
              standards in science and mathematics, provides for hands-on learning, and  is
              culturally connected.  Computers with the adaptive equipment needed by each
              student have  also been made available.  The DREAMS program has succeeded in
              raising the awareness of all  participants that persons who are disabled can
              succeed in life and in careers that require  expertise in mathematics and
              science.    Goals for the second cycle of DREAMS as an Experimental Project are
              to continue the program  for the original participants, and also add more
              students; to articulate and develop the  professional development potential of
              DREAMS; and to supplement National Science Foundation  funding to augment and
              continue DREAMS.  Through systematic professional development the  incompletely
              realized goal of DREAMS, to enable change in the infrastructure of schools,
              will  be promoted.
