Title       : Constructing Diagnostic Explanations Using Schema-Structured Bayesian Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2000   
File        : a9800929

Award Number: 9800929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265594             (Estimated)
Investigator: George F. Luger luger@cs.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to develop a representation and algorithms that 
              characterize diagnostic  reasoning. Human experts in a problem domain
              frequently interpret data in that domain in the context of a  particular causal
              hypothesis. This type reasoning contrasts with deductive inference where from a
              set of  general  rules and facts further information is deduced by sound
              inference rules. Diagnostic reasoning,  often called abductive inference,
              however, moves from a set of facts to the "best explanation"  for the 
              existence of these facts. This process often requires the expert to make a
              hypothetical conjecture that  would explain the facts and then search for
              specific new information that can  confirm that conjecture.  Thus the human
              expert searches through a space of possible  explanations for the observed
              information.  This research uses Bayesian Belief Networks to build  causal
              models of a domain. This approach  represents in a precise way the
              interrelationship of  causal patterns and their  use in moving towards an
              explanation. The research supports handling of  conflicting and ambiguous
              evidence, as well as a clear method for rating plausible  inferences and the
              possibility of learning relative strengths of conditional  probabilities from
              available statistical data. Although the research domain is  built on data from
              investigation of failures of discrete component semiconductors  as well as the
              analysis of failure mechanisms in complex real time control,  diagnostic
              reasoning is a general research area.  Results could be important in  modeling
              medical decision-making, integrated circuit fault analysis, as well as  used in
              real time process monitoring and control. 
              http://www.cs.unm.edu/CS_Dept/faculty/homepage/luge  r/
