Title       : Nonlinear Optical Telecommunications Switch Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a9800592

Award Number: 9800592
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180746             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Andersen k0rx@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9800592
Andersen
The rapid increase in demand for telecommunications services
              has not been followed by a commensurate increase in the technology capable of
              providing these services.  Demand for higher-bandwidth switches is stronger now
              than it has ever been.  Current electronic routing technologies are stretched
              nearly to their theoretical limits and in order to make the required leap in
              bandwidth capabilities, a move to nonlinear optical switch-based technologies
              is clearly required.

In this proposal, we put forth a research plan aimed at
              providing a deep understanding of the technologies underlying a nonlinear
              optical crossbar switch based on the four-wave mixing soliton dynamics that
              occur in third-order nonlinear integrated optical waveguides.  The proposal
              makes use of new results demonstrating the existence of multi-color four-wave
              mixing solitons where the phasematching between frequency components in a
              dispersive medium is accomplished by both cross-phase modulation and four-wave
              mixing.  These new results suggest that it should be possible to switch data
              using a nonlinear optical crossbar switch based on the four-wave mixing
              solitons.  Several additional advantages will also be realized by using this
              technology.  The most important of these is the intrinsic parametric
              amplification of the data beam that can take place as it passes through the
              switch, thus counteracting coupling losses that naturally occur as light is
              coupled from the long-haul fiber into and out of the switch.  In addition, the
              switch will be fabricated from nonlinear optical slab dielectric waveguides
              grown from the well-characterized AlGaAs/GaAs material system, and so there far
              fewer fabrication difficulties to overcome.

Our research plan uses
              analytical, numerical, and experimental methods to understand the four-wave
              mixing soliton properties that underly the construction of such a switch.  The
              work proposed here utilizes the unique expertise of the PI, coupled with a
              novel new approach to the problem of high data rate switching, to solve an
              extraordinarily important problem facing the telecommunications
              industry.
***








