Title       : Automated Detection of Informational Signs and Hazardous Objects: Visual Aids
               for the Blind
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a9800670

Award Number: 9800670
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vladimir J. Lumelsky                    
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270098             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Yuille yuille@ski.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smith-Kettlewell Eye Rsch
	      2318 Fillmore Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941151813    415/345-2000

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This  research  will develop a framework for the rapid  detection,  location, 
              and  identification of visual targets in  unconstrained  real  world domains. 
              This framework will lead to algorithms which  can be implemented on portable
              computers with video input with the  goal  of  being  used, for example, to
              enable  the  blind/visually  impaired  to  navigate in real world scenes.  
              These  requirements  mean that the algorithms must be extremely efficient at
              extracting  information  from  the  input  images.   The  approach  will   use 
              statistical  analysis of the targets and background,  taking  into  account 
              variations due to illumination and viewpoint  variations,  to determine
              probabilistic models for the appearance of the target  and  background.  From
              these models, sets of tests and  groups  of  tests  will  be  determined. 
              These tests will be designed  to  be  maximally  informative, based on
              statistical  measures  of  errors  rates   such  as  Chernoff  Information, 
              and  to  lead  to   fast  implementations on portable PC's.  The search
              strategy is based on  the intuition of picking tests which maximize the
              expected gain in  information  about the target hypothesis.  In practical 
              problems,  however,  it will not always be possible to compute these expected 
              information  gains  in real time.  Therefore the  search  strategy  will  make 
              use  of  a  more general formulation  in  terms  of  A  algorithms where the
              search is guided by a heuristics taylored  to  the  application  domain. 
              Expected information  is  one  possible  heuristic  but  there  are  many 
              others  which  are  more  easily  computable  and which can still give provable
              convergence  to  the  optimal solution.
