Title       : Dissertation Research: Mechanisms Maintaining Variation for Disease Resistance
               at Rpm1 in Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9800957

Award Number: 9800957
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7575               (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin E. Kreitman mkre@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joy M. Bergelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Kreitman  9800957        Plant species generally exhibit variation for
              resistance to disease.  This striking observation implies that a balance of
              opposing forces acts to maintain variation for disease resistance.  Since the
              cost imposed by disease would drive populations toward increased resistance, a
              trade-off   should oppose increased resistance to account for the observed
              variation. In the model plant species Arabidopsis thaliana, a balance of
              opposing forces maintains molecular variation at disease resistance gene Rpm1. 
              The proposed research will investigate the origin and determinants of variation
              for disease resistance within populations.  High through-put methods will allow
              genotyping of hundreds of A. thaliana individuals from local populations in
              Indiana and Michigan.  Analyses will measure associations between Rpm1 and
              nearby genetic markers.  Little association would support a balance within
              populations, while greater association would support a balance due to migration
              among populations where different forces dominate.      Arabidopsis disease
              resistance has come under intense study recently, and the ecological and
              evolutionary work proposed here will complement molecular genetic work on this
              system.  Plant disease resistance must be understood to facilitate the
              management of disease in crops, for assessing planting strategies and
              predicting the impact of disease in natural plant populations and weeds. 
              Furthermore, plant disease resistance can be compared with the animal immunity
              for a more general understanding of the pressures pathogens place on host
              species.  This project continues in the vein of Kreitman's work on the fruit
              fly Drosophila, at the interface between population genetic theory and
              empirical data.  Arabidopsis Rpm1 is a strong example of balancing selection
              maintaining molecular variation. Continuing study of Rpm1 will help elucidate
              the patterns and processes shaping genetic variation and change.  Finally, the
              proposed work continues   to develop Arabidopsis as  an important new model
              organism for population genetics.  Arguably, no other model organism affords as
              much potential for interplay with ecology and genetics, both well-established
              fields in Arabidopsis biology.
