Title       : Assessment, Rehabilitation and Management of Underground Infrastructure Systems
               through Life-Cycle Costing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9800204

Award Number: 9800204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dulcy M. Abraham   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9800204  Abraham  Investment in civil infrastructure made by public agencies 
              and the private sector involves a major portion of the  wealth of the U.S. Most
              often, owners, designers and  contractors have approached the design,
              construction,  maintenance and operation of underground infrastructure on a 
              crisis-based approach. As a result of this, the impact of  important
              considerations such as construction practices,  construction duration,
              life-cycle costs, environmental  impacts, safety requirements, etc., are not
              fully explored.  This project will create a framework for a life-cycle model 
              for assisting in the prioritization of scheduling of  maintenance and
              rehabilitation of underground  infrastructure. Sanitary sewer systems are
              selected to test  the proof-of-concept, since the maintenance of sewer systems 
              is an increasing priority worldwide.    The development of the sewer management
              framework can be  divided into three stages.    In the first stage the focus of
              the research will be on the  development of a prototype decision-making
              framework for  concrete sewers. Examples of key decisions include: type of 
              rehabilitation/maintenance strategy adopted, selection of  sewer where
              rehabilitation strategy will be applicable, and  frequency of application of
              rehab/maintenance strategy. This  will be accomplished through: 1) analysis of
              the condition  rating methodology (based on cracking, deflection, corrosion 
              and subsidence) used at present to determine the status of  sanitary sewers
              (using historical data from the City of  Indianapolis, Department of Capital
              Asset Management), and  2) deterministic dynamic programming, Markov decision 
              process, and probabilistic dynamic programming will be  investigated to
              determine their feasibility in modeling life-  cycle costs.    The second stage
              will include a focused pilot study to test  the framework developed in stage 1,
              to determine the ability  of the framework to improve decision-making, when
              life-cycle  costs are considered.  The framework can t hen be extended to 
              include the effect of external (such as soil type and depth  of cover) and
              internal factors (such as infiltration and  surcharge) on sewer deterioration. 
              In stage three, the  impact of other life-cycle costs (e.g., disruption costs, 
              environmental impact costs, and safety costs) will be  incorporated into the
              framework.  Two budget goals will be  analyzed at this stage: (a) Provision of
              the best return for  funds expended and (b) Optimal allocation of funds for 
              preventive maintenance and rehabilitation. Opportunity costs  and other virtual
              costs (such as planning costs, claims  costs arising because the system has to
              be shutdown) will be  considered in future studies.  ****
