Title       : Multivariable Operator Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9800931

Award Number: 9800931
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160155             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raul E. Curto curto@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              To: Dr. Joe Jenkins  >From: Raul Curto  Date: January 7, 1998  Re: Abstract of
              Project, Multivariable Operator Theory     This research project deals with
              four areas of multivariable operator  theory: (i) existence, uniqueness, and
              localization of the support of   representing measures for truncated moment
              problems;  (ii) structure and   spectral theory for polynomially hyponormal
              operators;  (iii) standard operator   models over Reinhardt domains; and (iv) a
              multivariable analog of Apostol's   Lemma on hyperinvariant subspaces for
              contractions.  Concerning the first   area, special emphasis will be given to
              the study of moment problems   associated with singular matrices, building on
              recent work (joint  with L.A.   Fialkow) on flat extensions of positive moment
              matrices, which has led to a    general framework for the study of truncated
              complex moment problems.    With the  aid of a new moment matrix associated to
              a semi-algebraic set,   progress is expected  in the localization-of-support
              problem.  A   characterization of quadrature domains in  terms of their moment
              matrices,   and further applications to quadrature and cubature  formulas will
              also be   sought.  As part of (ii), a characterization of polynomially 
              hyponormal   weighted shifts,  a structure theorem for quadratically hyponormal
              shifts, and   the detection of non-subnormal polynomially hyponormal operators
              through   the Pincus principal  function and through Putinar's 2-subscalar
              model, will be   sought.  The research aim  in the third area (which deals with
              a Sz. Nagy-   Foias dilation theory in several  variables and builds on recent
              work of A.   Athavale, V. Muller, F.-H. Vasilescu and  others), is to extend
              the existing   theory to functional Hilbert spaces over Reinhardt domains.  The
              suitability of   multi-shifts as standard models, the validity of von Neumann's
               inequality for   special n-tuples, and the structure of C*-algebras generated
              by spherical   isometries, will be considered.  The fourth and final area deals
              with  the   invariant subspace structure of commuting contractions on Hilbert
              space.    Using recent results of J. Eschmeier, M. Kosiek, A. Octavio, M. Ptak,
              and   others, two main goals will be pursued:  (a) an extension to the Taylor  
              spectrum of results on spectral dominance currently available only for the  
              Harte spectrum, and (b) an analog of  Apostol's Theorem in several variables.  
                  Multivariable operator theory is a rapidly evolving area of   mathematics,
              with deep and significant connections with areas of differential   geometry,
              topology, complex analysis, and algebraic geometry, and with   exciting
              applications to engineering, quantum and relativistic mechanics, and  
              computational mathematics.  The theory of truncated moment problems   provide
              easily accessible formulas for the evaluation of areas and volumes of   complex
              regions, of moments of inertia and centers of gravity. Dilation theory   and
              invariant subspace theory are essential tools to describe the algebraic  
              properties of elaborate physical or engineering systems, and the study of  
              transformations on function spaces has often led to the solution of problems   
              in control theory, intimately tied to systems theory and electrical
              engineering.    Our research project is aimed at resolving some outstanding
              problems in   multivariable operator theory, while creating recruitment and
              retention   opportunities for women and minorities to pursue careers in
              mathematics, by   engaging their participation in projects related to the
              interaction of   mathematics with other sciences.
