Title       : PPD/DP: An Ocean of Potentiality: Inclusion of Persons with Disabilities in
               Science, Engineering, and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a9800692

Award Number: 9800692
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $462882             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Radtke   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jim Skouge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The Ocean of Potentiality Project, in cooperation with  scientific,
              multiple nonprofit and state education organizations,  will build and support a
              Hawaii-wide experiential and accessible  guidance-instruction network to
              facilitate individuals who are  disabled to attain interest, education and
              careers in science,  mathematics, engineering and technology (SMET).  The
              project will  be organized and conducted by the University of Hawaii in 
              cooperation with multiple scientific and nonprofit and state  education
              organizations.  The project calls for use of a  three-tiered approach for the
              change of attitudes and for provision  of educational opportunities on a
              student, educator/family, and  state policy level.        We propose to create
              a program that involves a core of  students, families, scientists, educators,
              and university-level  science teacher trainers who will affect the larger
              population of  students by affecting science education curriculum, and
              educational  practices and policy in the state.  The project proposes to 
              identify, conduct, evaluate, and disseminate hands-on, field-based  science. 
              Emphasis will be placed on activities appropriate for  students with and
              without disabilities to promote collaborative  work in heterogeneous teams to
              actively experience science while  learning about the human ecology of Hawaii. 
                   Role models and mentors, many with disabilities themselves,  will interact
              with the student teams to advance access and  inclusion of all students in the
              SMET fields.  Assistive technology  will be used in concert with Internet
              display arenas to insure that  students will be fully included and empowered in
              SMET activities.   Electronic technology (including the Internet) will be used
              to  encourage networking and information dissemination among student  teams,
              educational organizations, administrators, and members of  the community. The
              project will be carefully documented for public  television and Internet
              venues.  All publications produced by the  project wil l be available through
              fully accessible electronic  media.
