Title       : Minority Participation in Keck Geology Consortium Undergraduate Student-Faculty
               Research Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a9800619

Award Number: 9800619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198174             (Estimated)
Investigator: Beth A. Palmer bpalmer@carleton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cathryn A. Manduca  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Carleton College
	      One North College Street
	      Northfield, MN  550574001    507/663-4000

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9277,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9800619
Manduca

This program, begun in 1991, provides opportunities for
              students from underrepresented groups at any institution to participate in the
              highly successful Keck Geology Consortium student-faculty research projects. 
              The goal is to encourage these students to pursue careers in the geosciences
              and to help them succeed by providing research experiences, credentials for
              future opportunities, and a support network.  The program allows students of
              color to participate in collaborative student-faculty research projects at two
              stages in their academic careers: a five-week summer program after the
              sophomore year and a year-long experience beginning the summer after the junior
              year.  Ten sophomore students each year will join two research groups each
              involving ten students and three faculty members.  Students from two to three
              member teams that design and implement a research project addressing an aspect
              of the group's research interest.  Three junior students each year will
              participate in any of five research groups each involving nine more advanced
              students and three faculty.  These students design and implement an individual
              research project that contributes to the group's research goals.  Research
              begins during a four-week summer project and continues through the academic
              year.  Four faculty from underrepresented groups are recruited each year to
              help lead the research projects.  These faculties enrich the scientific
              expertise on the projects, expand the career counseling available to students,
              and provide a wide variety of role models for students.  Students are guided in
              research during the academic year by an on-campus sponsor who may visit the
              summer research project.  Research groups stay in contact during the academic
              year using e-mail.  All students present their results at the annual Keck
              Research Symposium in Geology in either an oral or poster presentation and
              publish a short paper in the symposium proceedings.  In addition to providing
              closure to the research experience, the research symposium allows students to
              network with over 100 student and faculty participants in the Keck Geology
              Consortium Student-Faculty Research Program.

