Title       : A Proposal for Research on Quantum Computation and Clustering Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1998     
File        : a9800024

Award Number: 9800024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246389             (Estimated)
Investigator: Umesh V. Vazirani vazirani@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Quantum computation is an important new area that has shaken the  foundations of
              computational complexity theory and algorithms.  This project investigates
              several aspects of this subject: Use of  "negative probabilities" to design
              efficient quantum algorithms  for random generation and approximate counting. 
              Further  exploration of the new Fourier transform relationship between the 
              `spins world" and the "subgraphs world" to solve the Ising model  Gibbs
              sampling problem in the case that all interactions are  negative.  The study of
              further group theoretic properties of the  Fourier transform to design
              efficient quantum algorithms for  problems such as graph isomorphism.  In
              particular, this involves  studying the linear representations of
              non-commutative groups  such as the symmetric group.  The study of new error
              models for  quantum computers based on NMR experiments in quantum computation 
              currently underway at Berkeley.  The formulation of formal  criteria to
              demonstrate that the computation in these experiments  is inherently quantum
              mechanical.  The comparison of the class  BQP to classical complexity classes,
              including the polynomial  hierarchy, and most notably approximate counting. 
              The study of  the quantum analog of NP.  In addition this project studies 
              classical randomized algorithms for a fundamental algorithmic  task -
              clustering: A sequence of points is sampled from a  probability distribution in
              R, which may be any member of a  family of distributions which have several
              modes (regions of  concentrated probability).  Is there an efficient algorithm
              to  infer an accurate estimate of the distribution being sampled?  This
              formalizes a very general problem related to clustering.  Given a graph,
              partition its vertices into two sets such that the  ratio of the number of
              crossing edges to the number of vertices  in the smaller sets is with in a
              constant factor of the minimum.  The weighted version of this problem is the
              famous problem of  estimating the conductance of a graph to with in  a constant
               factor.  It formulizes a clustering problem in a concrete  setting.
