Title       : Binary Black Holes and Gravitational Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1999     
File        : a9800970

Award Number: 9800970
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231405             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pablo Laguna pablo@astro.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1252      SUPPORT OF LIGO RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ***
9800970
Laguna

Describing black holes and their motion has been the
              main thrust behind the intense activity in Numerical Relativity during the last
              half decade.  A large number of tools have been developed from this quest, in
              particular those arising from the Binary Black Holes collaboration.  However,
              in spite of the advancements in computer technology, numerical algorithms and
              understanding of Einstein's field equations, simulations of the last few orbits
              and the coalescence of black hole binary systems have not yet been achieved. 
              The primary objective of the group at Penn State will be to continue
              developing, and integrating into a complete solution to the collision and
              radiation problem, the missing components of this Black Hole Collision Puzzle,
              in close collaboration with the groups at Pittsburgh, Texas and Potsdam.  The
              effort at Penn State will mainly focus on two closely related areas:  i)
              apparent horizon boundary conditions and ii) gauge or coordinate conditions
              applied to 3+1 evolutions of spacetimes containing moving black holes.  Moving
              black hole, 3+1 evolutions have so far been performed taking advantage of
              isometry conditions, for the case of head-on collisions, or analytic lapse and
              shift conditions, for boosted single black holes systems.  A complete apparent
              horizon boundary condition to excise moving black hole singularities has not
              yet been fully implemented.  Similarly, up to this point, few studies have
              completely addressed the issue of constructing gauge conditions for 3D
              evolutions which control unbound unphysical growth of field variables, also
              known as grid stretching.  To investigate these two fundamental aspects of
              black hole evolutions, the following three problems will be considered:  i)
              boosted single black holes, ii) scattering of black holes and iii) single orbit
              and merger of binary systems.  These problems build upon complexity (moving
              single apparent horizon, gravitational radiation, multiple apparent horizons,
              corotating meshes, etc.); thus, they provide a natural step-by-step path to
              single out and solve specific aspects of black hole evolutions, directly
              relevant to the ultimate goal of generic inspiral black hole
              coalescences.

Successful solutions to these problems will represent progress
              beyond that exclusively in the computational front.  Scattering of black holes
              and simulations of an orbit or coalescence of binary systems will yield
              valuable information regarding gravitational radiation and the nature of
              interacting singularities.  Furthermore, the relevance of this effort extends
              to more than its fundamental implications in connection with black hole
              collision simulations; equally important will be the continuity of previous
              studies and collaborative models, as well as the use of infrastructure
              developed by the Binary Black Holes Alliance.  Collaborations, in particular,
              will play a crucial role since work on important areas such as outer boundary
              conditions, initial data and parallelization will not be directly considered by
              the present effort.
***

