Title       : PPD/DP: Standards Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a9800287

Award Number: 9800287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449575             (Estimated)
Investigator: Babette Moeller bmoeller@edc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen C. Wahl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Education Development Ctr
	      55 Chapel Street
	      Newton, MA  024581060    617/618-2227

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9253,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

HRD-9800287, Promoting Assets and Access Project, Educational
              Development Center (EDC)

Standards-based reform is bringing increased rigor
              and quality into mathematics and science education, but for a variety of
              reasons, those reforms have not been fully available to students with physical,
              developmental, and learning disabilities.  The result is limited participation
              and achievement by students with disabilities, and a denial of both the
              scientific and human enterprise of talent and contribution.  Further, both our
              reform rhetoric and the health of science demand that high quality education be
              available to all students, and exclusion of whole groups from opportunities to
              excel is not an issue of equity but rather a failing in our definitions of
              excellence.

The overall purpose of the project is to promote high quality,
              standards-based mathematics and science education for students with
              disabilities.  The Center for Children and Technology of EDC, in collaboration
              with the American Association for the Advancement of Science, will demonstrate
              for educators how all students can learn, a central idea in the standards, can
              be translated into each students will achieve.  To accomplish this goal, the
              project is undertaking two major activities:  (1) the development,
              implementation, evaluation and dissemination of model activities and materials
              for both inclusive and separate education settings; and (2) closely collaborate
              with individual and organizations involved in school reform and advocacy,
              including the standards committees.

The focus in this project is Grades K-4.
               The project is a significant effort to make standards-based education
              accessible to students with disabilities through the improvement of policy and
              practice.

