Title       : Pre-College Outreach in Electrical Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9800423

Award Number: 9800423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65302              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Bofah   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9800423
Momoh
A major activity of the Center for Energy Systems and Control
              (CESAC) is the development of a research center of excellence in support of
              power systems automation and control applications.

A secondary activity of
              the Center includes a summer outreach program to expose high school students
              and junior college students to research activities in expert systems (ES) and
              power systems (PS).  A five-week outreach program at the Center's facility
              provides the opportunity for students to engage in learning electrical
              engineering fundamentals and involve them in the Center's sponsored research
              activities.  The project gave the Center the opportunity to involve high school
              students in research and engineering education.

Over the years, we have
              attracted more than 50 minority high school students to the program.  Several
              of these students are high achievers with very high grade-point-averages and
              the motivation and potential to succeed at the university level.  A majority of
              the students selected scored above 1300 on the scholastic aptitude test (SAT)
              and have since enrolled in outstanding universities.  This is a demonstration
              of the success and impact of the learning experience gained from the program. 
              To continue this trend, we are proposing a multi-year educational program for
              pre-college African American students, other minorities and women.  To ensure
              future participation of minorities in science, we plan to increase interest in
              the engineering profession which will remain attractive in the 21' century. 
              The program contents include: electrical engineering fundamentals, a variety of
              research project topics spanning all of electrical engineering spectrum
              (communications, control, signal processing, power systems, materials science
              and solid state electronics, microwave and antenna), oral and written
              communication skills, and leadership training and topics on the engineering
              profession.

The outreach program will be done during the summer for five
              weeks to include interaction of students, faculty and industry.  The program
              will involve sponsoring agencies representative of our various grants as
              keynote speakers and high school students mentors.  The participants will also
              be involved in exchange programs with other Historically Black Colleges and
              Universities (HBCU) and Power Schools Engineering Research Coalition (PSERC)
              schools.  During the school year, the program will allow students to be engaged
              with research professors at Howard University, participate in science fairs
              hosted by Howard University faculty in selected schools.  The program will also
              include selected high school teachers who will be involved in technology
              awareness, problem solving and sharpening of their design skills.

Our
              experience with pre-college African American students could be bench marked
              against our success story of improving both their GPA and SAT scores, providing
              positive enabling environment and thus enhancing their chances of enrolling in
              engineering and could be prototyped for usage by other schools to achieve
              similar success.
*** 

