Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Classical Complex Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1998   
File        : a9800464

Award Number: 9800464
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67623              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald E. Marshall marshall@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9800464  Principal Investigator: Donald E. Marshall    Abstract:
              Under this grant Marshall will investigate problems in four areas of analytic
              function theory. Estimates of harmonic measure and the growth of hyperbolic
              distance will be used to study the angular distribution of mass induced by
              analytic, area-integrable functions. This problem has applications to the
              characterization of extremal dilatations for quasi-conformal homeomorphisms of
              the unit disk. Secondly he will investigate the integrability properties of
              derivatives of one-to-one analytic functions. Thirdly, he will investigate
              finite interpolation problems for the bidisk. Marshall will seek continued
              fraction decompositions for a certain class of rational functions in several
              variables to solve this problem. In the fourth area, Marshall will investigate
              the accuracy of a promising technique for the numerical computation of
              conformal maps.     Conformal maps (one-to-one analytic functions) have been
              used as a tool in science and engineering for many years. One way conformal
              maps are used is to transform a problem on a complicated region in the complex
              plane to a related problem on a "standard" region, such as a disk or
              half-plane, where known techniques can be used. The solution on the standard
              region is then transformed by the inverse of the conformal map to a solution of
              the original problem on the original region. Classically, this method was used
              for problems related to Laplace's equation. For example, temperature at
              equilibrium on a thin metallic plate satisfies Laplace's equation. More
              recently, conformal maps have found application to a wide range of numerical
              solutions of other partial differential equations arising in engineering
              problems. There are applications in electro-magnetics, vibrating membranes and
              acoustics, transverse vibrations and buckling of plates, elasticity, heat
              transfer, and fluid flow, for example. While early applications used explicit
              analytic representations for conformal maps, modern us es require conformal
              maps of more complicated regions which cannot be represented easily in terms of
              elementary functions. The only resort is to compute numerical approximations to
              the desired conformal maps.  We will investigate the accuracy of a new
              technique which rapidly computes conformal maps and their inverses. It is fast
              enough that it can be used for experimentation on a typical workstation. The
              integrability questions we will work on deal with the difficult problem of
              estimating the growth rate of conformal maps. One of the applications of
              complex analysis to electrical engineering problems is the construction of
              electric circuits associated with a given transfer function. One method is to
              decompose the transfer function into simpler pieces, called a continued
              fraction expansion. In order to understand related problems in several complex
              variables, Marshall will seek similar decompositions for transfer functions
              depending on two variables.
