Title       : Multiplicative Number Theory and Irregularities of Distribution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9800653

Award Number: 9800653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43558              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger C. Baker baker@math.byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                          9800653  Baker       This award provides funds for an investigation
              into the following six problems. (i)  Lagrange's four squares theorem with
              almost prime variables;  the PI aims to sharpen the results of Brudern and
              Fouvry by using numbers with far fewer prime factors. (ii)  Kloosterman sums
              and Fourier coefficients of cusp forms; the PI shall reexamine this classic
              work of J. M. Deshouillers and H. Iwaniec with a view to sharpening the
              applicable bounds on sums of Kloosterman sums. (iii) Lower bounds for sums of
              Bartan-Davenport-Halberstam type.  A 'variance' of differences between the
              number of primes in arithmetic progressions and the expected value is known to
              be at least of the expected order of magnitude in certain ranges.  The PI aims
              to extend these ranges. (iv)  Almost primes in short intervals:  a sieve
              problem on which many scholars have worked, where a number with at most two
              prime factors must be shown to exist in a short interval. (v)  Discrepancy of a
              set of points with respect to a convex body.  Here the difference is taken
              between the 'expected' number and the actual number of members of an N-point
              set in a dilated translation of a convex set with smooth boundary; Drmota has
              sharp lower bounds and the PI aims to weaken his smoothness conditions.  (vi) 
              Discrepancy of point sets with respect to balls:  the difference is taken
              between expected number and actual number of points of a set as above in a
              ball.  The PI seeks to sharpen Holt's version of the Erdos-Turan theorem, which
              relates the largest difference that occurs to a weighted average of exponential
              sums. (Work on some of these problems will be joint with Glyn Harman.)      
              This research falls into the general mathematical field of number theory.
              Number theory has its historical roots in the study of the whole numbers,
              addressing such questions as those dealing with prime numbers, sums of perfect
              squares, and so on.  It is among the oldest branches of mathematics, enjoying a
              surge of creativity at the hands  of Fermat in the 17th century and having
              grown and developed continuously since then. Within the last half century it
              has become applicable to important problems in data transmission and
              processing, and communications systems.
