Title       : Microvoltammetric Electrodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9800560

Award Number: 9800560
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $487300             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Mark Wightman rmw@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9161,9183,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   This project, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry   Program,
              is directed at the study and application of electrogenerated  
              chemiluminescence (ECL) reactions occurring at microelectrodes.    Professor
              Wightman and his students at the University of North Carolina   at Chapel Hill
              will investigate the use of ECL as a means of screening   potential organic
              compounds as light emitting diodes (LEDs) in   collaboration with Professor
              Neal Armstrong of the University of Arizona.    Optical monitoring of
              luminescence-producing reactions will be   undertaken to study the stochastic
              nature of the ECL process.  These two   studies set the stage for critical
              comparisons of the mechanisms of light   production in LEDs and via ECL.  ECL
              of Ru(bpy)3+2 immobilized at a   microelectrode will be evaluated as a monitor
              of histamine secretion from   cell walls.  Finally, ECL occurring at a
              microelectrode is proposed as a   new illumination source for near-field
              scanning optical microscopy   (NSOM).       The ability to monitor chemical
              processes in and about   micrometer-sized electrodes has a large number of
              practical applications.    Professor Wightman's laboratory is a leader in the
              theory and use of   these devices.  One of the most novel means of operating a
              microelectrode   is as an initiator of reactions which produce light, termed  
              electrogenerated chemiluminescence (ECL).   The technique is being   extended
              to the screening of potential organic molecules for use in light   emitting
              diodes and as a means of detecting histamine secretion from   biological cells.
               The use of ECL produced at microelectrodes may also be   useful for optical
              microscopy.  The work to be done by Professor Wightman   and his students is
              likely to have impact in a wide range of   technological areas.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
