Title       : Lower Bounds in Parallel Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a9800042

Award Number: 9800042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216963             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ketan Mulmuley mulmuley@cs.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              One of the most fundamental problems in theoretical computer  science, perhaps
              next in importance to only the P vs. NP  problem, is the P vs. NC problem. 
              Earlier work by the PI  has shown that many important combinatorial
              optimization  problems such as mincost flow and maxflow do not have fast 
              parallel algorithms in a PRAM model without bit operations;  this is like the
              usual PRAM model, the main difference being  that the instruction set of the
              processors does not contain  any bit operations.  Since the maxflow and
              mincost-flow  problems are P-complete, they do not have fast parallel 
              algorithms even in the unrestricted PRAM model assuming P  NC.  The
              significance of the result was in the fact that  this could be proved
              unconditionally, i.e., without assuming  P  NC, in a model that is natural and
              realistic for the  problems under consideration.  In fact, the PRAM model 
              without bit operations has been widely used in practice in  the design of
              parallel algorithms for a large number of  algebraic and weighted combinatorial
              optimization problems.  These include fast parallel algorithms for solving
              linear  systems, and for minimum-weight-spanning trees, shortest  paths, global
              mincuts in weighted undirected graphs,  blocking flows and max flows,
              approximate roots of  polynomials, and several problems in computational
              geometry.  Thus, our lower bound provided a concrete support for the  belief
              that P-completeness implies high parallel complexity,  and for the  P   NC
              conjecture itself, by proving its weaker implications  in a restricted, but
              realistic parallel model of  computation.    This project extends these
              techniques to investigate  parallel complexity of several other problems that
              are not  known to be, or expected to be, P-complete, and  consequently, whose
              parallel complexity is not well-  understood at present.  These include
              problems from several  different areas: network flows, matroidal optimization, 
              computational geometry, numerical computation, approximate  optimization, and
              so fo rth.  Investigating parallel  complexity of these problems in a unified
              manner is of  considerable practical as well as theoretical significance  in
              the design and analysis of parallel algorithms.    The project includes further
              applications of deep techniques  from algebraic to questions of lower bounds in
              complexity  theory.
