Title       : Neutrino Physics at Low Energies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1998  
File        : a9800739

Award Number: 9800739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winston Roberts                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2930               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard J. Stephenson gjs@baryon.physics.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1285      NUCLEAR THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal focusses on neutrino mass, one of the  most elusive
              quantities in nature.  Neutrinos are most  visible at high energies while mass
              is best determined at  low energies.  Currently, indirect high energy studies
              are  providing evidence that the mass is not zero.  Tritium beta  decay is
              known to be an ideal candidate for the direct  measurement of neutrino mass,
              but, to date, has yielded  results which appear to be unphysical.  There is a
              good  possibility that these results can be explained as  interference with
              very weak interactions which are not  included in the Standard Model
              description of particle  physics.  Such new interactions have been anticipated
              but  cannot be predicted.  To avoid conflict with other existing  low energy
              data, it is necessary for us to include all three  light neutrinos required by
              accelerator data, and to  consider the possibility that the new interactions
              couple  electrons to different combinations of those neutrinos than  that
              coupled by the usual weak interaction.  To learn  whether this interpretation
              is viable or not, it must be  tested against a large number of other precise
              low energy  measurements.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
