Title       : PPD/IEP: RASEM Regional Alliance of Science, Engineering, and Mathematics for
               Students with Disabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9800298

Award Number: 9800298
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $903980             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. McCarthy wmccarth@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              RASEM (Regional Alliance of Science, Engineering and Mathematics) for students
              with  disabilities is an alliance of 21 two- and four-year universities or
              community colleges in New  Mexico, West Texas, and Oklahoma.  Affiliate
              partners include the New Mexico Department  of Education, Region 19 Special
              Education in El Paso, Las Cruces Public Schools, Los Alamos  National
              Laboratory, Sandia National Laboratories, New Mexico Commission for the Blind,
              and  the New Mexico Department of Vocational Rehabilitation.  Broad in scope,
              RASEM has initiated  multiple projects to alleviate the lack of representation
              in SMET by students with disabilities in  the RASEM geographic area.    RASEM
              projects with elementary, secondary, and college components reach out to
              students with  disabilities of all ages.  Typical outreach projects include
              Netsurf at New Mexico State  University (NMSU) which excites middle and high
              school students with Web page computer  experiences; the Children's College at
              UNM/Los Alamos which touches 5th and 6th graders with  hands-on science
              experiences; and the Din  Community College which brings two weeks of  science
              fun to middle school Navajo students.  Teacher workshops conducted by Region 19
               reinforce inclusion and promote bridging of high school students into college
              through cooperation  between special and general education teachers.  MAVIS, a
              project in the NMSU Math  Department, is working to be able to quickly and
              effectively translate classroom and other math  documents into Nemeth braille. 
              Teacher mini-grants have allowed teachers throughout the three-  state region
              to bring enthusiasm for math and science to their students with disabilities
              through  creative school activities and field trips.  The projects mentioned
              are not inclusive but give a  flavor of the intent and impact of RASEM.    In
              the two plus years of its existence, RASEM has made itself known throughout our
              region.   Comments from students, teachers and others have assured us that
              RASEM has made a critical  dif ference.  RASEM has sown the seeds of science
              excitement in the Southwest and the crop is  now being cultivated.  Further
              support from NSF and the community at large will assure that  the RASEM efforts
              will come to fruition.
