Title       : Analytic Number Theory on Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a9800048

Award Number: 9800048
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184513             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorian Goldfeld goldfeld@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9800048
Goldfeld

This project involves the study of discrete groups  with
              applications to analytic number theory.  The focus is on two specific
              applications.  Modular symbols for congruence subgroups are integrals over
              closed cycles of a differential one-form, which are, by a theorem of Shimura,
              integral linear combinations of periods of  the Jacobian variety associated to
              the congruence subgroup.  The PI has previously conjectured that such integral
              coefficients have a polynomial growth in the level and that this implies the
              abc-conjecure.  New types of automorphic forms (twisted by modular symbols) are
              introduced to study the moments of modular symbols.  In particular, the
              investigation of the second moment may lead to progress in the direction of the
              abc-conjecture.  The second application involves the celebrated Gross-Zagier
              formula for critical values of L-functions associated to modular forms. 
              Recently, the PI and S. Zhang have found a much simpler and very direct proof
              of the L-value computation of Gross-Zagier.  The central idea is to compute the
              base change of a holomorphic Poincare series.  It is proposed to generalize
              this proof to the case of Hilbert modular L-series  over totally real fields. 
              The ultimate goal is to obtain new results in the direction of the
              Birch-Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture.

This research falls into the general
              mathematical field of number theory.  Number theory has its historical roots in
              the study of the whole numbers, addressing such questions as those dealing with
              the divisibility of one whole number by another.  It is among the oldest
              branches of mathematics and was pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic
              reasons. However, within the last half century it has become an indispensable
              tool in diverse applications in areas such as data transmission and processing,
              and communication systems.

