Title       : Solid Freeform (SFF) Based Fabrication of Porous Structures and Flow
               Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1998      
File        : a9800493

Award Number: 9800493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Selcuk I. Guceri   (Principal Investigator current)
              Merve Erdal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              DMI-9800493  GUCERI  Rapid prototyping technology allows us to generate complex
              architectures-ordered and random, isotropic and anisotropic, homogeneously or
              nonhomogeneously distributed-with a variety and accuracy never encountered
              before. An interdisciplinary and multi-institutional research effort is
              proposed to take advantage of the advances in rapid prototyping to fabricate
              controlled porous domains and to conduct fundamental studies for investigation
              and development of physical models for transport issues that are relevant to
              fluid flow and  impregnation-based  manufacturing technologies. The research
              has two concurrent and highly interrelated activities. The first will be the
              development of fabrication techniques to generate a variety of porous
              structures that are representative and have strong relevance to a range of
              impregnation-based  manufacturing applications. This effort will explore
              discrete manufacturing capabilities of solid freeform (SFF) rapid prototyping
              techniques to fabricate porous structures with controlled pore architectures by
              developing novel SFF hardware interfaces to generate/edit tool-paths. Next,
              various mesh generation algorithms with grid control  will be employed  to
              achieve desired three-dimensional  pore architectures.  The second phase of the
              study will focus on porosity and flow characterization.  Porosity will be
              evaluated by determining the pore architectures and percent porosity extremes
              that can be achieved using the SFF technology. Flow characterization for this
              exploratory research will be limited to determination of wet and dry
              permeabilities using the pressure gradient approach as well as optical methods.
              All studies will be conducted under isothermal conditions. The outcome of the
              proposed study will be the development of a new enabling technology for
              conducting fundamental studies in three-dimensional flow fields. Most
              importantly, it will enable researchers to design and evaluate complex
              three-dimensional preforms for impregnation-based manufacturi ng  with
              engineered  pore  architectures. If the exploratory  tasks are completed
              successfully, fabrication of preforms from ceramic and metallic materials for
              advanced composites applications will follow the current fused deposition
              research in prototyping/rapid fabrication with ceramics and metals.
