Title       : Suspensions and Suspension Noise for LIGO Test Masses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a9800097

Award Number: 9800097
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345618             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley E. Whitcomb whitcomb_s@ligo.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1252      SUPPORT OF LIGO RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***
9800097
Whitcomb

Through Caltech Professor Vladimir Braginsky and his
              group of the Moscow State University (MSU) will conduct a program of research
              in support of the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory Project
              (LIGO).  The research will focus on the development of techniques for future
              LIGO interferometers that will operate in the LIGO facilities after the first
              interferometers have completed their studies.

One of the key problems in the
              LIGO interferometers is the reduction of noise in the suspensions of the
              test-masses.  This noise reduction can be achieved by developing the highest
              possible quality factors for the suspensions' pendulum and violin modes and by
              suppressing excess (non-thermal, non-Gaussian) noise of various sorts.  The
              members of the MSU group have made substantial progress in this direction over
              the last five years.  Their past studies revealed a number of new aspects of
              suspension noise and fabrication that will be important for future LIGO
              interferometers.  Following up on the previous results, they have chosen the
              principal goals of the research to be done under this grant to be:

  I.    
              To realize further improvements of the quality-factors of the pendulum and
              violin modes of the suspensions (Q-factors greater than about 100 million are
              expected).  These will be achieved by the identification and reduction of a
              variety of dissipation mechanisms, including losses caused by electric and
              magnetic fields that actuators apply to the test masses, and surface losses in
              the suspension fibers.

  II.    To carry out experimental and theoretical
              investigations of excess noise in suspension fibers at a level which is much
              less than thermal equilibrium energies.

The MSU group has also worked in the
              past on "quantum non-demolition" techniques for precision measurements.  In
              collaboration with Professor Thorne of Caltech they will pursue a third
              goal:

  III.   To devise and to analyze theoretically schemes for
              gravitational-wave antennae in LIGO, and readout systems which can overcome the
              "standard quantum limit" while using light power that is low enough to be
              practical.

The grant provides for travel funds so the Moscow group can
              transfer to the LIGO team the techniques, and technology that they develop for
              high-Q fused silica suspension systems, and for the reduction of various kinds
              of dissipation and excess noise in the test masses and their suspensions.  The
              Moscow group will also provide advice to the LIGO team about various aspects of
              the LIGO interferometer R&D program, including R&D for enhancements of the
              first LIGO interferometers.
*** 

