Title       : Dissertation Research: The Evolution of Mutualism and Cost-Benefit Analysis:
               Selection on Extrafloral Nectar Traits of Chamaecrista Fasciculata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9800876

Award Number: 9800876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5650               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Rausher mrausher@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Rausher  9800876      Mutualisms are ecological interactions between species in
              which both   species benefit from the interaction.  This project will evaluate
              the   assumptions and predictions of the cost-benefit framework for the  
              extrafloral nectar-mediated mutualism between ants and Chamaecrista  
              fasciculata, the partridge pea.  A field experiment will evaluate four  
              assumptions: 1) the mutualistic trait (extrafloral nectar) is costly to  
              provide, 2) the extrafloral nectar provides a benefit through reduction   of
              herbivore damage by ants attracted to the nectar, 3) the balance of   costs and
              benefits produces stabilizing selection favoring an   intermediate optimum, and
              4) manipulation of costs and benefits should   change the value of the
              selective optimum.  In addition, this project   will assess whether the
              cost-benefit framework can explain geographic   variation in extrafloral nectar
              traits in C. fasciculata.  Geographic   variation in the trait will be
              surveyed, and the hypothesis that   variation between populations is consistent
              with the presence of   different selective optima will be tested using a
              reciprocal transplant   experiment.   Mutualisms are ubiquitous, but
              theoretical and mechanistic   understanding of the processes that underlie them
              has progressed slowly.    Of the models that have been used to explain the
              evolution of mutualisms,   the cost-benefit approach is the most general and
              the most appropriate   framework for understanding the evolution of adaptive
              traits involved in   mutualisms.  This project will evaluate the assumptions
              and predictions   of the cost-benefit approach in regard to a mutualism between
              ants and a   common annual plant of the eastern United States, Chamaecrista  
              fasciculata (the partridge pea).  Data from this project should provide   an
              important empirical basis for future discussion of the pattern of   selection
              on mutualistic traits.
