Title       : Deformations of Complex Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a9800924

Award Number: 9800924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234834             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Bishop bishop@math.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Prof. Bishop will investigate several aspects of geometry and analysis related
              to non-smooth objects such as limit sets of Kleinian groups, Brownian motion
              and quasi-conformal mappings.  Among the specific goals are to extend his
              earlier application of harmonic analysis and heat kernel techniques to compute
              the exact size (in terms of Hausdorff measures) of the limit sets of Kleinian
              groups to new examples (e.g., manifolds with thin parts) and new sets (the
              conical limit set, the set of escaping geodesics,...).  He will also attempt to
              extend Bowen's famous dichotomy to all divergence type Fuchsian groups,
              extending work of Sullivan, Astala, Zinsmeister, Jones and himself. Part of
              this is to further study the ``beta''s, a technical measure of how close a set
              is to a line segment at different scales, which is closely related to the study
              of the traveling salesman problem.  He will also continue his work
              investigating the removable and non-removable sets for quasi-conformal
              mappings, geometric properties of Brownian motion, and other geometric-analytic
              questions in classical complex analysis.


The proposal deals with a variety
              of geometric questions which are united by a desire to understand traditional
              concepts and calculations (e.g. compute the area of a region) in
              non-traditional and highly non-smooth cases.  This is motivated by (at least)
              two points of view.  First, a better understanding of the classical case can be
              obtained by seeing how it succeeds or fails in a more general setting; even the
              failures lead to new, interesting phenomena to investigate.  Second, many
              applications of mathematics (polymers, fractures, shock waves, wavelet
              analysis, crystal growth,...) involve highly irregular and fractal objects, and
              we need to understand and calculate with such objects the way we have always
              done with much smoother quantities.  For example, Brownian motion is a
              mathematical object which models random movement and is of tremendous intrinsic
              interest, as well as being fundamental to understanding many other random
              processes (e.g., shapes of long polymers chains, growth of crystals by random
              accretion, ...). However, Brownian motion is an extremely non-smooth process
              and various simple geometric questions about its random paths are still
              unknown.  Another example is with the Kleinian groups mentioned above.  These
              are symmetries in non-Euclidean geometry; as such, they are fundamental objects
              in topology and have been an area of intense investigation for many years. 
              They can be associated with certain fractal objects (the limit sets) involving
              non-linear rescalings, where the non-linearity is of a very special type, and
              present a theoretical stepping stone between self-similar sets with linear
              rescalings (which are fairly well understood) and much more complicated
              rescalings found in rational dynamics and chaos theory. 


