Title       : SBIR Phase II: A New Technology for the Formation of Impermeable and Reactive
               Subsurface Barriers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a9800844

Award Number: 9800844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388578             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dalibor Hodko hodko@lynntech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lynntech, Inc
	      7610 Eastmark Drive, Suite 202
	      College Station, TX  778404024    409/693-0017

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1415,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                This Small Business Innovation Research(SBIR) Phase II project describes
              development of a new method for the in situ formation of impermeable and/or
              reactive barriers in soil for potential applications in environmental cleanup
              technologies and geophysical engineering. The placement of such barriers in
              soil as well as the formation of horizontal or vertical impermeable barriers is
              performed by pressure injection, which is limited by short grout permeation
              distances and shallow injection depth.  The proposed method was successfully
              tested in Phase I for the formation of reactive, permeable zero-valent iron
              barriers and impermeable cementitious barriers. It provides an easy control of
              soil conditions as well as a distribution of the reagents to control the
              barrier permeability through gelling and/or polymerization. It can be applied
              in saturated soils of low or high hydraulic permeability where injection
              grouting is not efficient. Phase II will focus on the optimization of the
              parameters governing the process of controlled transport of colloidal particles
                     through the soil and on-the-field demonstration of the formation of both
              the impermeable and reactive barriers in soil.  Initial markets for the
              impermeable barriers will include repair and maintenance of clay liners in
              leaking landfills, soil containment, consolidation and improvement in
              under-water-constructions and construction below the buildings. Reactive walls,
              consisting of zero-valent iron or microorganisms prepared by the proposed
              method will find applications in treatment of polluted groundwater and soil at
              both industrial and military sites. The EPA estimates the use of in situ
              formation of `reactive walls` in which chlorinated solvents are converted from
              toxic to benign substances in situ, could save $ 1 billion in cleanup of
              contaminated sites.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
