Title       : GOALI: Systems Integration of Uncooled YBaCuO IR Detectors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  2000  
File        : a9800062

Award Number: 9800062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216083             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald P. Butler dpb@seas.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zeynep Celik-Butler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9800062  Butler  This proposal concerns the investigation and development of
              high detectivity pyroelectric infrared imagers operating at room temperature. 
              Previous work supported by the National Science Foundation and Army Research
              Office has shown that semiconducting, thin film YBaCuO possesses a high
              pyroelectric coefficient at room temperature, two hundred times greater than
              other thin film materials.  This enables high detectivity pyroelectric thermal
              detectors to be fabricated on micromachined thermal isolation structures
              integrated on CMOS read-out circuitry, since the amorphous semiconducting phase
              of YBaCuO, used in these imaging devices, is deposited at ambient temperature
              with no need of high temperature post-annealing.  It has been demonstrated by
              researchers at Southern Methodist University (SMU) that surfacemicromachined
              Nb/YBaCuO/Nb capacitor structures are capable of exhibiting pyroelectric
              coefficients in the range of 65 nC/K cm2 without an externally applied electric
              field and in the absence of prior poling.  When poled, the pyroelectric
              coefficient was found to increase to 18 (C/cm2-K.  If integrated with
              state-of-the-art thermal isolation structures, background limited performance
              is achievable.  High detectivity pyroelectric imagers will be fabricated by
              combining the SMU pyroelectric devices with the state-of-the-art thermal
              isolation structures and read-out circuitry produced by Raytheon/TI Systems. 
              Various issues at the systems level must be addressed and solved including
              process compatibility, electrical compatibility, and system figures of merit. 
              To solve the electrical compatibility issue, the resistive loss of YBaCuO will
              be decreased by adjusting its oxygen content.  Process compatibility issue will
              be addressed by finding an appropriate electrode metal for YBaCuO that is CMOS
              compatible and designing a fabrication process that incorporates the principles
              of YBaCuO deposition and lithography with micromachining technology developed
              for the thermal isolation structu res at Raytheon/TI Systems.  Several figures
              of merit, such as pyroelectric coefficient, pyroelectric figure of merit,
              responsivity, specific detectivity, noise, will be used to assess performance
              at the focal plane array level. The pyroelectric properties and the noise
              mechanisms, which limit the detectivity and are uniquely characteristic of the
              high degree of thermal isolation, will be investigated.  Upon successful
              completion of integration at the focal plane array level, a systems-integration
              will be attempted towards a complete IR camera.        The proposed work will
              realize a full range of engineering processes from basic research to device
              concepts to systems integration, thereby developing a complete uncooled IR
              imager, unsurpassed in performance and cost.  ***
