Title       : Metropolitan East Coast Regional Assessment of Climate Change Impacts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1999     
File        : a9800814

Award Number: 9800814
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197415             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lewis E. Gilbert gel@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter M. Eisenberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5418      OCE SPECIAL PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1314,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                As scientific research has improved understandings of the complex ways that
              climate and other facets of the global environment are changing, increased
              attention has focused on the impacts of those changes on people and ecosystems.
               In response to these changes, the U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP)
              and the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) have
              coordinated planning for a series of workshops that will focus on the impacts
              of global climate change on regional scales.  Eight workshops in this series
              and a national climate change forum were held in 1997; ten additional regional
              workshops are planned for 1998.  This award provides support to Columbia
              University for the conduct of a workshop and related regional assessment
              activities that will focus on the regional impacts of global climate change in
              the Metro East Coast region that stretches from Boston to Washington but that
              focuses on the New York and Philadelphia metropolitan areas.  The workshop will
              be conducted on the Columbia campus on 23-24 March 1998.  About two hundred
              people from the region are expected to attend the workshop.  The workshop will
              consist of a set of alternating formats, including plenary sessions, panel
              presentations, break-out discussions, and open-discussion sessions.  Topics on
              which attention will be focused include the impacts of global climate change on
              business and finance, state and local governments, human health ,
              transportation and commerce, energy, water, recreation and tourism, and natural
              and renewable resources.  A written report will be prepared and disseminated by
              the workshop organizers soon after the conclusion of the workshop.  In addition
              to conducting the workshop, the principal investigator and colleagues from
              regional institutions will continue development of a regional stakeholders
              network and contribute to the development of multi-regional syntheses and
              national sectoral cross-cutting assessments.  This workshop and related
              assessment activities will provide valuable new insights into the impacts of
              global change on a diverse set of sectors and activities in the Metro East
              Coast region.  Because it is being conducted as part of a coordinated set of
              regional workshops, its outcomes will also be useful in a comparative framework
              as the U.S. assesses likely impacts of environmental change.  In addition to
              its scientific value, the Metro East Coast assessment will engage local
              residents from many different fields into discussions that will facilitate
              public education and outreach about this important topic.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
