Title       : Studies of Two-Dimensional Superconductors and Multilayers in Magnetic Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a9800663

Award Number: 9800663
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $383669             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aharon Kapitulnik ak@loki.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm R. Beasley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9800663  Kapitulnik    This  experimental  two  investigator  research  project 
              is  concerned    with    detailed    understanding    of     2-D 
              superconductivity. Four research topics are as follows:  (a)  The   nature  of 
              the  thermodynamic  transition  near  Hc2,  including   the   validity  of  the
               Lowest   Landau   Level  approximation   (b)  The  length  scales   associated
                with  disorder,  and,  specifically,  comparison  of  the   length 
              associated with crossover of the dynamics with the  disorder  length  extracted
              from dc critical current measurements  (c)  The  superconductor-insulator
              transition, with  emphasis  on  possible    quantum   tunneling   of   vortices
                 in    the  superconducting  phase  and possible  effects  of  screening 
              (from  a groundplane) on the nature of the transition,  and,  (d)  The effect
              of bias current on the vortex system in  2-D  superconductors.  A substantial
              portion  of  the  work  will  involve  multilayers of MoGe alloys. This system
              has  proven  to  be an excellent model system in the investigation of 3-D  to 
              2-D  crossover effects in superconductivity. This highly  interdisciplinary
              research will involve graduate student and  postdoctoral researchers who will
              receive excellent training  beneficial  to their future careers in industry, 
              government  or academia.  %%%  This experimental two investigator basic
              research project  focuses on the special features that occur as superconductor 
              samples approach the limit of being two-dimensional. A two-  dimensional sample
              is one that is so thin that no motion of  carriers or electric current occurs
              in the direction  perpendicular to the plane of the sample. The project will 
              probe these properties in samples which are "superlattices"  similar in nature
              to a deck of cards, where each card is a  superconducting layer and a thin
              insulating layer is placed  between each conducting layer. In this work the two
              types of  layer will typically be alloys of Molybdenum and Germanium,  which
              form an alloy syst em such that Ge-rich alloys are  insulating and other alloy
              compositions can be metallic or  superconducting. This system is chosen as a
              "model system"  in which to carefully study effects that occur in materials  of
              potential for applications, such as cuprate  superconductors. The effects can
              be more reliably studied in  the model system than in the cuprates. Thus the
              results of  the basic study will lead to greater understanding of  cuprate
              superconductivity, and may lead to new applications  for these materials. This
              highly interdisciplinary research  will involve graduate student and
              postdoctoral researchers  who will receive excellent training beneficial to
              their  future careers in industry, government or academia.  ***
