Title       : Nonlinear Programming for Large-Scale Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9800544

Award Number: 9800544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375408             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen G. Nash snash@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ariela Sofer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9800544
Nash
     This grant builds upon prior research on optimization
              algorithms and software to develop successful methods for medical imaging and
              other challenging applied problems.  Some of the applications studied are image
              reconstruction via Positron Emission Tomography (PET), radiation therapy
              planning, x-ray crystallography, and the modeling of underwater aquifers. These
              problems are very large. The algorithms used are based upon well developed
              general-purpose methods for nonlinear optimization. They use as a foundation
              software for unconstrained optimization (both serial and parallel) based on a
              truncated-Newton method developed in prior research. The applied algorithms
              also use sophisticated ideas developed for barrier methods, techniques that
              ensure stable numerical computations capable of producing high-accuracy
              solutions. The algorithms are also based on primal-dual frameworks that are
              proving to be successful for wide classes of linear and nonlinear optimization
              problems.  The work extends these powerful computational tools, by exploiting
              the special features of the applied problems.  Parallelism (both in the
              underlying optimization method and in the calculations of the model functions)
              is also essential to achieve effective methods.
     The immediate goal of
              this research is to produce software that can be used by scientists and
              clinicians.  This requires algorithms that are fast and reliable.  The
              longer-term hope is that the techniques developed for these applied problems
              will lead to improved methods for general-purpose optimization.  The overall
              intent is to produce reliable algorithms and software to solve these problems
              as rapidly as possible.



