Title       : Operator Theory and Quadrature Formulas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a9800666

Award Number: 9800666
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96633              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mihai Putinar mputinar@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Principal Investigator: Mihai Putinar    The project focuses on three themes,
              all well connected to each other: quadrature domains for harmonic functions via
              hyponormal operators of rank-one self-commutator, cubature formulas in several
              variables for polynomials of a fixed degree via dilation theory (with
              prescribed commutators, for tuples of self-adjoint operators) and the spectral
              picture of spherical isometries in a Hilbert space. The basis for the first
              subject is the progress made in the last five years in the study of quadrature
              domains with linear algebra techniques, and specifically using determinantal
              functions of pairs of matrices. There are many analogies with classical
              perturbation theory of self-adjoint operators which point to several open
              problems resulting from this approach. The second theme is based on the
              observation made a couple of years ago by the P.I. that practically all facts
              connected with multivariate cubatures can be translated into familiar terms of
              dilation theory (of commuting Jacobi matrices). It is expected that this point
              of view will be successfully exploited by both sides. The third subject is a
              specialization of the second, for positive measures supported by odd spheres.
              The complex variables and the associated Toeplitz operators (which are typical
              examples of spherical isometries-- ubiquitous objects in modern operator
              theory) are expected to carry in a closed, flexible form the basic information
              about the original measure.      Inverse problems, that is the reconstruction
              of complex objects from partial data, are everywhere present in modern science
              and technology. To give a few classical examples we can mention the vibrations
              of a string, the shape of a planet knowing its distant gravitation field, or
              the evolution of an oil spill in water. The proposal is aimed at solving some
              mathematical questions related to inverse problems related to shapes or to mass
              distributions. A history of more than one century of remarkable discoveries in
              this area will be comb ined with recent advances in modern mathematics. The
              resulting work will be significant for the present research frontier in
              mathematics and potentially for applied fields such as geophysics, image
              processing or tomography.
