Title       : Geometric Langlands Correspondence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1998      
File        : a9800511

Award Number: 9800511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79680              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis Gaitsgory   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9800511
Gaitsgory

This project is devoted to the study of the geometric
              Langlands program. This is a relatively new field whose basic feature is the
              employment of methods of modern algebraic geometry (e.g., the theory of
              perverse sheaves, algebraic stacks, D-modules, conformal field theory) for
              investigation of various problems in representation theory and in number
              theory. The purpose of the geometric Langlands program is to relate local
              systems on an algebraic curve with respect to some reductive group to perverse
              sheaves on the moduli space of principle bundles on that curve with respect to
              the Langlands dual group. In this proposal three particular directions of study
              are suggested: 1) Construction of automorphic sheaves for  GL(n) using a
              geometric analog of the Whittaker model; 2) The study of automorphic sheaves
              that correspond to local systems induced from the maximal torus, i.e. the case
              of Eisenstein series;  3) Construction of automorphic sheaves for GL(2) that
              correspond to 2-dimensional ramified local systems. Progress in each of the
              above directions will contribute to a better understanding of the general
              structure of the Langlands correspondence and of the related number-theoretic
              and representation-theoretic problems.

This proposal is in the part of
              mathematics known as the Langlands program. The Langlands program is part of
              number theory. Number theory is the study of the  properties of the integral
              numbers and is the oldest branch of mathematics. From the outset, problems in
              number theory have furnished a driving force in creating new ideas in all areas
              of mathematics. The Langland's program is a general philosophy that connects
              number theory with calculus; it embodies the modern approach to the study of
              integral numbers. The object of this proposal is to explore the applications of
              geometric techniques within the Langlands program.

