Title       : Ultrasonic Evaluation of Delimination Defects at FRP/Concrete Interface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a9800345

Award Number: 9800345
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149986             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohammad R. Ehsani ehsani@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tribikram Kundu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9800345  Ehsani  Fiber Reinforced Composites (FRP) are fast becoming a viable 
              new construction material.  Perhaps the most suitable area  of application for
              these materials is in the field of  strengthening and rehabilitation of
              existing civil  structures.  Numerous field applications have demonstrated 
              that FRPs can result in some 30% cost savings compared to  conventional
              rehabilitation techniques.    The success of the technique depends to great
              extend on the  quality of the construction, and in particular, the epoxy  joint
              which had to transfer the stresses from the FRP plate  to the substrate. 
              Consequently, there is a great need for  development of Non-Destructive
              Evaluation (NDE) techniques  which could detect any flaws or delaminations in
              the epoxy  bond line.  Such a system could not only be used to ensure  quality
              of construction, but could also help with detection  of any damage that may
              form during the life of the structure  by environmental effects such as
              ultraviolet rays, moisture  penetration, etc.    The quality of rehabilitation
              will be monitored  nondestructively by ultrasonic inspection of internal 
              defects, voids and delaminations, when the specimen is not  homogeneous, such
              as a composite layer that is to be used,  evaluation of interfaces between two
              different materials or  layers is a much harder job.  It is specially difficult
              if  the two interfaces are debonded or weakly bonded but are in  close contact
              with each other forming what is called  "kissing" or "slip" bonds.    Hence for
              this applicaiton the Lamb wave scanning technique  appears to be the superior
              technique.  ***
