Title       : GOALI/IUCP: Improving Manufacturability of Powder Metallurgy (P/M) Superalloys
               by Microstructural Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2001   
File        : a9800430

Award Number: 9800430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311526             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Nettleship nettles@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alice E. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Rizzo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              DMI-9800430  Nettleship  This is a Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with
              Industry (GOALI) Collaborative Research project to improve manufacturability of
              superalloys made using the powder metallurgy (P/M) process. Crucible Compaction
              Metals, a leading maker of P/M superalloys for critical applications in
              aerospace and energy, is the industrial partner.  The academic participants are
              an inter-disciplinary team representing materials science and engineering and
              industrial and manufacturing engineering.  The approach taken is to examine the
              P/M manufacturing process as a whole with the objective being to develop
              relationships of the various processing parameters to the mechanical properties
              of the final product. Using insights and relationships that describe how
              processing affects first microstructure, then final characteristics, a
              prescriptive model for improving manufacturability can be inferred.    This
              model will help engineers and plant managers reduce batch variability, make
              continuous improvements in the processing steps, formalize successful operator
              actions and interventions, and ultimately design products that meet or exceed
              specifications while being cost effective to make. Experimental and analytical
              work will be conducted for the two most complex and important processing steps:
              inert gas atomization and hot isostatic pressing.  Variables describing the
              beginning raw materials, the machine settings at the various manufacturing
              steps, the ambient conditions in the plant, operator expertise and action, and
              the product design will be linked to the properties of the superalloy as
              evidenced by detailed examination of microstructure and thorough materials
              testing.  Using inference and inversion, the models of
              process-to-microstructure-to-properties can be used to prescribe the steps to
              be taken to improve the process.
