Title       : Magnetic Ordering in Solid 3He
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a9800712

Award Number: 9800712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Dwight Adams adams@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                         9800712  Adams    This  is an experimental project in low temperature
              physics.  The  research will employ the facilities at the Microkelvin
              Laboratory  at  the  University  of Florida, and the National  High  Magnetic 
              Field  Laboratory at the University of Florida and Florida  State  University. 
              The  research focuses on magnetic and  thermodynamic  properties of solid
              Helium-3, an isotope of Helium. Solid Helium-  3  exhibits  novel and complex
              magnetic phases as a  function  of  magnetic  field  and temperature. The
              transition from  the  high-  field  phase  to the paramagnetic phase of
              anti-ferromagnetically  ordered  body-centered-cubic Helium-3  will  be 
              investigated  at  magnetic fields and temperatures previously unavailable. A
              second  investigation will use the technique of cascade magnetization  to 
              study  ferromagnetic ordering of the hexagonal-close-packed phase  at 
              temperatures in the microKelvin range. A third  project  will  study the
              magnetism of droplets of frozen Helium-3 in a matrix of  Helium-4,  the  other 
              and more common isotope  of  Helium.  Here  surface effects influence the
              magnetic properties of the Helium-3  in  ways that are not understood. The
              research provides excellent  training  of  graduate students and post-doctoral 
              associates  in  cutting-edge research in the properties of matter at extremes 
              of  (low) temperature and ultra-high magnetic fields. This background  prepares
               the  students  for careers in  a  range  of  employment  opportunities, from
              basic research to technological areas.  %%%  This  is an experimental project
              in low temperature physics.  The  research will employ the facilities at the
              Microkelvin Laboratory  at  the  University  of Florida, and the National  High
               Magnetic  Field  Laboratory at the University of Florida and Florida  State 
              University.   The   research  focuses   on   the   magnetic   and 
              thermodynamic properties of magnetically ordered solid  Helium-3,  an isotope
              of Helium. Solid Helium-3 is a model magnetic mat erial  that  exhibits complex
              magnetic phases as a function of  magnetic  field and temperature. It is novel
              in that these phases are found  only at ultra-low temperatures and at
              ultra-high magnetic fields.  The  research therefore demands unique
              instrumentation  available  only at a few laboratories in the world, including
              the University  of  Florida  and  Florida State University. The experiments 
              will  investigate  the magnetic properties of Helium-3 at  temperatures  within
               a few millionths of absolute zero, and at magnetic fields  that  are  a 
              billion times the strength of the earth's  magnetic  field.  The results are of
              fundamental interest but are  relevant  to  all  fields of magnetism where
              magnetic properties vary  with  temperature  or  magnetic field. The research
              provides  excellent  training  of  graduate students and post-doctoral 
              associates  in  cutting-edge research in the properties of matter at extremes 
              of  (low) temperature and ultra-high magnetic fields. This background  prepares
               the  students  for careers in  a  range  of  employment  opportunities, from
              basic research to technological areas.  ***
