Title       : Geometric Applications of Non-Abelian Hodge Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2001      
File        : a9800790

Award Number: 9800790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tony Pantev tpantev@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                        Pantev  9800790      Pantev will use techniques from abelian and
              non-abelian Hodge theory to approach concrete geometric questions as well as
              problems in mathematical physics and string theory. Four problems will be
              studied. The first one is to look for a construction of a linear algebraic
              object that is canonically associated to a projective variety X and calculate
              the cohomology of all local systems on X together with their Hodge structures
              whenever the latter makes sense. The second concerns the non-abelian Hodge
              conjecture on curves and provides an intrinsic geometric characterization of
              the locus of motivic local systems. The third discusses a construction of a
              singular plane curve whose complement has a non-residually finite fundamental
              group. The fourth project suggests a geometric strategy for understanding the
              appearance of enhanced gauge symmetry in string theory and proposes a method
              for analyzing the exotic components of F theory moduli spaces. The
              understanding of these questions is essential for unifying various
              linearization procedures in algebraic geometry and mathematical physics. On one
              hand, it will bring us closer to understanding the basic structure of algebraic
              varieties, and on the other hand it will bring a geometric perspective to the
              interaction of the recently discovered M and F string theories.      This is
              research in the field of algebraic geometry. Algebraic geometry is one of the
              oldest parts of modern mathematics, but  one that has had a revolutionary
              flowering in the past quarter-century. In its origin, it treated figures that
              could be defined  in the plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials.
              Nowadays the field makes use of methods not only from algebra, but from
              analysis and topology, and conversely is finding  application in those fields
              as well as in physics, theoretical  computer science, and robotics.
