Title       : PPD/DP: MAVIS: Mathematics Accessible to Visually Impaired Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a9800209

Award Number: 9800209
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $582134             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Gillan gillan@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur I. Karshmer  (Principal Investigator former)
              Gopal Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra Gieger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Mathematics Accessible to Visually Impaired Students (MAVIS)  is an access
              project dedicated to ensuring that communication  between mathematics faculty
              and their blind students is clear and  meaningful.  Two major problems exist
              when attempting to establish  this communication.  First, faculty cannot easily
              make their  mathematics and science instructional and assessment materials 
              accessible to these students.  Second, blind students cannot  independently
              communicate their course work with faculty in print,  and few teachers will be
              proficient in Braille codes.  The goal of  the proposed research is to give
              better access to visually impaired  students to the educational domains of
              science, engineering,  mathematics and technology.  The objectives of the MAVIS
              project  are to ensure:      o  that tools and channels are available to
              instructors       nationwide so that they may be able to give their students   
                 quality materials at the same time as their sighted peers;     o  that tools
              are available to visually impaired students so they       can produce quality
              standard print technical documents for       their instructors;     o  that
              in-class electronic devices are accessible, and    o  that all of the above are
              not only usable, but also are       intuitive to learn.       MAVIS proposes to
              support and conduct research and development  projects in the following areas: 
              (1) LaTex to Nemeth code  translation filter; (2) Back-translation filter; (3)
              Math screen  readers and equation browsers, and (4) Testing and evaluation of
              an  accessible graphing calculator and other non-MAVIS access  technology. 
              MAVIS will also use its Braille and tactile image  production lab for science,
              mathematics, engineering,  and  technology (SMET) courses offered at New Mexico
              State University.
