Title       : Index Theory of Perturbed Dirac Operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a9800782

Award Number: 9800782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64227              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Haskell haskell@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Haskell. Abs    Abstract    Proposal: DMS-9800782  Principal Investigator: Peter
              Haskell      Professor Haskell plans to study the index theory of perturbed
              operators of Dirac type on complete and incomplete noncompact manifolds.
              Index-theoretic invariants of such operators extend the invariants arising from
              coarse geometry and suggest a formulation of a theory of ends for operator
              algebras. Some examples of Dolbeault operators with meromorphic perturbations
              have been used in physical models. Index formulas for more general examples
              involve the Todd class of the perturbation's possibly singular zero set.  The
              index of an operator that is invariant under and elliptic in directions
              transverse to a smooth action of a compact Lie group on a closed manifold is
              usually expressed as a distribution but can be expressed in terms of
              differences of multiplicities of irreducible representations in the operator's
              kernel and cokernel. Professor Haskell plans to calculate the latter version
              using indices of perturbed first-order differential operators on incomplete
              manifolds. Professor Haskell also plans to develop the index theory associated
              with self-adjoint perturbed Dirac operators. This will include the role of such
              operators in the index theory of perturbed Dirac operators on noncompact
              manifolds with noncompact boundaries. Such work will begin with the
              investigation of the effect of perturbation growth and end geometry on the
              spectral theory of self-adjoint perturbed Dirac operators.    Because much of
              physics is about quantities, such as velocity and acceleration, which represent
              rates of change, mathematical models of physics are often expressed as
              differential equations, the solutions of which are functions whose rates of
              change have specified properties. Index theory (for  instance, the
              Atiyah-Singer index theorem) is the study of geometric properties revealed by
              the comparison of sizes of solution sets of differential equations. Many of the
              most challenging problems in geometry and topology involve  spaces that extend
              indefinitely. Because many physical models are based on Euclidean space,
              physicists have studied examples of differential equations on spaces that
              extend indefinitely. Physical problems involving these differential equations
              are most tractable in the presence of a constraining force, whose mathematical
              manifestation is as a potential term in the differential equations (for
              example, in the Schroedinger equations of quantum physics). Professor Haskell
              plans to investigate the geometric information carried by differential
              equations with potential terms in more complicated geometric settings. While
              understanding the analysis on and geometry of complicated spaces that extend
              indefinitely is a goal in itself, this work may also have implications for
              models of geometrically constrained physical systems. Because Professor
              Haskell's techniques are based on "noncommutative topology" (that is, spaces
              are studied via algebras of functions on them), this work should also reveal
              finer structures, such as symmetries, that can be encoded in noncommutative
              algebras.
