Title       : Shaping the Future of Geoscience Education: Guidelines for Development of an
               Introductory Undergraduate Curriculum in Earth System Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9800839

Award Number: 9800839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward C. Roy   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Busch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  78212    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is a collective professional response to the NSF supported
              conference on Earth System Education and the resultant report of
              recommendations contained in "Shaping The Future of Undergraduate Earth Science
               Education."  It provides an operative step by involving a wide spectrum of the
              geoscience community in the undergraduate earth system curriculum reform
              effort.  Several dozen individuals, from two year community college
              institutions, to doctoral research institutions, will participate in a working
              conference to begin to plan an appropriate and collective geoscience response
              to a major undergraduate earth system curriculum reform effort.  Workshop
              participants will develop guidelines for development of content, pedagogical
              strategies, and instructional material for the new curriculum.  This curriculum
              reform program parallels earlier calculus and chemistry reform initiatives and
              is intended to bring a more integrated, earth systems approach, to the
              introductory geoscience sequence.  The activity is projected to be a
              multi-year, multi-institutional, effort and is designed to strengthen
              curriculum for majors and enhance offerings for non-majors.  Specific outcomes
              from this initiative will be: a content framework for a two-semester
              introductory, undergraduate, Earth system science curriculum; a curriculum
              template that will serve as the content framework model; a time table, resource
              and organizational framework for the comprehensive curriculum reform effort.  A
              workshop report will be published and sent to Chairpersons of all U.S.
              undergraduate geoscience departments and geoscience professional organizations.
               The report, including personal perspectives, instructor commentary, and links
              to other Earth system related reform efforts will be available on a project Web
              site.
