Title       : Dynamics of First-Order Phase Transitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2002   
File        : a9800074

Award Number: 9800074
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $734600             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Oxtoby d-oxtoby@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              David Oxtoby is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his work on nucleation   theory.  He will use
              statistical mechanical techniques, primarily density   functional approaches,
              to investigate the dynamics of first-order phase   transitions.  Such
              transitions are of central importance in many areas of   science and
              technology.  The objective of the current research program is   to develop new
              theoretical approaches to be able to predict nucleation   rates for gas-liquid
              and liquid-solid phase transitions.  The density   functional approach used by
              Oxtoby incorporates atomic-level interactions   to an extent not possible in
              traditional classical theories of   nucleation.  Specific targets of the
              research program for the next three   years include: 1) a better understanding
              of the effects of dipolar   interactions on nucleation; 2) a microscopic and
              predictive approach to   the phase diagrams of three-component
              water-oil-surfactant systems that   produce microemulsions; 3) an improved
              theory of crystal nucleation in   metal alloys; 4) a new approach to protein
              crystallization and its   relation to coagulation; and 5) a careful study of
              the effects of solid   substrates and electric fields on crystal nucleation. 
              Nucleation is important in a number of areas of science and technology  
              including: 1) the condensation and freezing of water vapor in clouds; 2)   the
              casting of solid metals and metal alloys from the melt; and 3) the   growth of
              protein crystals from solution in order to determine their   structure.  On a
              molecular level, the mechanism of these changes of state   are not well
              understood, and perhaps the least-understood aspect is the   rate at which the
              first clusters of the new phase appear.  This step,   defined as nucleation, is
              often rate-determining for the formation of the   new phase, and it is the step
              which Oxtoby's research will attempt to   elucidate.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
