Title       : A Search for Gravitational Radiation at LIGO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1999     
File        : a9800961

Award Number: 9800961
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Brau jimbrau@faraday.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1252      SUPPORT OF LIGO RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***
9800961
Brau

The Oregon Experimental Relativity Group will collaborate
              with the LIGO Scientific Collaboration on preparations to search for
              gravitational radiation.  With the construction of LIGO, a new era of
              sensitivity to gravitational radiation will begin.  After LIGO commissioning,
              the first detection of the effects of gravity waves on the strain measurements
              in the LIGO interferometers will come from careful analysis of noise-dominated
              data streams.  This will require a careful characterization of the noise,
              including the many sources of environmental noise, and the correlation of these
              noise sources among interferometers.  Environmental noise includes subtle
              effects such as stray magnetic field and cosmic ray interactions with detector
              elements that may limit LIGO's sensitivity after the initial phase of
              operation.  Prior to LIGO commissioning, during the next two years, the Oregon
              group will develop analysis techniques, analyze simulated interferometer data
              sets, and investigate the influence of environmental factors on this simulated
              data and the anticipated real data.

Following the discovery and the initial
              tests of General Relativity, one can expect a new astronomy of detection of
              emitters of gravitational radiation to greatly expand our understanding of the
              universe.  By concentrating on data analysis and investigation of environmental
              influences on the interferometer data, the Oregon group will make an important
              contribution to the creation and exploration of this new frontier.  Successful
              observation of gravity waves will rely on detailed data analysis of an evolving
              nature.  Initially there is the identification of spurious noise and faulty
              performance of the instrument.  Success will depend on analysis tools that are
              able to isolate quickly sources for correction.  This also requires a good
              characterization of the surrounding environmental noise sources.  As the
              performance improves, the irreducible limits of performance will be explored. 
              Only with an advanced understanding of the character of the LIGO data will it
              be possible to develop new techniques to search for increasingly subtle sources
              of gravitational radiation, and to adapt these techniques to test new effects
              and ideas.  By developing tools to understand this data, the Oregon group will
              be in a position to exploit fully the science of LIGO after LIGO is
              commissioned by the LIGO Laboratory.
***

