Title       : Dynamical Models for the Interaction of Shocks with Dispersive Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1998     
File        : a9800797

Award Number: 9800797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans P. Engler                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61921              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul K. Newton newton@spock.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               In this work, the awardee will study models for the propagation of
 shock
              waves through a dispersive environment. These kinds of 
 nonlinear, multi-mode
              interactions occur in a wide range of 
 natural settings. One example arises
              when acoustic shocks from 
 an underwater explosion propagate through the
              ocean and interact 
 with internal dispersive waves or surface gravity waves.
              Another 
 example arises in medical applications where acoustic waves and 

              shocks are used in the destruction of undesirable objects such 
 as kidney
              stones. A third arises when shock waves due to 
 supernova explosions
              propagate through the interstellar plasma 
 media. Despite the fact that these
              three physical settings
 are characterized by vastly different spatial scales
              and 
 disparate physical mechanisms, there are important underlying 

              mathematical similarities that unite them. Each is characterized 
 by a
              multi-component amplitude equation governing
 a fast-moving hyperbolic wave
              (shock), interacting nonlinearly 
 with a slowly-moving dispersive wave. This
              wide difference
 of timescales, characterized by the ratio of dispersive group
              velocity to
 shock speed, forms a small parameter which allows one to
              perform
 a multi-scale asymptotic analysis of the interaction process.        
                  

 The physical problem that the awardee will focus on  
 is an example
              of a shock-dispersive wave system that 
 arises when a supersonic object
              travels over the ocean surface. 
 The shock wave associated with a sonic boom
              leaves a pressure 
 `footprint' on the water's surface.  The interest is in
              modelling 
 the interaction of this shock with the nonlinear ocean surface 

              waves in order to understand the penetration pressure below the
 ocean
              surface. It is suspected that the finite amplitude 
 surface waves can act as
              focusing `acoustic lenses', which in 
 principle can increase the noise level
              below the surface and
 create `hot spots' of more intense acoustic energy.
              Such problems 
 are of interest to oceanographers and marine biologists who
              are 
 concerned with the amount of noise propagating below the ocean 

              surface and its influence on marine life. 
 The model equations that will be
              studied are interesting 
 in their own right and capture important physical

              mechanisms requiring new mathematical tools to analyse 
 and understand them.
              



