Title       : Mathematical Problems in Low Dimensional Gauge Theories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9800955

Award Number: 9800955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74646              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ambar N. Sengupta sengupta@math.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Proposal: DMS-9800955  Principal Investigator:  Ambar Sengupta   
              This project is an investigation of certain infinite dimensional  functional
              integrals and measures arising from geometric quantum field  theories and their
              relationship to natural geometric objects in two  and three dimensions.  In two
              dimensions the object in question is the  moduli space of flat connections over
              a surface.  This space appears  in contexts as diverse as algebraic geometry
              and quantum gauge theory:  it is the moduli space of representations of the
              fundamental group of  a surface, it has arisen in the study of certain
              invariants of  three-dimensional manifolds, and in certain contexts it is the
              moduli  space of certain types of bundles over a surface.  Dr.  Sengupta has 
              been led to study the structure and nature of the moduli space through  his
              investigation of a limiting classical form of an infinite  dimensional measure
              which arises in the quantum theoretic study of  gauge fields.  This
              investigation will study the infinite-dimensional  quantum field theoretic
              measure, understand the way in which it  condenses onto a natural volume
              measure on the moduli space, and  extract information about the structure and
              volumes of the various  strata of this space.  This investigator believes that
              much  topological information about the moduli space of flat connections is 
              contained in the Yang-Mills probability measure.  It is hoped that  this
              project will provide a fruitful example of how probability theory  can be used
              to understand topology in this context.  In three  dimensions, this project
              aims to develop a rigorous analysis of the  quantum-field theoretic functional
              integrals arising in Chern-Simons  theory and understand, at a rigorous level,
              their relationship with  topological invariants.  These investigations will
              also provide new  concrete non-linear problems and techniques, involving
              stochastic  processes on Lie groups, in infinite-dimensional Gaussian analysis.
                 In broad terms, this project inv estigates mathematical questions that 
              arise from the deep relationship between geometry, topology, and  physics.  The
              idea that space, time, and matter can be understood in  terms of geometry forms
              the foundation of Einstein's general theory of  relativity.  Later, as the
              study of quantum theory and elementary  particles developed, it was discovered
              through the works of Yang,  Mills, and others, that geometry and topology play
              an even deeper and  more subtle role in mediating the fundamental forces of
              nature.  In  recent years, many mathematicians have focused their attention on
              deep  problems in topology and geometry which arise from questions in 
              fundamental particle physics.  The mathematics here is often  understood at a
              rough and intuitive level.  This project is devoted to  putting some of these
              mathematical issues on firm foundations as well  as discovering new results in
              the mathematical setting.
