Title       : Backreaction Effects in Classical and Semiclassical Gravity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1999     
File        : a9800971

Award Number: 9800971
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Anderson anderson@wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      300 South Hawthrone Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27109    336/716-5000

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***
9800971
Anderson

Professor Paul Anderson will carry out several
              projects relating to backreaction effects in semiclassical gravity.  Three
              projects relate to the study of quantum effects in black hole spacetimes.  They
              include a search for solutions to the semiclassical backreaction equations that
              could correspond to black hole remnants, an investigation of the effects which
              quantized fields have on the interior of a black hole, and a study of how
              quantum effects influence critical phenomena that have been found in
              gravitational collapse.  Another project involves the study of the effects of
              particle production on the expansion of the universe.
The research on black
              holes will address several important issues relating to the study of black
              holes.  The search for solutions to the semiclassical backreaction equations
              that could correspond to black hole remnants will address questions regarding
              the end point of the black hole evaporation process and what happens to the
              information about how a black hole formed.  The study of quantum effects inside
              of black holes will address the questions of whether quantum effects can remove
              the singularity at the center of a black hole, dissipate anisotropy in the
              interior of a black hole, or alter the causal structure inside of a charged
              black hole.  Critical phenomena have been found in classical gravitational
              collapse.  It is expected that the investigation of critical phenomena during
              gravitational collapse will show that quantum effects have a significant
              influence on this process.  The flatness problem is related to the question of
              why the universe is expanding the way it is today.  Unless it is spatially
              flat, a generic solution of Einstein's equations would predict that today the
              universe would be either contracting or expanding in a very different manner
              than it is.  Previous work has shown that if engough particle production occurs
              in the early universe then this problem can be solved in a natural way. 
              Various sources of particle production in the early universe will be examined
              to see if enough particle production could have taken place to solve the
              flatness problem.  Particle production in oscillating models of the universe
              will also be studied.  It is expected that in these models particle production
              can definitely be used to solve the flatness problem.
***

