Title       : Optimal Mechanical Design by Juxtaposing Rigidity and Compliance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9800417

Award Number: 9800417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194409             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suresh G. K. Ananthasuresh gksuresh@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for the development of a novel design
              methodology by juxtaposing rigidity and compliance.  A prudent combination of
              rigidity (stiffness) and compliance (flexibility) of structural elements is
              necessary for efficient mechanical design.  The objective of this research is
              to seek a rational approach to determination of how much rigidity/compliance is
              optimal in a mechanical device or a system, and where.  By combining the
              methods of structural design and compliant mechanism synthesis, a unified
              theory will be developed for design of mechanical devices with multiple rigid
              and/or compliant segments connected together with rigid and/or compliant
              joints.  Based on the kinetostatic synthesis solution, possible regions for
              joints (kinematic or compliant or fixed, hitherto undetermined) and individual
              components are identified for the topology optimization.  A topology
              optimization problem that accounts for joint locations and the nonlinearity
              incurred due to large deformations, is then solved.  Four types of constraints
              will be considered: desired path with an acceptable error envelope, volume
              constraints, constraint on the number of connections, and stress constraints.  
                  The successful completion of this research will lead to a method that will
              enable designers to systematically determine the optimal level of compliance
              for a given specification.  In this method, the designer doesn't have to
              specify which segments or joints ought to be rigid or compliant, rather the
              optimization itself will assist the designer to make this decision.  The
              solution of the topology optimization identifies the layout of individual
              components as well as the type of connections (kinematic, compliant, or fixed)
              among them.  Following this step, the designer can do an interactive parametric
              study and a virtual tryout to refine the design in a virtual environment.  This
              work will also contribute to the development of efficient numerical methods to
              compute the design sensitivities of structures undergoing nonlinear
              deformations.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
