Title       : PPD/DP: Special Science Teams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a9800336

Award Number: 9800336
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sami Kahn samkn@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arlene S. Chasek  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9253,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Consortium for Educational Equity at Rutgers University, an affiliate of the
              Center for Math, Science, and Computer Education is undertaking activities for
              the development, field-testing, and evaluation of Special Science Teams (SST),
              a professional development program for teachers of students with special needs.
               Targeting grades 3-5, SST is integrating exciting hands-on environmental
              science activities, equity-focused cooperative learning strategies and physical
              and pedagogical modification in an effort to provide teachers with the skills
              and knowledge necessary to encourage all children science, regardless of
              disability.

Inspired by the success of the original SST model, which has
              been highly effective in promoting gender and racial equity in elementary
              science classrooms, SST was created to address the underrepresentation of
              persons with disabilities in science careers.  The program seeks to overcome
              many of the barriers which contribute to the loss of interest and confidence in
              science experienced by students with disabilities including lack of exposure to
              science, negative stereotypes, and lack of encouragement in science.  By
              providing general and special education teachers with a comprehensive approach
              including equity-based cooperative learning techniques, specific strategies for
              modifying hands-on science activities, standards-based environmental science
              curriculum, disability equity training, and support for ongoing collaboration,
              SST is creating a synergy within participating districts who will utilize the
              expertise of all of their faculty.  As part of the project, SST will also be
              included in the pre-service education courses at the College of New Jersey, so
              that future teachers will be prepared to include all children in science.  SST
              targets grades 3-5 in an effort to reach students at a time when essential
              scientific concepts are first introduced, and developmentally, children are
              beginning for form lifelong opinions about disability.

The objectives of the
              project are:  (1) to provide general and special education teachers with
              classroom management skills which promote full participation by their students;
              (2) to provide teachers of students with disabilities strategies for adapting
              science activities for students with special needs; and (3) to promote
              collaboration between general and special education teachers within
              participating districts.

SST is a pioneering endeavor which will provide a
              model for districts nationwide which will be highly reproducible.  It will help
              to ensure that all teachers have the confidence and competence to teach science
              to students with disabilities, and will help all students to focus on each
              other's abilities rather than disabilities.

