Title       : PPD/IEP: Information Access - Education, Opportunities, and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2000    
File        : a9800175

Award Number: 9800175
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $893967             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Barner barner@eecis.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Foulds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Delaware has completed three years of NSF-  supported research
              focused on increasing the number of students  with disabilities in scientific
              academic programs and professions.   This effort has focused on increasing the
              access to information by  students with disabilities necessary for success in
              education and  careers in science, engineering, and mathematics.  The project
              has  also emphasized hands-on opportunities for students with  disabilities
              studying these disciplines and providing the  technological tools that provide
              the students full participation in  these fields.    Specifically, research and
              development efforts have centered on  three critical areas:      .  Model
              outreach projects for high school and university       students.  This
              component includes an Internet-based mentoring       program, technology based
              workshops and summer programs,       internships, campus organizations and
              support groups, and a       campus lecture series focused on disability,
              education, and       employment topics.    .  Educational and professional
              development programs for parents       and educators.  These programs are
              designed to allow greater       advocacy by parents and increase the knowledge
              base of       educators.   Components include workshops and lecture series     
               open to all parents and educators covering topics related to       disability,
              education, employment, and assistive technology.        Additionally, both
              pre-service and in-service education of       pre-college science and
              mathematics teachers is provided at       the university by project staff.    .
               Research and development of information access tools.        Information
              access tools are being developed to allow       individuals with disabilities
              use of laboratory instruments       and access to classroom and scientific
              information.  Research       will continue to focus on engineering solutions to
              information       access problems including tactile rendering of information,  
                  haptic and sonification r epresentations of data, classroom       access
              and communication tools for the deaf and hard-of-       hearing, as well as
              alternative output and remote access       laboratory instruments.    To ensure
              a widespread and lasting impact, many of the program  components were
              established and operated in partnership with other  institutions,
              organizations, and projects.  Several of these  components have started the
              process of institutionalization through  their independent continuation or
              through institutional support.  This process of institutionalization will be
              continued during the  next three years building on the successes achieved
              during the  previous award.
