Title       : Computer Simulation of an Electric Marketplace Using Artificial Adaptive Agents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9800589

Award Number: 9800589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309683             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald B. Sheble gsheble@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leigh S. Tesfatsion  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9800589  Sheble    This project proposes the use of adaptive agents to
              demonstrate the effective behavior of the electric markets presently being
              implemented around the world.  The market exchanges to be emulated include:
              United Kingdom Norway-Sweden (Denmark-Finland), New Zealand, Australia, and
              California.  The adaptive agents will use spot and bilateral markets to
              maximize profit subject to the operational constraints and the market rules. 
              The agents will use multiple markets for ancillary services when appropriate. 
              The agents will be bound to the contracts matched on the markets according to
              the penalty clauses envisioned for each market.  The artificial life paradigms
              of genetic algorithms and artificial neural networks will update the adaptive
              behavior of the agents during the bidding process for the spot market and for
              the openly negotiated bilateral market.  The cost of search for the bilateral
              market will be included as well as the cost of the spot market.  The resulting
              simulations should enable verifications of the price clearing capability of
              each market and the cost of price determination for each market. The impact of
              this research would be a comprehensive list of the benefits and the detriments
              of each market for comparison.  It should be expected that no one market would
              overshadow any other markets.  Thus, it should be demonstrable that other
              markets improving the efficiency of each market in turn could capture the
              benefits of some markets.  The overall impact on the educational process will
              be the training of several students in the combined art of economics and power
              engineering.  Such students are in short need at this time due to the changes
              in the regulatory environment around the world.  The impact on the
              undergraduate curriculum will be demonstrated by the need for economic
              understanding to maximize the benefit of the engineer on the company's bottom
              line profits.
