Title       : Uniqueness of Gibbs Measures and Rapidly Mixing Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9800351

Award Number: 9800351
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Prasad Tetali tetali@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9800351
Tetali

This research concerns the hard-core lattice gas model on the
              integer lattice, with special emphasis on the square lattice.  The project
              includes the following problems:
(i) To establish a rigorous, quantitative
              connection between the rate of approach to equilibrium of certain discrete
              dynamics and the uniqueness of (infinite--volume) Gibbs measure for the
              hard-core model on general graphs
(ii) To analyze the rate of mixing of
              certain dynamics with the intention of improving the existing bounds on the
              critical activity of the hard-core model on the square lattice.
(iii) To
              investigate the role of percolation and other techniques in this context.  In
              graph-theoretic terms, one of the objectives is to generate independent sets of
              a large n by n grid with probabilities favoring the bigger independent sets, in
              particular, with hard-core distribution with activity > 1.  The proposal also
              includes a student project on estimating the mixing rates of Markov chains on
              combinatorial structures, whose counting function is the nth Catalan
              number.

The lattice gas model  is of independent interest and significance
              to researchers in statistical physics, theory of computing, probabilistic
              combinatorics, and communication networks.  The easiest-to-describe motivation
              is that of a telephone (loss) network with Poisson arrival rates and
              independent holding times for calls.  The hard constraint demands that a call
              be accepted/active only if all the neighboring cells (neighborhood according to
              an arbitrary topology) are inactive.  The PI hopes to contribute to the
              understanding of the connections between spatial correlations (i.e. the effect
              of the presence of a call in one location on calls at reasonably far locations)
              and the convergence of the dynamics (i.e. the rate at which the network
              approaches, if it eventually does, a unique stable configuration of active
              calls).

