Title       : Diophantine Inequalities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1998      
File        : a9800859

Award Number: 9800859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60846              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Thunder jthunder@math.niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                          9800859  Thunder    The objectives of this project are twofold.
              First, the PI hopes to complete work in progress on estimating the number of
              solutions for non-degenerate quartic norm form inequalities in three variables.
              The results would be similar to those obtained recently by the PI for cubic
              Thue inequalities. This will use recent advances in Diophantine approximation,
              in particular new estimates for a quantitative version of Schmidt's subspace
              theorem, and estimates for volumes associated to decomposable forms proved by
              the PI and M. Bean. More substantially, the PI hopes to extend his work on
              cubic Thue inequalities to forms of higher degree. This will entail a deeper
              investigation into rational approximations of algebraic numbers and possibly a
              reformulation of a quantitative version of Roth's theorem. Ultimately, it is
              hoped that the methods thus developed will yield fairly sharp estimates for the
              number of solutions of general non-degenerate norm form inequalities. Second,
              the PI will attempt to prove an "effective" version of the absolute Siegel's
              lemma. He also hopes to find improved bounds for the absolute Hermite constant
              and investigate possible connections to sphere packings, finite groups, and
              error-correcting codes. The methods to be employed include standard Euclidean
              and adelic geometry of numbers.       This research falls into the general
              mathematical field of number theory.  Number theory has its historical roots in
              the study of the whole numbers,  addressing such questions as those dealing
              with the divisibility of one  whole number by another. It is among the oldest
              branches of mathematics and  was pursued for many centuries for purely
              aesthetic reasons. However, within  the last half century it has become an
              indispensable tool in diverse  applications in areas such as data transmission
              and processing, and  communication systems.
