Title       : Dynamic Configuration and Highly-Distributed Orchestration of Supply Webs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a9800449

Award Number: 9800449
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102790             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dharmaraj Veeramani raj@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1338,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                     This grant provides funding for the investigation of theoretical methods,
              computer-integrated systems, and organizational processes to support
              Internet-based formation and management of supply-webs in the manufacturing
              industry.  Reference architectures for supply-web interactions and
              representation models for job announcements and supplier capabilities will be
              developed.  The research will investigate metrics, decision strategies and
              logic for rapid and effective bid construction, bid evaluation, and supplier
              selection.  Representation models and decision-making algorithms and protocols
              at both the supply-web level as well as the shopfloor level will be studied.  A
              highly-distributed computational testbed will be implemented for modeling,
              simulation, and analysis of shopfloor and supply-web interactions. 
              Proof-of-concept computer-aided decision-systems will be implemented by
              integrating the theoretical methods developed in this research with Internet
              technologies.  This research will be conducted in close collaboration with
              industry.  Current organizational structures and business processes for
              supply-web interaction will be studied, and new ones that are better suited to
              dynamic supply-web interactions and virtual enterprises will be developed.     
               If successful, the results of this research will lead to an improved
              understanding about efficient and effective representation models for
              describing customer job requirements and supplier capabilities via the Internet
              in a variety of manufacturing domains.  This will support ongoing efforts on
              standardization of representation data models.  The analytical models and
              computational experimental testbed to be developed in this research will help
              predict supply-web and shopfloor performance under various decision strategies.
               The research will provide an understanding of how to seamlessly integrate
              decisions at both levels of system abstraction by using up-to-date shopfloor
              status information to support decision-making at the supply-web level.  The
              proof-of-concept decision-systems to be developed in this research will be
              useful to demonstrate the research results to industry and to promote
              technology transfer.  Our collaborative efforts with industry will provide
              insights regarding how organizational structures and business processes need to
              be reengineered in order to achieve the full benefits of Internet-aided
              supply-web interactions.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
