Title       : Light Years
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1997  
File        : a9800585

Award Number: 9800585
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42667              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mara Mayor MAYORMA@tsa.si.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      750 9th Street N.W.
	      Washington, DC  205600903    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PROGRAM:  Informal Science Education    AWARD NUMBER:  98-00585  PRINCIPAL
              INVESTIGATOR:  Mara Mayor  INSTITUTION:  Smithsonian Institution  TITLE:  Light
              Years    TOTAL AWARD AMOUNT:  $42,667  FY 1998 AWARD AMOUNT:  $42,667   
              ABSTRACT: The Smithsonian Associates Program at the Smithsonian Institution has
              a unique, one-time only opportunity to test the potential of producing a very
              low cost, but high quality science program featuring an outstanding and widely
              recognized scientist.  The program will be an edited hour from an hour and a
              half interview that Timothy Ferris will have with Stephen J. Gould before a
              live audience on November 7, 1997.   If successful, the program will be
              broadcast in prime time by PBS and would serve as a prototype for additional
              programs other eminent scientists.   During the requested Small Grant for
              Exploratory Research phase, the Smithsonian will:    * Determine if a viable
              hour-long program can be derived from a live interview that is only an hour and
              a half in duration.  This 1 to 1.5 ratio of finished program material to the
              total footage shot is very economical but also is much lower than most
              television programs which have a ratio of 1 to 3 and up.    * Test how to take
              advantage of Dr. Ferris' talents in a video interview format.  While Ferris has
              interviewed many scientists for print media, this will be his first interview
              for this kind of broadcast medium.    * Assess how successful Ferris is in
              conducting a live interview so that difficult scientific concepts will be
              accessible to a lay audience.    This interview with Dr. Gould also will
              provide a rare opportunity to investigate emerging research areas that are
              likely to be of lasting interest and to present them to the public.    The
              Smithsonian Associates will assess the effectiveness of this approach in two
              ways.  First, a group of five scientists and informal science education experts
              will review a rough cut of the program to determine if a program can be
              produced in this manner and effectively convey  complex science to a lay
              audience.   Possible members of this group include Bruce Alberts (National
              Academy of Science), Paula Apsell (WGBH), Robert Hazen (George Mason
              University), Mary Jane McKinven (PBS), and Maxine Singer (Carnegie Institute). 
               The second gauge of effectiveness will be the acceptance of the program for
              prime time distribution by PBS and the public reaction to the program.     
              Timothy Ferris is a generalist scholar who has taught in five disciplines -
              astronomy, English, history, journalism, and philosophy at four universities.  
              He currently is emeritus professor at the University of California, Berkeley. 
              He has received the American Institute of Physics prize, the American
              Association for the Advancement of Science prize, the Klumpke-Roberts prize,
              and a Guggenheim Fellowship.    The television producer will be Catherine Tatge
              who has produced a wide range of programming for PBS and for CBS Cable.  Her
              productions include Playing With Fire:  The Tenth Van Cliburn Piano Competition
              and the feature film of the New York City Ballet version of The Nutcracker. 
              She was commissioned by the Congress of the United States to direct and produce
              an historical overview of the U.S. Congress.    The PI for the project will be
              Mara Mayor, Director of The Smithsonian Associates and former Director of the
              Annenberg/CPB Project which supports the creation of  educational resources for
              a variety of media.
