Title       : Design and Operation of Reverse Production Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2000       
File        : a9800198

Award Number: 9800198
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349302             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew J. Realff matthew.realff@che.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane C. Ammons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9800198
Realff
     The research funded by this grant concerns the development
              of an approach for making strategic decisions about production and logistics
              systems for recovering and reprocessing used products.  The method considers
              recycling tasks, collection, sortation and separation of materials and
              remanufacturing tasks such as material compounding and depolymerization.  Each
              task may have several different implementations and can be located at different
              sites connected by various modes of transportation. This results in a
              superstructure of recycling networks from which the one with lowest overall
              annualized cost will be found using an optimization method. The approach will
              be based on mixed integer linear programming methodology and will include an
              interface implemented on the World Wide Web to allow potential users of the
              tool to access and modify models to run case studies and examine solutions.
  
                If successful, the results of this research will provide a way to design cost
              effective reverse production systems and improve the understanding of the
              similarities and differences in systems for recovering a range of products. The
              optimal solution will  consist of which sites to open, what tasks to allocate
              to the sites and how much material should be shipped by what mode. The
              formulation has a multi-period structure so that the network can be expanded in
              an optimal fashion over time. The method will be tested using several products
              starting with carpet for which a small scale network exists. Other products
              will include paper machine webs and electronic consumer goods. The tool will
              provide the capability of simulating a wide range of recycling and reprocessing
              strategies and technologies.  This will quantify the effects of uncertainty in
              collection volumes and technologies on the structure of the network for those
              trying to make investments in recycling infrastructure.



