Title       : Cosmological Experiments in He3 - He4 Mixtures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a9800748

Award Number: 9800748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388477             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norbert Mulders mulders@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Qaisar Shafi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Masoud Mohazzab  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1243      GRAVITATIONAL EXPERIMENTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Cosmological phase transitions can be a copious source of topological defects.
               The same happens in condensed matter systems, and experiments on these systems
              can help in determining the mechanism for defect formation.  The similarities
              between the superfluid transitions in liquid helium and cosmological models
              containing topological defects is especially strong.  As a result, in recent
              years there has been considerable activity to simulate phase transitions of the
              early universe using liquid He-3 and 
He-4.

Previous experiments in both
              He-3 and He-4 have shown that defects, in this case vortices, are indeed
              created, and that the vortex line density is consistent with estimates based on
              the mechanism proposed by Zurek, now known as the Kibble-Zurek (K-Z) mechanism.
               This mechanism makes specific predictions about the scaling of the vortex line
              density with a) the rate at which the transition takes place and b) the
              amplitude of the correlation length of the order parameter.  In earlier
              experiments there was little control over the former, while the latter,
              determined solely by the fluid, could not be changed appreciably either.  Prof.
              Mulder's group will carry out a new experiment, operating close to the
              tricritical point in He-3 and He-4 mixtures, will have the ability to change
              both over a wide range.  This should result in a definitive test of the K-Z
              mechanism.

This project is jointly supported by the Division of Physics, the
              Division of Materials Research and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities.


