Title       : A New Experimental Approach Toward a Unified Theory of Time-Dependent
               Consolidation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a9800318

Award Number: 9800318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85929              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Sheahan tsheahan@coe.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9800318  Sheahan    "A New Experimental Approach Toward a Unified Theory of
              Time-  Dependent  Consolidation"    This  research involves an innovative
              experimental  approach  to   help   resolve  a  fundamental  issue  in 
              geotechnical  engineering:  the role of  time-dependent creep deformations
              during consolidation.  The  original  consolidation  theory for fine-grained
              soils cannot  predict  the   influence  of  creep  deformations  that  occur 
              under  constant   effective  stress  levels.   This  has   led   to 
              significant  practical  problems,  including  difficulty  in  predicting  
              field   consolidation  settlements   based   on  laboratory tests.  It has also
              led to research and debate on  the  nature  of creep during consolidation.  One
               hypothesis  predicts no influence of creep deformations until after  all 
              loading-induced  pore water pressures  are  dissipated;  the  other hypothesis
              includes creep throughout the consolidation  process.    There   are  
              substantial  data  and  prominent  researchers  supporting  each  of the two
              theories, but little  agreement  between them.    This   research   will 
              investigate  the   validity   of   a  consolidation  model  that  can
              potentially  unify  the  two  hypotheses and explain both sets of  apparently
              conflicting data.  This research is not aimed  at  proving  one  of  the
              hypotheses, but toward  measuring  the  contribution  of each consolidation
              component (due  to  pore  pressure  dissipation  and  due to  creep)  to  the 
              overall  behavior.    The  research will be executed through a partnership
              between  Northeastern University and the University of Massachusetts-  Amherst.
                The  UMASS-  Amherst  partner  will  obtain  high  quality  block samples of
              four natural soils, each with  its  own  particular structure, and will perform
              short- and long-  term  conventional, incrementally loaded tests  to  evaluate 
              creep  behavior  and conventional consolidation  parameters.  At   
              Northeastern,    a    computer-automated,    specially  inst rumented
              consolidation cell was developed under a  prior  NSF  award.   This device will
              be used to perform controlled  gradient  tests with feedback provided by
              mid-specimen  pore  pressure probes.  ***
