Title       : The Laser-Mossbauer Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9800753

Award Number: 9800753
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231663             (Estimated)
Investigator: Monica Sorescu sorescu@duq.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duquesne University
	      Administration Bldg
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15282    412/434-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                        Sorescu  9800753    This project is
              led by a female scientist at Duquesne University,  a primarily undergraduate
              institution. The research goals are to  understand and correlate the mechanisms
              and controlling factors  of the nucleation and growth of micro-structural
              phases in  amorphous and other media during laser irradiation treatment. The 
              work will add to our understanding of excimer laser processing of  a wide range
              of materials, including glassy ferromagnets. This  project will establish
              methodology to tune magnetic materials  properties from soft to hard, by
              affecting the magnetic coupling  between their crystallites. New information on
              the fundamental  effects underlying the interaction of laser radiation with 
              partially and completely crystallized metallic glasses will be  obtained, and
              the possibility of controlling the magnetic texture  and phase equilibrium in
              thermally-annealed metallic glasses will  be examined by combined application
              of transmission and  conversion electron Mossbauer spectroscopy, dc hysteresis
              loops  and ac magnetic susceptibility measurements. The research will  involve
              undergraduate and graduate students in novel research  activities and will have
              a significant impact on the scientific  infrastructure at Duquesne University.
              The project includes the  purchase of a new excimer laser that is essential for
              the  proposed research.  %%%  This project is by a female scientist at the
              predominantly  undergraduate educational environment at Duquesne University.
              The  research employs a novel combination of laser processing and  Mossbauer
              spectroscopy to produce new materials via micro-  structural processing. The
              project includes the purchase of a new  excimer laser that is essential for the
              proposed research. The  laser pulse induces micro-structural changes in
              textured  materials and this modifies the magnetic and other properties of  the
              materials. The research will focus on amorphous materials,  particularly
              amorphous magneti c materials of interest to the  information storage industry.
              The project will involve both  undergraduate and graduate students in
              innovative research  projects dealing with materials preparation, Mossbauer 
              spectroscopy, and in situ laser processing.  ***
