Title       : Stochastic Networks and Spatial Queueing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9800606

Award Number: 9800606
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242391             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Serfozo richard.serfozo@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9800606  Serfozo   The aim of this research project is to develop stochastic
              process models of manufacturing and communications systems.  In a manufacturing
              system, parts orders or material move among workstations or staging areas where
              they are processed.  The intended models will describe the probabilistic
              behavior of production rates, wasted time due to queueing, locations of
              bottlenecks, meeting deadlines and resource needs (machines, tools, and
              personnel). Similarly, in a computer or telecommunications network, data
              packets, read/write transactions and telephone calls move among a network of
              computers, buffers operators or switching stations.  The models will describe
              probabilities of delays, busy signals and overloads.  A major focus will be on
              "spatial queueing models" for wireless communications (or cellular phones),
              where customers move in a space rather than a fixed network. The analysis will
              use contemporary theories of space-time point processes and Markov processes on
              general spaces to find appropriate formulations of spatial customer demands in
              the plane, service times and dependencies in the demands and services due to
              customer locations.       The models to be developed will be useful for initial
              planning and design of manufacturing and communications systems, or for the
              improvement of existing systems. They will provide information for comparing
              several prototype systems, selecting optimal operating rules and finding
              least-cost systems. For instance, where to place transmission stations
              (antennas or concentrators) in a wireless communications system and what
              switching procedures to adopt that will guarantee a desired level of service
              for mobile and fixed customers.  The models will help in predictions of system
              overloads under normal operating policies, job completion times, operating
              costs, customer demands for wireless systems and personnel requirements.  Other
              uses are in setting standards for communications systems and fashioning
              manufacturing contracts.
