Title       : Japan STA Program: Magmatic-Hydrothermal Fluids in the Ore Deposits and Active
               Geothermal Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1999      
File        : a9800963

Award Number: 9800963
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Muntean   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 5921,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Muntean  9800963    This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology Agency
               of Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. John Muntean  at the Geological
              Survey of Japan in Tsukuba, Japan.  Dr.  Muntean will work with Dr. Jeffrey
              Hedenquist, Senior  Scientist, Mineral and Fuel Resources Department, on a 
              research project entitled "Magmatic-Hydrothermal Fluids in  the Ore Deposits
              and Active Geothermal Systems."    The proposed research project will focus on
              the continuum  model for magmatic-hydrothremal fluids, both for active 
              volcanic-hydrothermal systems and or deposits, which will be  tested from a
              variety of directions with a variety of  approaches--active versus extinct
              systems, exposures from  the surface through shallow to great depth, and using
              field-  based geological study plus laboratory-based geochemical  work. 
              Magmatic-hydrothermal processes reflect the physical  and chemical interactions
              between magma bodies, the  surrounding rocks, and Earth's hydrosphere. 
              Significant  progress has been made in the last dozen years on  identifying and
              understanding magmatic-hydrothermal  processes in volcanoes, geothermal
              systems, and ore  deposits.  The recent progress points to a continuum of 
              magnatic-hydrothermal fluids ranging from magmatic aqueous  fluids with little
              external input through to fluids of mixed  heritage that results from complex
              interactions between  magmatic aqueous fluids, rocks , and aqueous fluids of 
              surficial origin.  These magmatic-hydrothermal fluids play a  major role in
              cycling of the earth's elements in the upper  crust.  Increased understanding
              of magmatic-hydrothermal  fluids and processes has profound implications in
              assessment  of volcanic hazards, development of geothermal energy, and  the
              exploration and development of hydrothermal metallic ore  deposits.  ***
