Title       : Mechanistic Organic Chemistry of Relevance to the Insterstellar Medium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9800716

Award Number: 9800716
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. McMahon mcmahon@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1318,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on identifying, characterizing and examining the  
              reactivity of organic molecules that occur in interstellar space.      Species
              known, or likely to exist in interstellar space will be generated   in low
              temperature matrices in the laboratory and characterized by a   variety of
              spectroscopy techniques.   Laboratory results will be   correlated with
              radioastronomical searches to identify new species in   interstellar clouds,
              and the carriers of diffuse interstellar bands.     The research will introduce
              graduate and postdoctoral students to   low-temperature matrix-isolation
              techniques, spectroscopic   characterization of the isolated species, and a
              unique interdisciplinary   application of these techniques.  With this Renewal
              award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program   supports the research
              of Professor Robert McMahon of the Department of   Chemistry at the University
              of Wisconsin.   Professor McMahon's research   will address questions regarding
              the nature and chemistry of the   reactive, organic fragments known, or
              postulated to exist in interstellar   space.   Intermediates thought to be
              present in interstellar space will   be prepared in the laboratory,
              spectroscopically fingerprinted, and the   spectral data compared with
              radioastronomical data to establish their   presence in interstellar clouds and
              diffuse interstellar bands, and to   identify other species present.   
              Professor McMahon's educational   activities will include the training of
              graduate and postdoctoral   students.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
