Title       : Facility Layout (Re)Design Using Planar and Network Location Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9800429

Award Number: 9800429
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255545             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajan Batta batta@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rakesh Nagi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9800429  Batta       This grant provides funding for the development of a
              graphical layout software that will be based on new theory developed from
              researching the interface between two separate, yet related, fields in
              Operations Research -- location theory and layout analysis. This research will
              concentrate on the analysis of two new problems. The first one is called the
              planar layout problem in which machines or cells/departments have to be located
              on the available shop floor area in the presence of other existing machines or
              cells/departments. In the second problem, called the mixed planar/network
              layout problem, the new machines have to be located such that they complement
              the aisles in the manufacturing facility. For both problems, the focus is to
              perform these locations so as to minimize the material handling cost. Once the
              two problems have been thoroughly analyzed, we will develop an integrated
              software tool to implement the theoretical results of the study.       Current
              Layout tools focus almost exclusively on the redesign of an entire facility.
              Though this is ideally what most businesses want to do, it is much more common
              to add some additional space to an existing manufacturing facility and to
              relayout both the existing and the new machines so as to utilize the total
              space available and improve manufacturing operations. The software developed
              will specifically address such recurring reengineering efforts on shop-floor
              layouts. On the theoretical end, this research will contribute to the
              scientific literature by bringing the two fields of location and layout
              analysis significantly "closer" together. This should stir additional work and
              interest from other members of the scientific community, since developments in
              these fields have traditionally stayed quite separated.
