Title       : Dissertation Research: Temperature Dependent Sex Determination in the Giant
               River Turtle Podocnemis Expansa from Colombian Amazonia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1998       
File        : a9800679

Award Number: 9800679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8360               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Janson janson@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Janson  9800679    Unlike mammals and birds, embryos of many turtle species can 
              develop into either sex, depending on the temperature at  which they are
              raised.  As a rough rule, high temperatures  during a particular sensitive
              period induce differentiation  into females and low temperatures induce males. 
              The purpose  of this proposal is to model temperature-dependent sex 
              determination of the endangered Amazonian Giant River  Turtle, Podocnmeis
              expansa.  Unlike previous efforts, this  new model will include natural
              fluctuations of temperature  as experienced in the field, as well as controlled
               laboratory experiments.    The following specific experiments will be
              conducted:  1)  Artificial incubation at constant temperatures; 2) Shift-one 
              and shift-twice experiments, where eggs are transferred from  female to
              male-producing temperatures and vice versa; 3)  Seminatural incubation at
              different depths and shade  conditions, and natural incubation.  With these
              experiments  the PIs will determine the relationship of sex ratios to 
              temperature, the timing of the temperature-sensitive period  of development,
              and the effects of fluctuating temperatures  on sex ratios.  The PIs will
              propose that the single  variable underlying all these relationships  is the
              amount  of heat accumulated by the end of the sensitive period.  The  PIs will
              measure accumulated heat under different  experimental and natural incubation
              regimes and relate this  variable to rate of development and hatchling sex
              ratios.  The results should provide a model that explains sex-ratios  in nature
              for turtles in general, and will be useful in  designing management plans for
              this endangered study  species.
