Title       : PPD/R&D: Producing and Evaluating Random Access Audio Tours for Visually
               Impaired Visitors to Science - Technology Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1998     
File        : a9800577

Award Number: 9800577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186377             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Friedman afriedman@nyhallsci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Hall of Science
	      47-01 111TH STREET
	      Corona, NY  113682950    /   -

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The New York Hall of Science will conduct research to determine the 
              effectiveness of random-access audio technology as a means of  improving access
              to science-technology center exhibitions for  visually-impaired visitors.  The
              project will use formative  evaluation techniques to create random access tours
              of two major  exhibitions at the New York Hall of Science:  Sound Sensations
              and  Seeing the Light.  The project will use a recently developed  technology,
              the random-access audio player, which offers the  promise of improving the
              effectiveness of learning for all  visitors, including the visually-impaired,
              at science-technology  center interactive exhibits.  This project builds upon
              earlier work  to develop and evaluate audio tours for hands-on science museums.
               The exhibitions selected for this project address the technology of  audio
              reproduction (Sound Sensations) and the physiology and  psychology of visual
              perception (Seeing the Light).  The project  goal is to extend the benefits of
              these substantive informal  science experiences to visually impaired visitors. 
              Seeing the  Light, originally created by the Exploratorium in San Francisco, is
               one of the most widely replicated exhibitions in the world, making  the
              findings of the project directly relevant to many museums.  The  project team
              will use control and experimental groups of visually  impaired visitors to
              evaluate the effectiveness of these tours in  increasing the impact of the
              exhibits for these individuals.  The  goal of the currently funded project is
              to determine whether audio  tours work for any.  The initial findings from the
              earlier research  were encouraging indicating that audio tours are beneficial
              for  audiences in hands-on science museums.  The new research will  extend the
              prior work in two ways:  (1) It will enable the museum  staff to develop and
              test an audio tour which is designed to  support the special requirements of
              visually-impaired audiences.  (2) It will enable the project team to ascertain
              the degree to   which an audio tour can benefit from the principles of
              universal  design -- how the specific requirements of a visually impaired 
              audience might be incorporated in the design of an audio tour for  all
              audiences.  Both general findings and tour components from this  research could
              be used later by over 250 science-technology centers  in the United States. 
              The project will conclude with a report to  the field on the production, use,
              cost, and impact of this  technology on the target audience.
