Title       : K-Theory, Group C*-Algebras, Large Scale Geometry, and Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  2000   
File        : a9800765

Award Number: 9800765
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280419             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel D. Higson higson@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Roe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Dear Joe,    John and I worked up the following paragraphs summarizing our
              grant   proposal.  Let me know if you find them unsatisfactory.    Yours,    
              Nigel       ------------------------------------------------------------------ 
                The large scale geometry of groups and spaces plays a determining role in  
              the calculation of invariants in C*-algebra theory and topology. The  
              investigators aim to explore the effect of the geometry and topology of   group
              boundaries (defined using large scale geometry) on the harmonic   analysis of
              groups and the determination of their C*-algebra K-theory. The   Baum-Connes
              conjecture proposes a means of calculating the K-theory of   reduced group
              C*-algebras which blends group homology with the   representation theory of
              finite subgroups.  The conjecture, if true, would   have a number of
              implications in geometry and topology, and a fascinating   circle of ideas is
              coming into view which links the Baum-Connes conjecture   to aspects of the
              harmonic analysis of groups and the geometry of group   actions on boundary
              spaces.  The investigators will attempt to clarify   these relations.  A long
              term goal is to prove the Baum-Connes conjecture,   and more importantly to
              understand better its meaning, for classes such as   the hyperbolic groups of
              Gromov.  More immediate objectives include   clarifying the relationships
              between existing proofs of partial forms of   the conjecture for these groups,
              and developing further the connections   between C*-algebra K-theory, manifold
              theory, and controlled topology.    Although the tools used to investigate it
              are rather elaborate, the idea   behind large scale geometry is very simple: 
              ignore the local, small scale   fluctuations in a quantity and concentrate on
              its large scale, or long   term, behaviour.  By doing so, trends or qualities
              may become apparent   which are obscured by inconsequential, small scale
              fluctations.  The   investigators have developed tools to distinguish between
              different sorts   of multi-dimensi onal, large scale behaviour in geometry. 
              Somewhat   surprisingly, aside from their intrinsic interest, their tools have
              found   application in ordinary, small scale geometry.
