Title       : Maintainability Modeling and Evaluation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1998     
File        : a9800189

Award Number: 9800189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163848             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Paasch paasch@engr.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for the development, validation and refinement
              of a methodology for electromechanical system diagnosability modeling and
              evaluation.  The work focuses on two objectives:  1) the development of
              analytical modeling methods and metrics for the prediction, during conceptual
              and embodiment design, of life cycle costs associated with the isolation of
              faults; and 2) the development of methods to decrease, for existing systems,
              the costs associated with fault isolation through optimized maintenance
              procedures.  The utility of these methods as design tools will be validated and
              refined by application, concurrent with the design process, to a selected
              complex electromechanical system.       If successful, the results of this
              research will be methods for the prediction of life cycle costs associated with
              fault isolation and for the generation of optimum maintenance procedures. 
              Validation on a complex commercial product during the actual design process
              will assure the industrial relevancy, applicability and accuracy of the
              methodology.  Although validated on a specific system, the methodology will be
              applicable to most electromechanical systems, with the greatest potential
              benefit for systems with higher degrees of complexity.  For complex systems,
              fault isolation costs can be a significant part of total life cycle costs, and
              the application of the results of this research could significantly reduce
              these costs through increased system maintainability.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
