Title       : Binary Black Holes and Gravitational Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a9800722

Award Number: 9800722
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229762             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Matzner richard@helmholtz.ph.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew Choptuik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1252      SUPPORT OF LIGO RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ***
9800722
Matzner
Professors Richard Matzner and Matthew Choptuik of the
              University of Texas Center for Relativity will work with postdocs and other
              members of the Center, to develop computer codes that describe the interaction
              and collision of astrophysical black holes and the production of gravitational
              radiation in their interactions.  The techniques will be extended from simpler
              descriptions of single black holes, and will make use of a set of existing
              computer codes that simulate black hole interactions.  Because of technical
              advances in the computational and analytical description (particularly methods
              for locating the surfaces of the black holes), this is a timely effort, and
              should yield significant scientific results.  Some of this work will be done in
              collaboration with The University of Pittsburgh, and with The Pennsylvania
              State University.

The detection of gravitational radiation by detectors now
              under construction will open a dramatic new window on the universe.  Having a
              theoretical prediction of the signals from possible astrophysical sources will
              be extremely important to understanding the expected signals, and to designing
              the detection algorithms themselves.  Black hole interactions are very
              important, because black holes may be the strongest sources of gravitational
              radiation signals.  This project will test this statement, and will provide a
              substantial theoretical input to the prediction of gravitational wave signals
              as they are detected.  In addition this is an example of very large scale
              scientific computation, and will develop and extend techniques that are
              applicable in a wide range of computational-science problems.
***

