Title       : Material Removal Processes in Fine-grained Ceramic Materialsat Low Contact Loads
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  2002   
File        : a9800920

Award Number: 9800920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336348             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry T. Yang susan.cochran@chancellor.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Srinivasan Chandrasekar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              DMI-9800920  Yang   Micro-crystalline ceramics are widely used in electronics
              and optics.  The nature of these applications requires that the surfaces be
              very smooth and free of deformation damage.  For the generation of smooth
              surfaces it is essential that material removal occur by a plastic microcutting
              process.  The contact between a hard, rigid indenter and a ceramic surface
              provides a good model system for studying material response and material
              removal mechanisms of relevance to various machining processes.  In this
              project, a technique uniquely suited for analyzing microplasticity in ceramics
              of relevance to material removal processes will be developed for estimating the
              yield strength and elastic-plastic, stress-strain behavior of ceramics from
              low-load indentation tests.  It will involve measurement of the onset of
              plasticity underneath an indentation, determination of the force-penetration
              curve, and finite element modeling of the indentation process.  The mechanism
              of material removal will be studied using low-load, scratch experiments with
              optically transparent ceramics.  This configuration provides a unique setting
              for directly observing the deformation and fracture phenomena occurring in the
              contact zone.  Cutting forces, deformation mechanics, and the threshold load
              for ductile chip formation will be analyzed in these experiments, together with
              the effect of parameters such as indenter shape and scratch velocity.  A finite
              element model of the plastic cutting process leading to continuous chip
              formation in ceramics will be developed by exploiting the analogy between
              machining and asymmetric, wedge indentation of a solid indenter.   The study is
              expected to lead to a fundamental understanding of surface generation in
              machining of ceramics and the controlled generation of ultra-smooth surfaces
              for electronics and optics.
