Title       : Kazhdan-Laumon Representations and Langlands Correspondence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1998     
File        : a9800684

Award Number: 9800684
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59140              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander A. Beilinson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Braverman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9800684
Beilinson

This award supports a project by Alexander Braverman, a
              postdoctoral associate of  A. Beilinson. This project consists of three parts.
              The first part is concerned with the study of general properties of the
              so-called Kazhdan-Laumon category, attached to a reductive group over a finite
              field,  and some of its variants. Parts 2 and 3 are concerned with two possible
              applications of Kazhdan-Laumon category. The first one is connected with the
              geometric Langlands-Drinfeld conjecture. More precisely, we formulate a certain
              analog of the geometric Langlands conjecture for tamely ramified local systems
              on a projective curve over a finite field and propose to prove it in some
              cases. This formulation involves  the definition of the Kazhdan-Laumon
              category. We also propose to study the so called geometric Eisenstein series
              sheaves. The last part of the project concerns with a possible application to
              representation theory of finite Chevalley groups and character sheaves,  
              extending the work started in Braverman's  Ph. D. thesis.

This proposal is
              in the part of mathematics known as the Langlands program. The Langlands
              program is part of number theory. Number theory is the study of the  properties
              of the whole numbers and is the oldest branch of mathematics. From the
              beginning problems in number theory have furnished a driving force in creating
              new mathematics in other  diverse parts of the discipline. The Langlands
              program is a  general philosophy that connects number theory with calculus;  it
               embodies the modern approach to the study of whole numbers. One aspect of this
              proposal is to explore the applications of geometric techniques within the
              Langlands program.

