Title       : SBIR Phase II: Chemical Vapor Deposition-SiC Coated Ceramic Valve Components of
               High Damage and Wear Resistance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9800946

Award Number: 9800946
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan-Fong Jue jjue@materialsys.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Materials & Systems Resrch
	      5395 West 700 South
	      Salt Lake City, UT  841044403    801/973-1199

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1444,9146,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                ***  9800946  Jue    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
              will demonstrate significant improvements in resistance to corrosion, erosion
              and fracture and service lifetimes for valves with the graded silicon carbide
              (SiC) components to be developed relative to the valves with sintered alpha-SiC
              components.  SiC is a low-cost ceramic that possesses high hardness, good
              sliding wear resistance, and excellent corrosion and oxidation resistance. 
              Because of these attributes it is used as mechanical face seals for water pumps
              in automobiles and as balls and seats in shut-off valves.  SiC, however, has a
              low fracture toughness that renders it susceptible to fracture under impact and
              thermal-shock conditions and to surface damage and erosion in particle impact. 
              During Phase I, the feasibility of toughening SiC was demonstrated.  The
              approach used consisted of designing and fabricating a functionally-graded
              material where the outer layer was 'pure' beta-SiC deposited by chemical-vapor
              deposition (CVD) on a substrate made of liquid-phase sintered SiC-TiC
              particulate composite. The designed composition and thermal-expansion mismatch
              led to a residual surface compression in the CVD-SiC coating on cooling from
              the deposition temperature.  Coating compressions as high as 1.1 GPa were
              developed by this approach depending on the substrate composition, coating
              thickness, and the geometry of the component.  Surface compression in the
              graded-SiC increased rolling-contact-fatigue life by greater than a factor of
              100.  The Phase II research will apply this technology to balls and seats in a
              1.5 in. ball valve manufactured and marketed by Valtek International, the Phase
              III partner.  Development of a ceramic manufacturing process for making SiC-TiC
              balls and seats, optimization of a rapid chemical-vapor deposition/composite
              vapor coating (CVD/CVC) coating process, low-cost surface finishing and
              prototype and field testing of the valve components are the major tasks in the
              proposed research.    Th e Phase II research project is aimed at introducing
              surface-compression-toughened SiC in ceramic ball valves.  These valves
              accounted for $ 8 million in sales in North America in 1996. The technology can
              also be implemented in the ceramic bearing and the automobile industries ,
              e.g., cam followers.  ***
