Title       : Time/Frequency Approach to Robust Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a9800057

Award Number: 9800057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201578             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pablo A. Iglesias pi@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9800057
Iglesias

The central theme of the proposed research is the use
              of recent contributions in the representation of time-varying systems in the
              theory of robust controller design.  This analysis will include the recently
              introduced W-transform, which is a generalization to time-varying systems of
              the well known Laplace transform, as well as other time-frequency analysis
              tools, such as the wavelet transform.

Part of the research proposed will
              develop a rigorous theory of poles and zeros for time-varying systems.  This
              theory will then be used to consider the fundamental limits that exist in
              time-varying designs and the effect of the poles and zeros on the closed-loop
              performance of the system.  This research will lead to research into filters
              that may be suitable for robust control design.  Finally, we propose to develop
              the theory of time/frequency representation of these filters.

The research
              proposed here will bridge the gap between the optimal control theory of linear
              time-varying systems, and the means for designing effective controllers for
              these systems.  It will have the additional benefit of unifying the powerful
              Hoo. control theory with the current advances being made in time-frequency
              representations of time-varying systems.  Because of the interdisciplinary
              nature of this research - bringing together recent advances in signal
              processing into the control theory community - this research program will
              strengthen the connection between the two fields.  This should help broaden the
              educational experience of the students involved in this research.

In
              addition to its use for the study of time-varying systems, the theory developed
              as part of this proposal should be useful for the control of systems where the
              time-variations are externally imposed, for example, in gain scheduled
              controlled systems, parameter varying systems, and hybrid systems.


