Title       : SBIR Phase II: Ambient Temperature Chloroaluminate Ionic Liquids for Preparation
               of Precursors to III-V Ceramic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1998  
File        : a9800930

Award Number: 9800930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Carter eltron@eltronresearch.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eltron Research, Inc.
	      4600 Nautilus Court South
	      Boulder, CO  803013241    303/530-0263

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses a
              general method for production of high purity precursors to III-V ceramic
              materials, exemplified by aluminum nitride.  These materials are increasing in
              importance for applications in microelectronic packaging, optoelectronic
              devices and wear or chemical resistant surface coatings.  Phase II will develop
              a generalized homogeneous chemical route to bulk quantities of stable
              precursors for diverse applications.  This route will lower the cost of final
              materials by diversifying the base of applications.  The proposed approach will
              exploit unique chemistry of ambient temperature chloroaluminate ionic liquids
              to generate ultrahigh purity precursors to aluminum nitride by a mild, room
              temperature route.  Routes will be developed for production of volatile
              precursors for chemical vapor deposition of surface coatings and nonvolatile
              precursors for preparation of powders.  The chemistry of the ionic liquid will
              allow different precursors to be prepared from a unified process, using
              reactants that do not introduce carbon or oxygen impurities into the final
              materials.  The proposed process will produce bulk quantities of stable,
              ultrahigh purity chemical precursors to III-V ceramics.  These materials will
              be useful for ceramic coatings, bulk materials for microelectronic circuit
              substrates, optoelectronic components and advanced protective coatings for the
              aerospace industry.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
