Title       : Partial Differential Equations; Fundamental Solutions and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a9800605

Award Number: 9800605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263675             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Beals beals@math.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9800605  Abstract of research proposal "Partial Differential Equations"   by
              Richard Beals, Department of Mathematics, Yale University      The principal
              goal of this project is to find solution operators   in as explicit a form as
              possible for model second order linear   operators of various types:
              subelliptic operators, such as those  associated to boundary problems in
              complex domains; degenerate elliptic,   and associated degenerate parabolic and
              weakly hyperbolic operators;  and operators of mixed type, such as those that
              occur in statistical   physics.  This continues, and expands considerably on,
              earlier work   with B.Gaveau and P.C.Greiner which has produced explicit
              formulae   and optimal parametrices for a number of model subelliptic operators
                associated to strongly and weakly pseudoconvex domains.  In another 
              direction, work is planned with D.H.Sattinger on completely integrable  
              equations, focussing on the spectral and inverse spectral transforms   for
              energy dependent potentials.      Most physical and geometric phenomena are
              described by partial   differential equations, typically by equations of second
              order.   Examples include the equations that describe the behavior of   sound,
              light, radiation, diffusion, nuclear processes, and so on.   Exact solutions
              for the model equations of classical physics have   played a central role in
              the development both of mathematical  physics and of the general theory of
              partial differential equations.   Much of the advance in the latter theory in
              this century has been due   to refinements in the technique for approximating
              the solutions of   more complex equations, both theoretically and numerically. 
                Nevertheless among these more complex equations are models for which   it is
              possible to find exact solutions, and it is hoped that the   exact solutions
              will again play a role in our understanding at a more   detailed level.  This
              proposal describes certain linear equations of   interest for which it may be
              possible, building on recent wor k, to   obtain fairly explicit exact
              solutions.  It also proposes further   work on a widely studied technique that
              provides explicit solutions   of certain types of nonlinear partial
              differential equations.  Among   these equations are those that describe water
              waves, in certain   circumstances, and the propagation of pulses in optical
              fibers.
