Title       : Ergodic Theory, Differential Dynamics and Combinatorial Number Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9800861

Award Number: 9800861
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $436068             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald S. Ornstein ornstein@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yitzhak Katznelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Katznelson/Ornstein    Furstenberg, Katznelson, Ornstein, and Weiss
              will continue and expand  several long-term projects dealing with stability, as
              well as properties of  limit sets and other limit behavior, of dynamical
              systems. Among the projects  on stability:  1) We have devloped an alternative
              approach to problems that seemed  accessible only via the KAM strategy. In
              dimensions one and two we  obtained finer results both in the smoothness of the
              conjugation of circle  diffeomorphism (completing the pioneering results of
              Herman and Yoccoz)  and persistence under perturbation of twist maps of certain
              invariant circles  (Moser's theorem and extensions), as well as smoothness of
              curves invariant under surface diffeomorphism.  These methods   look promising
              as tools for the study of existence and smoothness of invariant tori in higher
              dimensions.  2) Establishing that a flow is Bernoulli not only characterizes it
              completely  as an abstract measure theoretic flow,  but also serves as the main
              step in  proving statistical stability. We are in the process of formalizing
              general  criteria for Bernoullicity of flows. Among the projects on limit
              behavior we  mention the study of multiple recurrence with polynomial times and
              problems  dealing with dimensions of fractals and other limit sets.   
              Dynamical systems are mathematical models of evolutionary phenomena  in both
              natural and social sciences. They  also provide  important tools in statistics,
              computer sciences, combinatorics, etc.  In this broad and broadening subject,
              we direct our main effort  to problems dealing with stability: to what extent
              are the perceived properties of a system robust, that is, will persist if the
              system is perturbed (modified) somewhat.  In any sort of practical application,
              where the data and the parameters are known only approximately, one can hardly
              rely on properties which are not stable. One of our main projects is to find
              conditions which guarantee the existence of surfaces invariant under the
              system. In  the right dimension, such (hyper) surfaces separate the space into
              invariant regions, or domains from which orbits cannot escape, and if the
              surface persists under perturbation-so do the domains. In other words, we can
              guarantee that some conditions will never evolve into some other (specific)
              type.
