Title       : Theoretical Studies of Inorganic and Organometallic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a9800184

Award Number: 9800184
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Hall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              supports theoretical studies related to catalysis by Dr. Michael B. Hall of the
              Chemistry Department, Texas A&M University.  Systems related to four
              fundamental steps in catalysis will be investigated: oxidative-addition,
              substitution, migratory-insertion, and atom transfer.  Detailed kinetics of the
              early stages of C-H bond activation by a rhodium carbonyl complex will be
              studied.   The nature and energy of the transition states connecting two
              proposed solvated intermediates will be determined.  Other studies will
              concentrate on dirhodium catalyzed cyclizations and ruthenium catalyzed alkyne
              and alkene dimerizations.  Transformations between non-classical dihydrogen
              complexes and classical hydrides will be modeled.   Oxygen transfer and
              insertion will be examined in a model system that mimics molybdenum enzymes. 
              Calculational results will be compared with known experimental results. 
              Non-local density functional theory (DFT) and multiconfiguration
              self-consistent field (MCSCF) methods, especially generalized molecular orbital
              method (GMO2),  will be used for full-gradient geometry optimization of stable
              molecules, reaction intermediates, and transition states.  The GMO2 method is
              well-suited to transition metals.  Higher level methods will be used to
              determine critical points on potential energy surfaces.

Detailed mechanisms
              for catalysis of many important industrial reactions are not known.  In this
              study, theoretical calculations of the electronic states of molecules and their
              reaction pathways will be used to develop models for reactivity that will be
              compared to experimental results.  This could aid in the development of
              improved catalysts.

