Title       : Nonlinear Repetitive Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1998     
File        : a9800294

Award Number: 9800294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162561             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brad E. Paden paden@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              High-speed diamond turning of eyeglass lenses, noncircular  machining of
              camshafts and pistons, high-speed scanning and  vibratory probing in atomic
              force microscopy (AFM), and  metal rolling are examples of  industrial
              processes which  can benefit from repetitive control algorithms. Motivated by 
              the nonlinearities in optical turning and AFM control, this  research project
              addresses basic challenges in nonlinear  repetitive control. In addition to
              research on basic theory  involving the existence of periodic motions,
              stability  results, and design methods, specific nonlinear problems in  optical
              turning and AFM control are addressed. The project  involves collaborations
              with DAC Vision, Inc. to understand  the diamond turning of polycarbonate
              eyeglass lenses. The  process requires quasi-periodic tool trajectories and 
              suffers from significant actuator nonlinearly. Following the  initial
              investigations into the nature of nonlinear periodic  motions in single-input
              single-output (SISO) repetitive  control systems, extension to MIMO systems,
              possible  connections with normally hyperbolic manifold theory, and  the onset
              of chaos in nonlinear repetitive control will be  investigated. Modeling and
              simulation of the DAC Vision  diamond turning process will be accomplished in
              this same  period followed by control design and implementation of  controllers
              on DAC's machines. Instructional development in  UCSB's graduate control lab in
              collaboration with Magnetic  Moments, a supplier of educational control
              experiments is  also a part of this project. The PI will incorporate 
              repetitive control design into this teaching lab for the  outbalancing of a
              magnetically suspended rotor. Later in  this program, repetitive control
              problems in atomic force  microscopy (AFM) are to be addressed with the aim of 
              improving the imaging speed of these devices. The specific  problem to be
              addressed is the control of AFM's in tapping  mode. At high tapping and scan
              rates, AFM's can enter into  chaotic motions that degrade image quality
              significantly.  One of the aims of this research is to control the onset of 
              chaos and thus improve system performance.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
