Title       : Importance of Sorption of Organic Pollutants, and Especially PAHs, to Soot in
               the Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a9800485

Award Number: 9800485
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375671             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip M. Gschwend pmgschwe@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1440,1472,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9800485 Gschwend The objective of this project is to determine the significance
              of soot, much of which is produced during combustion processes, in sorption of
              organic contaminants from sediments and soil.  Sorption of contaminants by soot
              limits the mobility of contaminants in soil and sediments and controls their
              availability for being degraded biologically.  In this project, soot carbon
              will be isolated from contaminated sediments at two sites with contrasting
              histories of pollutant inputs.  One has received contaminants from adjacent
              land by direct atmospheric fallout, overland flow during storms and release to
              groundwater from exfiltration.  The other site is a coastal harbor location,
              sediments at which have been heavily contaminated by polycyclic aromatic
              hydrocarbons and polychlorinated biphenyls.  The soot carbons from these
              sources will be characterized for their physical properties, their adsorbed
              pollutants removed and then used for experimental determination of their
              sorption properties.  The polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon sorbates planned for
              use include naphthalene, phenanthrene and pyrene, exhibiting a range of
              hydrophobicities.  A mix of planar and nonplanar polychlorinated biphenyls will
              also be evaluated to determine the behavior of compounds that come in contact
              with the soot carbon only after both have been separately introduced into the
              environment.
 
Results of this project are expected to enable assessment of
              the role that soot carbons play in influencing the engineering design of
              processes and systems for decontamination of sediments and soils contaminated
              by polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and other contaminants that are sorbed to
              this type of carbon.  Knowledge of the capacity that soot carbon has for
              restraining release and migration of those contaminants is likely to play an
              important role in determining the need for engaging in decontamination
              procedures, and when found to be needed, the extent to which decontamination
              must be practiced to reach the level at which contaminants are bound to soot
              carbon and no longer pose an environmental threat.  


