Title       : Invariant Manifolds and Complex Behavior in Nonlinear Physical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1998       
File        : a9800922

Award Number: 9800922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gyorgy Haller haller@cfm.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9198,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In nonlinear evolutionary problems of physics, one is typically concerned 
with
              the analysis of observable dynamical behavior, which impacts large 
classes of
              initial states. Dynamical systems theory offers a powerful 
geometric tool,
              invariant manifolds, to tackle such problems. Invariant 
manifolds are capable
              of acting as organizing structures in the phase space 
of a system, as well as
              creating complex or chaotic behavior for sizable 
sets of initial conditions.
              Examples of these phenomena include chaotic 
mixing, fast energy transfer, and
              diffusion in finite dimensional  systems, 
and jumping behavior and pulse
              generation in evolution equations. This 
proposal suggests novel extensions
              and new applications of invariant 
manifold theory in an array of areas,
              ranging from difficult open questions 
of applied analysis to concrete
              problems in laser optics,  oceanography, 
and atmospheric science.

Most
              phenomena in nature are dynamic in nature, i.e., one observes them 
change in
              time. Such phenomena include ocean currents, atmospheric 
events, and the
              motion of planets. The mathematical discipline that deals 
with the
              description of these time-varying phenomena is called dynamical 
systems
              theory. The main concern of this theory is to understand the 
evolution of the
              studied phenomenon in terms of mathematical formulas 
and predict its future
              for long times. This theory has already showed its 
power in several
              applications, but has not been mature enough to deal with 
large-scale
              physical processes. This proposal suggests the development of 
several new
              tools in order to make dynamical systems theory applicable to 
highly
              important problems of laser optics, oceanography and atmospheric 
science. For
              example, one of the suggested directions of research is aimed 
at the analysis
              and prediction of the motion of large eddies in the ocean. 
Another aspect of
              the proposed work will provide scientifically solid 
estimates for the rate of
              ozone depletion near the Antarctic polar vortex.

