Title       : PPD/R&D: Audio Display of Non-textural Scientific Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9800041

Award Number: 9800041
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $596414             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Gardner gardner@physics.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project is designed to continue the development of three computer software
              projects  intended to improve accessibility to math and science by people with
              print disabilities.  One  project relates to research on audio display of x-y
              graphs.  With an audio display, a user  "views" the graph by listening to an
              audio representation of the y  value as x is swept  through its range during
              some time interval.  Methods will be tested that allow the user to  obtain a
              more complete picture than a very simple tone plot such as that provided by the
               TRIANGLE program.  Audio graph reading should become a valuable tool for blind
              people  as well as for many people with visual dyslexia.  A second project will
              port the TRIANGLE  program to Windows 95/NT and make it self-voicing.  TRIANGLE
              is a reading/writing/  doing math program for blind users.  It includes a math
              word processor, a graphing  calculator, a simple audio graph viewer, a table
              viewer, and a viewer for tactile figures on  an external digitizing pad.  The
              DOS version is difficult to use with most speech screen  readers.  The Windows
              version should be much more user-friendly.  This program   that can  be used
              with Braille, audio, or viewed visually -- provides blind users the ability to
              read,  write, and manipulate scientific documents easily as well as compute and
              view graphs.   TRIANGLE should fill an enormous gap that has prevented access
              by blind students and  professionals to scientific information.    The final
              project is to continue development of the MathPlus Toolbox, a fully accessible 
              math teaching/learning program developed explicitly to meet the needs of
              students learning  very basic math, particularly students with learning
              disabilities.  When this program is  complete, it could be a powerful new tool
              for teachers of elementary math with students who  have various disabilities. 
              The software may also become popular with students without  disabilities.
