Title       : Task Synchronization Via Integration of Scheduling, Planning, and Control for
               Underwater Robotic Vehicles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9800829

Award Number: 9800829
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308688             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tzyh-Jong Tarn tarn@wuauto.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9800829  Tarn  The study of autonomous Underwater Robotic Vehicles (URVs) and
              their application is a dynamic research area in oceanic engineering.  This
              project will investigate fundamental theoretical problems which arise in the
              coordination and control of autonomous URVs.  It is also devoted to the
              development of a systematic methodology for designing, simulating and
              implementing intelligent controllers for autonomous URVs.

The goal of this
              project is to model, develop and stimulate a new integrated control methodology
              for the automation of mission planning and control for the operation of
              autonomous URVs.  The proposed research will focus on the following specific
              problems:  (i) Use of Max-Plus Algebra to develop a new methodology for
              modeling, analysis and design of task schedule and action plan in the
              perspective frame, (ii) Nonholonomic analysis and control for underactuated
              underwater robotic vehicles, and (iii) Simulation studies and tests of the
              obtained theoretical results.

This development, consolidated with perceptive
              sensing, will use new definitions of action reference parameters for
              multi-segmented tasks in an underwater environment.  It will enable a flexible
              concurrent sequencing of subtasks in scheduling schemes.

The research goals
              are as follows:
1.   Create a perspective frame that adapts the scheduling,
              planning and execution of cooperating URV tasks to the geometric and dynamics
              uncertainties automatically.

2.   Improve the safety and reliability of the
              operation of autonomous  URVs.

3.   Contribute to the scientific base and a
              better understanding of the use of robotic vehicles in the ocean.
 ***


