Title       : A Study on the Theory and Practice of Nonlinear Process Control Using Functional
               Expansion (FEx) Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1998     
File        : a9800073

Award Number: 9800073
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210595             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmet N. Palazoglu anpalazoglu@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Palazoglu - 9800073  Understanding the dynamics of nonlinear systems
              is important for the design, operation and control of many chemical processes. 
              The lack of information regarding the behavior of nonlinear processes causes
              the chemical engineer to limit the region of safe operation, to overdesign in
              an attempt to soften nonlinearities, or to design conservative control systems
              such that an acceptable operation is maintained.  Such engineering solutions
              may yield suboptimal plant operations, and more economically favorable regimes
              may be unnecessarily deemed unsafe or unreliable.    The goal of this research
              is to establish a rigorous setting within which nonlinear process control
              problems can be analyzed, and controllers can be designed and implemented  on
              actual processes.  This setting will be built upon a new paradigm that exploits
              functional expansion (FEx) models to develop novel control system design and
              analysis tools.  Such a setting is not only expected to broaden one's
              understanding of nonlinear process control problems, but will also promote the
              application of these new concepts to real process systems.  The methods make
              use of analogous linear analysis and control concepts, thereby providing an
              intuitive setting for engineers.  The work to be done includes:    (1)
              Functional expansions will be used to quantify the "nonlinearity" of a process,
              and the approximate FEx model structure will be exploited for model
              identification using process data.    (2) The control design effort will be
              based upon FEx models in the spirit of model predictive control.  This will
              generate new viewpoints about the representation and manipulation of nonlinear
              discrete-time models for control.    (3) A set of criteria will be developed to
              help assess the stability and robustness of FEx model based control systems.   
              (4) The methods will be tested by real-time applications using a
              laboratory-scale process as well as pilot-scale processes that are run by
              commercial Distributed Control Systems(DC S).  This last area will take
              advantage of a long-time collaboration with Prof. Romagnoly of the University
              of Sydney.
