Title       : Laser Micromachining of Silicon: A New Technology for Fabricating Tera Hertz
               Imaging Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9800260

Award Number: 9800260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher K. Walker cwalker@as.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9800260
Walker
One of the main obstacles encountered in designing low noise,
              high efficiency, heterodyne receivers and local oscillator sources at
              submillimeter wavelengths is the quality and cost of waveguide structures.  At
              wavelengths shorter than 400 micrometers, rectangular waveguide structures,
              feedhorns, and backshorts become extremely difficult to fabricate using
              standard machining techniques.  We have used a new laser milling technique to
              fabricate high quality, THz waveguide components and feedhorns.  Once
              metallized, the structures have the properties of standard waveguide
              components.  Unlike waveguide components made using silicon wet-etching
              techniques, laser-etched components can have almost any cross section, from
              rectangular to circular.  Under computer control, the entire waveguide
              structure (including the corrugated feedhorn!) of a submillimeter-wave mixer or
              multiplier can be fabricated to micrometer tolerances in a few hours.  Laser
              etching permits the direct scaling of successful waveguide multiplier and mixer
              designs to THz frequencies.  Since the entire process is computer controlled,
              the cost of fabricating submillimeter waveguide components is significantly
              reduced.  With this new laser etching process, the construction of high
              performance waveguide array receivers at THz frequencies becomes tractable.  We
              request funds to construct a laser micromachining system at the University of
              Arizona.  The system will be used to continue our research into the application
              of this process to the fabrication of submillimeter-wave imaging
              systems.
***

