Title       : Meromorphic Functions and Holomorphic Curves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9800084

Award Number: 9800084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88589              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandre Eremenko eremenko@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9800084  Principal Investigator: Alexandre Eremenko    Abstract:
              A. Eremenko will continue his study of the distribution of values of
              meromorphic functions and their generalization, holomorphic maps from the
              complex line to projective spaces, using the new methods of potential theory
              developed in his previous work. With this approach he already obtained such
              results as the proof of a defect relation for non-linear hypersurfaces
              conjectured by B. Shiffman (joint work with Sodin, 1992) and the proof of the
              Modified Cartan conjecture in dimension three (1996). Specifically, he plans to
              concentrate on the following topics: normality criteria for holomorphic maps
              omitting hyperplanes, the study of extremal maps for defect relations, and the
              Inverse Problem of the Value Distribution Theory for maps to projective spaces,
              with special attention to the maps satisfying algebraic differential equations,
              both linear and non-linear.    Meromorphic functions constitute the most basic
              class of functions used in mathematics and its applications. This class
              includes elementary functions like the exponential, cosine and tangent
              functions, as well as higher transcendental functions, like the Gamma function,
              Airy functions, elliptic functions, etc., which are indispensable in physics,
              engineering and other applications. The fundamental problem about these
              functions is the study of solutions of equations f(x)=a, where f is a given
              function, and a is a given complex number. Usually such equations have
              infinitely many solutions and the question is how their location depends on the
              right-hand side of the equation. This is the subject of Value Distribution
              Theory, a great achievement of mathematical analysis in the second half of the
              nineteenth century and the first half of the present century. The logic of
              development of mathematics and potential applications to differential equations
              require an extension of the main results of this theory to the case of
              functions whose values are no longer numbers, but i nstead are vectors. Despite
              major efforts by several outstanding researchers in the beginning of the
              twentieth century, our current understanding of this subject is very
              incomplete. Recent breakthroughs give hope of major new advances in the area.
              Such advances would extend our knowledge of a basic and fundamental
              mathematical subject, which is the value distribution of the vector-valued
              entire functions known as "holomorphic curves in projective spaces."
