Title       : Study of Transient Flow Structures in the Continuous Casting of Steel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1998     
File        : a9800274

Award Number: 9800274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian G. Thomas bgthomas@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Surya P. Vanka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                      DMI -9800274  Thomas   This work is to develop mathematical models of
              transient fluid flow in the continuous casting of steel slabs, validate them
              with measurements, and apply them to provide a detailed understanding of how
              defects form, so that the process can be improved.  Continuous casting accounts
              for 89 percent of the 100 million tons of steel produced each year in the
              United States. Continued viability of the high-volume-low-profit-margin steel
              industry depends on improving the quality of the steel product while also
              increasing efficiency. Plant observations have found that many serious quality
              problems are directly associated with the flow pattern in the mold region. This
              flow is highly turbulent, and is characterized by large scale unsteady
              recirculation. A better understanding of the flow physics would enable
              improvements to process modeling and future optimization. With many different
              operations to optimize, the industry can no longer afford the traditional
              trial-and-error approach.  This project will advance the state-of-the-art of
              Large-Eddy-Simulation flow modeling, which has not previously addressed a
              process of this complexity.    The models will be calibrated and validated
              through experimental measurements obtained in both the research labs and plants
              of a consortium of steel companies, who are cosponsoring this work. Then, based
              on the improved fundamental understanding gained from model application,
              improved nozzle designs and operating conditions that minimize defects will be
              found.  In the future, as thin slab and strip casting processes continue to be
              developed, the computational tools developed in this work can be applied to
              these new processes as well.
