Title       : Physics of Charge Damage in High Density Plasma Etchers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1998       
File        : a9800461

Award Number: 9800461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis F. Chen ffchen@ee.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9800461
Chen
The complexity and performance of computer chips have been
              advancing at an amazing rate.  These advances in miniaturization of integrated
              circuits have been made possible by the use of plasmas (ionized gases) in the
              etching of fine features in semiconductor chips and the deposition of
              insulating and conducting layers into small spaces.  Up to now the problem has
              been to generate high-density plasmas (HDPS) that can produce a uniform flux of
              positively charged ions over a 12-inch diameter silicon wafer, on which
              hundreds of chips, each containing millions of transistors, can be made
              simultaneously.  To help fulfill this need, one of the new "inductive" plasma
              sources, the helicon source, was intensely studied by the UCLA group under NSF
              sponsorship for six years.  Plasma production is no longer a primary concern of
              the industry.

Amore urgent problem has arisen, however, and that is
              charge-induced damage to thin insulating layers, usually silicon dioxide, that
              are used to insulate the input terminals ("gates") of transistors.  As
              designers make the transistors ever smaller, the gates have to be ever thinner
              in proportion, reaching thicknesses of less than 50A (or 5 nm).  These thin
              gates are subject to damage during plasma processing.  Electrical charges can
              build up on them and cause internal defects that can render the entire
              transistor useless.  This is a serious problem in maintaining a high yield of
              good chips on a wafer.  Though the statistics of oxide damage has been
              documented, the cause of the damage is not yet well understood.  Originally, it
              was thought that magnetic fields and plasma nonuniformities were the causes of
              the charge imbalance.  More recently, it has been suggested that the "electron
              shading" phenomenon, in which electrons are blocked from reaching the bottoms
              of deep trenches in patterned wafers, is a much more serious effect.

Few
              basic experiments have been performed, especially outside of Japan, to
              elucidate the causes of charge damage, leading to ideas for its prevention. 
              This proposal is to design and perform experiments to measure charging effects
              in high-density RF plasma sources.  In particular, we plan to tackle two
              aspects of charge buildup which are not being examined elsewhere: 1) pulsed
              charging which occurs only in certain phases of the RF cycle, and 2) charging
              due to low-frequency instabilities occurring in magnetized plasma sources.


