Title       : SBIR Phase II: Mitigation of Coke Deposits on Heat Transfer Surfaces Via Ion
               Implantation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1999  
File        : a9800925

Award Number: 9800925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $384917             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Warren dwarren@linkonline.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvest Technology
	      9253 Glenoaks Boulevard
	      Sun Valley, CA      818/767-3157

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                This Small Business Innovation Research(SBIR) Phase II project involves use of
              ion implantation for modifying the surface properties of metal alloys to
              mitigate the growth of catalytic coke that forms on furnace tubes during the
              thermal cracking of hydrocarbons for the production of olefins. Because coke
              deposits diminish heat transfer rates, thermal efficiencies and product yields,
              the control of coke growth rate in furnace tubes can significantly enhance the
              profitability of olefins production. A substantial reduction in the the rate of
              coke formation on metal coupons by ion implantation of selected elements was 
              demonstrated in Phase I. Ion implantation produces a coke-inhibiting surface
              layer that is less prone to degradation under the harsh conditions of a thermal
              cracker compared to pure coatings formed using alternate treatment methods. In
              Phase II, test specimens will be prepared using a conformal treatment method
              known as plasma ion immersion implantation and deposition (PIIID), and the
              effect of implant composition on coke inhibition will be measured using a lab- 
                    scale thermal cracking reactor. The method will be used to treat an
              industrial furnace tube section that will be tested in a pilot-scale coking
              reactor.  The technology developed in this program will lead to treated furnace
              tubes with substantially increased on-line time, efficiency and product yield
              for thermal crackers used to produce olefins such as ethylene, propylene and
              butylene. Coke formation is estimated to cost a modern ethylene facility about
              $10,000,000 per year.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
