Title       : Computational and Proof Complexity Bounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9800124

Award Number: 9800124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Beame beame@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research addresses problems in a variety of computational  settings, In
              each case, a significant goal of the research is to  obtain new lower bounds on
              the problems' complexity.  The prime  computational setting of interest is that
              of the complexity of  proofs in propositional tautologies is fundmental in that
              it is  equivalent to the NP versus co-NP question.  Analysis of the  complexity
              of specific methods of proof is important in its own  right as well as for
              practical questions of automated theorem-  proving and may yield insight into
              the NP versus co-NP question.  The research in this area is concerned with
              extending the range  of proof systems in which complexity bounds are currently
              known,  with particular emphasis on the study of randomly chosen k-CNF 
              formulas.  Based on past experience, methods from the study of  circuit
              complexity are expected to be useful in this analysis.  The second setting of
              interest is the complexity of computations  on random access machines able to
              operate on word-level  quantities at unit cost.  Surprisingly efficient
              algorithms for a  number of problems, such as sorting, have been shown in this 
              model.  The goal of the research in this area is to understand  the limits of
              the algorithmic improvements possible in this  model.  The final setting is
              that of the complexity of  representing Boolean functions so that they are easy
              to  manipulate and compare, important properties for symbolic model  checking
              algorithms.  The major question to investigate in this  area is whether
              representations which are easy to manipulate and  compare can efficiently
              represent non-linear as well as linear  functions.
