Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Sensory Drive in a Variable Signaling
               Environment: An Investigation of Surfperch (Embiotocidae) Visual Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1998       
File        : a9800938

Award Number: 9800938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Endler endler@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Molly Cummings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                      Non-Technical Abstract     Sensory Drive in a Variable Signaling
              Environment: An  Investigation of Surfperch (Embiotocidae) Visual 
              Communication     Animals living in optically variable habitats encounter 
              unique visual challenges when using color to communicate.  Color patterns can
              change in appearance as the ambient light  varies in its spectral distribution.
               The Californian  coastal marine environment exhibits a wide range of spectral 
              conditions depending on depth, water column productivity,  and kelp canopy
              cover.  Surfperch are a family of fish that  live along optically variable
              Californian coast and have  evolved diverse color patterns and distinct visual
              courtship  signals.  The specific goals of this research are to  determine
              whethersurfperch species selectively court under  specific spectral conditions,
              and whether female preference  for males is affected by changes in spectral
              conditions.  To  investigate the first question, measurements of the visual 
              pigments of the different fish species, the color patterns  of the fish, and
              the ambient light conditions during various  fish activities are collected with
              emphasis on comparing  light conditions between courtship verses non-courtship 
              activities.  The second question will be address with a tank  experiment that
              manipulates the light environment and  observes female response to male
              courtship under different  optical conditions.    The primary significance of
              this project is in gaining a  greater understanding of the evolution of signal
              diversity  across the animal kingdom.  However, the significance of  this study
              reaches beyond evolutionary biology and into the  fields of optical
              oceanography and visual science as it is  the first study to examine the
              spectral variation in the  shallow near-shore environment, and will provide a
              better  understanding of the selective forces on the visual system  by studying
              a visual properties of animals with particular  environmental constraints.
