Title       : PPD/DP: Shaping Vocational Frontiers: Science, Engineering, and Mathematics for
               Persons with Disabilities in Rural and Remote Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1998     
File        : a9800699

Award Number: 9800699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59784              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Radtke   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              From its inception, an initiative to improve education and inclusion in science,
              mathematics, engineering, and  technology (SMET) of students with disabilities,
              must develop an active partnership between the scientific,  educational,
              non-profit and administrative communities.  Until the primary and secondary
              educational system  (educators, parents, students) perceives broader range of
              educational options for students with disabilities, Alaska,  and other rural
              and remote regions, will not see students and their families formulating
              individualized education  plans that draw upon the full wealth of students 
              talents.  Careers in the sciences and technology, especially those  including
              field work, will not be viewed as viable options.  This project will bring
              together numerous scientific  organizations, state education and nonprofit
              agencies to construct a proposal to benefit rural areas.  The second  proposal
              and network will seek funds to develop pedagogical, guidance and system
              practices to support and  encourage the participation in SMET by students with
              disabilities.  This project is conducting a series of face to face  meetings
              along with e-mail, US mail and telephone conferences to examine how best to
              address the needs of students  in rural and remote regions such as Alaska. 
              Such interaction will produce plans to construct the infrastructure and 
              programs to encourage full participation in science and mathematics education
              leading to careers in SMET.
