Title       : Dissertation Research: Climate Change, Hydraulic Function, and Ecotypic
               Variation in Spatially Isolated Ponderosa Pine Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9800932

Award Number: 9800932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5230               (Estimated)
Investigator: Evan H. DeLucia delucia@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DeLucia  9800932    The change in climate expected in the next century will
              challenge the  capacity of trees to acclimate to increased temperatures and
              aridity. The  dry atmospheric conditions of an and climate increase evaporation
              from the  leaf surfaces of a plant (transpiration), increasing moisture
              requirements.  The PIs used a geographic comparison of Ponderosa pine
              populations growing  on a climate gradient as a proxy for differences between
              the current and  future climate. The PIs found that trees growing in a warm,
              dry versus a  cool, moist climate increased biomass allocation to sapwood
              (water  conducting tissue) relative to leaves. To determine if these changes in
               tree structure may be physiological and evolutionary adaptations to an and 
              climate, we propose to examine four research questions. First, does  increased
              allocation to sapwood relative to leaves increase transpiration  in and trees?
              Second, does increased allocation to sapwood reduce the  probability of
              dehydration during prolonged summer droughts? Third, does  increased allocation
              to sapwood provide greater water storage in and trees?  Fourth, does the
              physiological and structural response of Ponderosa pine to  aridity have an
              underlying genetic basis? The proposed research will  establish direct links
              between tree structure and function and permit  predictions to be made about
              the physiological and evolutionary potential  of Ponderosa pine to respond to
              climate change.
