Title       : High-Resistance Layers by Ion Implantation and Their Device Applications in
               Silicon Carbide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9800083

Award Number: 9800083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ravi K. Nadella rnadella@t32-800b.wilberforce.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wilberforce University
	      Brush Row Road
	      Wilberforce, OH  45384    513/376-2911

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9800083  Nadella    The proposed research plan will establish an ion
              implantation technology to obtain planar and selective regions of
              high-resistance layers in silicon carbide (SiC) to exploit the superior
              properties of SiC to make high frequency electronic devices and high density
              integrated circuits.  Metalsemiconductor-field effect transistors (MESFETS) and
              UV photodetectors will be made utilizing this high-resistance layer technology.
               The PI of this project has already performed the preliminary experiments and
              obtained high-resistance layers with resistivities as high as 108 (-cm in
              n-type 4HSiC.  The proposed research will be conducted in collaboration with
              researchers from industry, national laboratories, and universities.    The
              physical and electronic properties of SiC make it the foremost semiconductor
              material for high frequency, high power, short wavelength optoelectronic, high
              temperature, and radiation resistant electronic devices.  Major material issue
              for high-frequency devices and integrated circuits fabrication in SiC is the
              need for high-resistance layer technology.  In the proposed project, ion
              implantation will be used to obtain planar and selective high-resistance layers
              in SiC.  Ion implantation will allow the formation of high-resistance layers of
              different sizes and shapes at different locations.  This is in contrast to the
              recent commercial availability of high-resistance substrates made using growth.
                 High-resistance layers will be obtained in this project by chemical doping
              and implantation damage using transition metal ions and chemically inert light
              ions, respectively.  Implantations will be performed for different energies and
              doses to obtain a wide variety of doping profiles at different depth locations.
               Optimum annealing conditions will be determined for high quality layers.  High
              temperature microwave annealing station specially being designed for SiC will
              be used for anneals as high as 1700 (C.  Several characterization techniques
              including secondary ion  mass spectrometry, Rutherford backscattering, deep
              level transient spectrometry, photoluminescence, current-voltage measurements,
              capacitance-voltage measurements, and reactive ion etching assisted carrier
              concentration depth profiling will be used for analyzing the samples.   
              High-resistance layers obtained in this study will be put to test by making
              fully ion implanted MESFETs and UV detectors.  High energy implants will be
              used to obtain deep insulating layers to isolate the devices from their
              substrates.  Multiple energy implants will be performed to obtain lateral
              isolation of the devices.  N- and p-type regions will be obtained by using
              nitrogen and aluminum, respectively.  These devices will be thoroughly tested
              and their properties compared with the present state of the art devices.   
              Wilberforce University is a historically black university (HBCU) and an
              undergraduate institution.  The increased research and educational
              infrastructure at Wilberforece University due to this project will attract more
              minority students to electrical engineering and make them pursue higher studies
              in this field.  Fifty percent of the students involved in the PIs previous
              National Science Foundation grant went to graduate school.    ***
