Title       : Kinematics Driven Geometric Modeling for Virtual Design and Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1998      
File        : a9800690

Award Number: 9800690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298740             (Estimated)
Investigator: Qiaode Jeffrey Ge qge@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amitabh Varshney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for the development of an integrated
              computer-aided design/computer-aided manufaturing system for design and
              manufacture of kinematic freeform surfaces.  The kinematic freeform surfaces
              have integrated geometric and kinematic control structures that embody the
              geometry of tool motions required for Computer Numerically Controlled (CNC)
              machining processes.  Algorithms for synthesizing and analyzing rational Bezier
              and B-spline (or NURBS) based multi-parameter freeform motions will be
              developed.  Kinematic freeform surfaces generated by the multi-parameter NURBS
              motions will be developed for commonly used cutting-tool geometries such as
              lines for wire-cut Electric Discharge Machining (EDM) processes, planes for
              5-axis grinding processes, and cylinders for 5-axis milling processes. 
              Multisensory virtual environments with multi-resolution rendering capabilities
              will be developed for design, approximation, and fine-tuning of kinematic
              freeform surfaces.  Methods for analyzing and minimizing the machining errors
              due to discretization will be developed for generation and optimization of tool
              motions.  A 5-axis virtual milling machine with visual, aural, and haptic
              feedback capabilities will be developed to simulate not only the position but
              also the velocity and acceleration of tool motions.  The research results of
              this project will be validated on a real 5-axis CNC milling machine.       This
              project represents an extension of NURBS geometry from the purely geometric
              domain to the kinematic domain.  It offers an integrated framework for
              addressing geometric and kinematic problems in various stages of the virtual
              design and manufacturing pipeline.  By incorporating kinematic issues early in
              the design stage, the project, if successful, would yield a new methodology and
              a software tool for designing sculptured shapes that are free of geometric
              machinability problems such as under- and over-cut.  The project results will
              also provide a basis for concurrent design and manufacturing of dies, molds and
              other sculptured shapes for automobile and aerospace industries.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
