Title       : Boundary and Interior Regularity for Minimizers of the p-Energy and Related
               Functionals in Carnot-Caratheodory Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9800794

Award Number: 9800794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77276              (Estimated)
Investigator: Luca Capogna   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Capogna                     The main theme of this project is the
              study of the interior and boundary   regularity of minimizers for functionals
              that involve the "horizontal"  gradient of functions defined in a Carnot group
              or in a sub-Riemannian manifold.  Such functionals have a special interest both
              in geometry and partial   differential equations, and include  the energy
              functional  and the area functional. Among the applications of the regularity
              theory   one has the Dirichlet problem for subLaplacians, regularity and
              rigidity   properties for quasiconformal maps between Carnot groups and the
              geometry   of minimal surfaces. As a variation on the main theme, this projects
              also   includes the study of minimizers for a suitably defined energy of maps  
              with sub-Riemannian target.                The study of the regularity for
              minimizers of variational problems   has been  one of the main concerns in
              mathematics for centuries.  It is deeply related to the study of natural
              phenomenon, since in nature   the energy minimizing configurations are the most
              likely to appear.  If a minimizer is very regular then it is easy to study its
              structure.   Translated out of the mathematical formalism, this means  that 
              the  physical system  corresponding to a very regular minimizer   can be
              predicted very accurately. This observation is at the basis  of a wide range of
              applications, from meteorological forecasts  to the planning of a space shuttle
              launch (depending on the specific functional   and minimizer studied).  The
              variational problems involved in  this project are associated to a  special
              structure of the space that arises naturally in the study of many physical
              systems, among them thermodynamical systems  and crystalline materials. A main
              feature of this special structure is that not all   directions in space  are
              equivalent. It costs more to travel along some   directions than to move along
              others. The mathematical problems related to this   feature are very difficult
              and interesting.
