Title       : Ancient Atmospheric P(CO2), Paleoclimates and the Stable Isotope Geochemistry of
               Low Temperature Iron Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1994   
File        : a9204313

Award Number: 9204313
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224758             (Estimated)
Investigator: Crayton J. Yapp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,1571,1579,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                   The actual role of CO2 as a "greenhouse" gas in the Earth's               
              past can only be learned from proxy data on ancient atmospheric                
              Pco2 and corresponding climatic temperatures.  Research conducted              
              in this laboratory has found that the oxygen isotope systematics               
              of the common mineral goethite (a-FEOOH) make it a suitable                    
              indicator of paleotempeatures and ancient sources of water.                    
              Furthermore, we have discovered that goethite contains an apparent             
              Fe(CO3)OH component in solid solution whose abundance is related               
              to ancient ambient Pco2.  These characteristics of natural                     
              goethites have been used to deduce tropical temperatures and                   
              atmospheric CO2 pressures 440 million years ago.                               
                   A broader application of these properties of goethite is                  
              planned.  Part of the work well involve experimental study of the              
              isotopic effects of substitution of Al for Fe in goethite.  Such               
              information is of importance to isotopic paleoclimatic research                
              involving goethites in tropical soils, where degrees of Al                     
              substitution can be high.  another portion of the proposed research            
              will undertake the study of the oxygen isotope systematics of                  
              goethite + phosphate as a promising mineral pair oxygen isotope                
              paleothermometer.  The two-component CO2 mixing model for soils (as            
              manifested in the Fe(CO3)OH component of surficial goethite) will              
              be tested further as a third aspect of the research with data                  
              obtained from goethite in active Cenozoic laterites.                           
              Goethite-bearing Mesozoic oolitic ironstones and laterite will also            
              be isotopically, etc., analyzed to evaluate ancient temperatures,              
              water sources and possibly atmospheric CO2 pressures.
