Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Singular Integrals and Fourier Integral Operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1993  
File        : a9204196

Award Number: 9204196
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Duong H. Phong phong@math.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project seeks to analyze the mathematical theories of                
              singular integral, Fourier integral and pseudodifferential                     
              operators.  The theories developed over the past thirty years                  
              yielding a wide range of applications based on their simplicity                
              and unity.  Nevertheless, operators falling outside their scope                
              are appearing with increased frequency in studies of Fourier-Airy              
              operators of diffraction theory, maximal operators and Hilbert                 
              transforms along curves of differentiation theory, Hilbert                     
              integral operators and singular Radon transforms of subelliptic                
              boundary value problems, oscillatory singular integrals on                     
              nilpotent groups, the X-ray transforms and Guillemin operators of              
              integral geometry and deformation theory on manifolds of                       
              geodesics.                                                                     
                   Two unifying themes have emerged; they appear themselves to               
              be related.  The first consists of Fourier integral operators                  
              whose Lagrangian is not a local graph but projects on tangent                  
              spaces with folds or cusps.  The second is where the densities on              
              the Lagrangian have singularities.                                             
                   The main goal of this work is to arrive at a more complete                
              theory of degenerate Fourier integral and singular integral                    
              operators.                                                                     
                   Strong evidence for the existence of such a framework is                  
              provided by recent progress in several directions: work will be                
              done in exploring them further.  First, efforts will be made to                
              understand the stratification of the singular varieties of                     
              projections of degenerate operators on tangent spaces and how                  
              they influence Sobolev bounds.  This will only treat operators                 
              with constant coefficients.  Efforts at a formulation of the                   
              theory on manifolds, a new phenomenon - not present in the                     
              classical case - occurs.   Work must be done in obtaining lower                
              bounds for the oscillation of the phase function.  Other goals                 
              involve finding extensions to operators defined in spaces of                   
              higher dimension and the measure of the level of stratification                
              of the local geometry of the Lagrangian to yield sharp bounds for              
              singular Radon transforms.
