Title       : PRF: Molecular Mapping of Inbreeding Depression Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1992      
File        : a9204745

Award Number: 9204745
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jefferey A. Dole   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1175,
Abstract    :
              The genetic basis of load and inbreeding depression has important              
              implications for the evolution of mating systems and management                
              of rare and endangered species.  Yet the best data available                   
              consider viability load at the level of whole chromosomes in                   
              Drosophila.  The Principal Investigator proposes to measure the                
              load attributable to small (ca. 10 centiMorgan) chromosome                     
              segments in the plant Brassica campestris.  Maximum likelihood                 
              methods to map QTL onto short chromosomal regions marked by                    
              restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) will be                        
              employed.By determining the degree to which small QTL bearing                  
              chromosome segments contribute to load by overdominance,                       
              dominance, or epistasis, the researchers can begin to infer the                
              distribution of effects for loci contributing to genetic load and              
              inbreeding depression.  Most previous studies have examined                    
              single fitness components in one environment, precluding the                   
              possibility of overdominance induced by pleiotropy among fitness               
              components or genotype x environment interaction.  This research               
              project will measure viability and fecundity in both field and                 
              greenhouse to give more accurate estimates of overdominance.                   
              This study represents the next step towards resolving the basis                
              of genetic load at the gene level by combining molecular and                   
              quantitative genetics.
