Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analytic Discs in Several Complex Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1992      
File        : a9204384

Award Number: 9204384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40842              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Tumanov   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award supports mathematical research on problems                     
              concerned primarily with the extension of functions and mappings               
              defined on boundaries of domains in several complex variables.                 
              The boundaries are generalizations of surfaces, known as (real)                
              manifolds. The idea of extending a function from the manifold to               
              a holomorphic function on the domain is actually a boundary value              
              problem in partial differential equations.  Functions which can                
              be extended must satisfy certain (Cauchy-Riemann) conditions on                
              the manifold.                                                                  
                   It has recently been shown that all CR functions on a                     
              generic manifold extend over a wedge in a neighborhood of some                 
              point of the manifold.  Work will now be done adapting newly                   
              developed techniques to establish the location of the wedge.                   
              Another research direction will be that of determining geometric               
              conditions for extending CR functions over a neighborhood of the               
              manifold.                                                                      
                   Analyticity or wedge-extendibility of a CR function on a CR               
              manifold propagates along complex curves in the manifold.  A                   
              natural consideration is also the propagation of CR                            
              extendibility.  Work will be done in showing that CR                           
              extendibility is transported in parallel with respect to some                  
              connection on M.  A basic tool in all the work is that of using                
              analytic discs to localize the analysis.                                       
                   Work on mappings between CR manifolds will focus on                       
              continuous maps between analytic manifolds to determine the                    
              extent to which continuity actually implies that the mappings are              
              holomorphic.  Some initial smoothness assumptions will be made                 
              coupled with the use of the reflection principle on attached                   
              analytic discs.
