Title       : Isotopic Probes of Flavoprotein Oxidase Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1994     
File        : a9204698

Award Number: 9204698
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Fitzpatrick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Flavoenzymes catalyze a wide variety of metabolically                          
              significant reactions.  Flavoprotein oxidases are among the                    
              simplest of these enzymes, catalyzing the transfer of a hydride                
              equivalent from their substrates to molecular oxygen to form                   
              hydrogen peroxide.  The research proposed here will develop                    
              methods utilizing kinetic isotope effects on steady state and                  
              rapid reaction kinetics to examine the mechanisms of                           
              flavoprotein oxidases, using D-amino acid oxidase (DAAO) as a                  
              model.  The PI will determine the pH dependence of the V/K                     
              values and of the primary deuterium kinetic isotope effects on                 
              the V/K values with D-alanine, D-serine, and glycine; determine                
              if the maximal observed isotope effects are the intrinsic                      
              values; measure secondary deuterium kinetic isotope effects in                 
              order to determine if carbon-hydrogen bond cleavage and flavin                 
              reduction in D-amino acid oxidase are stepwise or concerted;                   
              and replace the native FAD with artificial flavins with                        
              different redox potentials and determine the intrinsic isotope                 
              effects.  These methods will then be used to evaluate the                      
              results of site-directed mutagenesis of individual amino acid                  
              residues in DAAO.  They will also be applied to two additional                 
              flavoprotein oxidases, tryptophan monooxygenase and alcohol                    
              oxidase, to ascertain their general applicability.                             
              %%%                                                                            
              Flavoproteins are a major class of proteins involved in a wide                 
              variety of metabolic processes.  Elucidation of the catalytic                  
              mechanisms of these enzymes can provide insights into the                      
              mechanisms of a number of metabolically significant enzymes, into              
              the mechanisms of more complex flavoproteins, and into general                 
              biological mechanisms of electron transfer and oxygen activation.              
              This research will yield information pertaining to the mechanism of            
              flavoprotein oxidases using kinetic isotope effects to examine the             
              role of specific amino acid residues in catalysis.  General                    
              knowledge about flavoprotein carbon-hydrogen bond cleavage as well             
              as about oxygen activation by flavin and pterin dependent enzymes              
              will also be generated.
