Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Ordovician and Silurian Explosive Volcanism in the
               Lapetus Region: Tectonomagmatic, Tectonic,Event-Stratigraphic & Biological
               Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1995      
File        : a9204893

Award Number: 9204893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124859             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren D. Huff warren.huff@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The study will continue and expand upon work on Ordovician and            
              Silurian explosively formed volcanic ashes which occur both in                 
              eastern North America and northwestern Europe for the purpose of               
              resolving some fundamental questions concerning the origin and                 
              distribution of these ash beds relative to the closing of the                  
              Iapetus Ocean, and the effect they may have had on mass extinction             
              of marine biota.  The enormous database of geochemical,                        
              petrographic, stratigraphic and paleontological information                    
              provides a unique opportunity to understand the tectonomagmatic                
              framework within which large quantities of felsic subduction-                  
              related ash was injected into the stratosphere and widely                      
              distributed across large portions of Baltica, Avalonia and                     
              Laurentia.  It is clear that major centers of volcanism changed                
              along the margins of Iapetus from Ordovician to Silurian time, but             
              the timing and location of these centers is not well understood.               
              We will look particularly at what we now believe to be a single,               
              ultraplinian eruptive event which deposited ash on both continental            
              margins of Iapetus and may have been derived from the same arc                 
              source as the Ammonoosuc Volcanics of southern New England.                    
              Resolving these questions will provide new clarifying information              
              about the tectonic events affecting the margin of Iapetus.                     
              Further, we propose to evaluate the event-stratigraphic and                    
              biologic implications of these events by selected, detailed studies            
              of widespread Ordovician and Silurian K-bentonites using isotopic              
              ages, chemical fingerprinting, and faunal studies.  Recognition of             
              one or more ash beds of both sides of the Atlantic will be an                  
              important contribution to furthering trans-Atlantic stratigraphic              
              correlation of Ordovician and Silurian strata.  Finally, in an                 
              effort to provide more insight into the likelihood that dust clouds            
              of global proportions have deleterious and long-lasting effects on             
              major groups of organisms, we will examine the evidence for                    
              biological mass extinctions that may have occurred as a results of             
              these catastrophic eruptions.
