Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Homotopy Theory and Its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1994      
File        : a9204534

Award Number: 9204534
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $463300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haynes R. Miller hrm@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              D. M. Kan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Hopkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Franklin P. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project encompasses research by four mathematicians and              
              their students on problems in homotopy theory.  Hopkins will study             
              classification questions in stable homotopy theory using tools from            
              p-adic number theory and localization.  Kan will continue research             
              into fundamental structures in homotopy theory connected with                  
              classification questions in unstable homotopy theory.  Peterson                
              will study the Dickson algebra and other algebras as modules over              
              the Steenrod algebra.  Miller will study the structure of finite               
              loop spaces using cohomological methods.                                       
                   Topology arose originally as an approach to the study of                  
              differential equations.  Over the intervening century it has                   
              evolved prodigiously, often seeming to have a life entirely its own            
              and independent of its source.  Increasingly, however, it has begun            
              to repay its debt.  The point is that it is often more important to            
              know of the solution of an equation whether it is a closed loop or             
              whether it is knotted, for example, than to know precisely and                 
              numerically what are the coordinates of all of its points.                     
              Furthermore, although the former qualitative information is                    
              implicitly contained in the latter complete description, it is not             
              at all obvious how to extract it.  The sophisticated machinery that            
              has been developed by topologists, such things as the                          
              investigations in homotopy theory outlined for this project, has               
              now been developed to a degree that often permits these natural                
              problems to be handled in a natural way.
