Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Complex Manifolds and Meromorphic Mappings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1993  
File        : a9204037

Award Number: 9204037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Shiffman shiffman@math.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project continues mathematical research into problems                
              associated with the geometry of several complex variables and                  
              mappings defined on regions within such spaces.  The work focuses              
              on complex varieties, meromorphic mappings and holomorphic vector              
              bundles.  Work on meromorphic mappings seeks generalizations of                
              Hartogs' theorems on separate analyticity and on holomorphic                   
              extendibility.  Also to be investigated are Hartogs-type results               
              for analytic subvarieties with possible application to the                     
              characterization of holomorphic chains of codimension greater                  
              than unity.  Studies of holomorphic vector bundles concerns                    
              singular hermitian metrics on numerically effective line bundles               
              on projective-algebraic manifolds.  A continuation of work on                  
              cohomology vanishing theorems and sectional curvatures of                      
              indecomposable Hermitian-Einstein vector bundles on complex                    
              projective space will be carried out.  Finally, the geometry of                
              affine algebraic varieties and degree bounds for the division                  
              problem for special polynomial ideals will be studied.                         
                   Complex function theory encompasses the study of                          
              differentiable functions of a several complex variables and                    
              related classes of functions such as boundary values of                        
              holomorphic functions. The subject is highly geometric; many of                
              the problems concern the properties of various sets and how they               
              transform by mappings composed of holomorphic functions.                       
              Applications of the theory to potential theory and fluid dynamics              
              is now standard in engineering circles.
