Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Quantum Nondemolition Measurements in Microwave
               Cavities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1992      
File        : a9204058

Award Number: 9204058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38450              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Weiss   (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Chu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1240,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Long and Medium-Term Research:  Quantum Nondemolition                          
              Measurements in Microwave Cavities                                             
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at                       
              Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S.                      
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                 
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the             
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and                       
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit             
              by Dr. David Weiss of Stanford University to work with Professor               
              Serge Haroche at L'Ecole Normale Superieure.                                   
                                                                                             
              This project is in the field of Quantum Optics, specifically in                
              Cavity Quantum Electrodynamics.  An apparatus is currently under               
              construction at L'Ecole Normale Superieure which will enable the               
              field in a high finesse microwave cavity to be measured using                  
              beams of atoms in a long-lived Rydberg states.  The cavity is                  
              detuned from an atomic resonance so that while the atoms                       
              experience a measurable energy shift due to light in the cavity, they          
              do not absorb any of the cavity's photons.  This so-called quantum             
              non-demolition scheme is the first that promises to allow                      
              measurements of extremely weak fields, down to the single photon               
              level.  The likely first experiments using this system will be the             
              preparation of non-classical states of the field, including pure               
              number states, where the exact number of photons is determined at              
              the expense of all knowledge of the field's phase, and "Schrodinger            
              cat" states, which are coherent superpositions of different classical          
              fields.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel and a stipend for twelve months.
