Title       : Regulation of Diterpene Biosynthesis in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1995       
File        : a9204118

Award Number: 9204118
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168605             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles A. West   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The general objective of this research is to develop understanding             
              of the mechanisms operating in higher plants to regulate the                   
              biosynthesis of diterpenoid metabolites that contribute to a                   
              plant's ability to survive environmental and biological stresses.              
              The focus is on the regulation of cyclization enzymes that catalyze            
              the first committed step of the pathway leading to a                           
              physiologically active diterpenoid metabolite(s), and thus is a                
              logical site for regulation.  One target enzyme is casbene                     
              synthetase, which catalyzes the synthesis of the putative                      
              phytoalexin, casbene, in castor bean seedlings.  The casbene                   
              synthetase gene is transcriptionally activated in response to                  
              treatment of the seedlings with pectic fragment elicitors.  Genomic            
              clones containing casbene synthetase coding sequences have been                
              isolated.  A major goal of the research is to characterize the                 
              casbene synthetase gene and the cis- and trans-acting factors that             
              participate in the transcriptional activation of the gene in                   
              response to pectic fragment elicitors.  These investigations are               
              of importance in connection with plant disease resistance since                
              phytoalexins are among the defensive components that appear in a               
              resistance response.  Another experimental target is kaurene                   
              synthetase, a key regulatory enzyme in the pathway leading to the              
              gibberellin family of regulators that help mediate environmental               
              influences on plant growth and development.  A major objective is              
              to purify kaurene synthetase to homogeneity, and to use the                    
              purified protein to prepare specific antibodies and kaurene                    
              synthetase cDNA probes.  These probes will be used to measure                  
              kaurene synthetase mRNA levels in plant tissues, and changes in                
              their levels under different environmental conditions, as an                   
              indicator of their relative potentials for gibberellin                         
              biosynthesis.
