Title       : Dissertation Research: Social Influence on the Development of Foraging Behavior
               in Golden Lion Tamarins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1992      
File        : a9204342

Award Number: 9204342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9084               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa G. Rapaport  (Student current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This study will explore the development of foraging behavior in                
              golden lion tamarins (Leontopithecus rosalia rosalia).  These                  
              small monkeys are unusual among primates in that they live in                  
              tight-knit family groups and all group members assist in infant                
              care.  Young may learn information concerning what to eat and                  
              where to search for food by sharing the foraging sites of parents              
              and other group members.  In addition, dietary information may be              
              obtained when food is directly transferred from older individuals              
              to immatures.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Using behavioral observation to be gathered at both the National               
              Zoological Park (Washington, DC) and in Brazil, the researchers                
              will investigate the degree to which young tamarins take                       
              advantage of opportunities to learn about diet and foraging from               
              others.  The relative importance of various kin and non-kin as                 
              role models and age-changes in food sharing will be investigated.              
              A series of hypotheses regarding the social benefits of food                   
              sharing will be tested.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Food sharing among tamarins is more frequent and more complex                  
              than in any other primate aside from humans.  The data gathered                
              will allow for the comparison of these behaviors in the two                    
              species.  Additionally, as the golden lion tamarin is a severely               
              endangered species, the data may well assist in the conservation               
              of the species.
