Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Topology and the Fundamental Group
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1994     
File        : a9204502

Award Number: 9204502
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102900             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Cannon cannon@math.byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Most (perhaps all) 3-manifolds are geometric.  Geometric group            
              theory seeks to tie together combinatorial and geometric properties            
              of geometric isometry groups.  The theory is burgeoning at the                 
              hands of Gromov, Epstein, Thurston, Holt, Bestvina, Feighn, Mess,              
              Paterson, Gersten, Short, Shapiro, Parry, Floyd, Baumslag, Casson,             
              Brick, Stallings, a whole school of continental mathematicians,                
              Cannon, and others.  The theory has produced the notions of                    
              automatic group, negatively curved group, complex of groups, almost            
              convex groups, combable groups, isoperimetric and isodiametric                 
              inequalities for groups.  Amid these many topics, Cannon, his                  
              students, and coworkers are currently concentrating on a cluster of            
              projects related to the existence of hyperbolic structures on 3-               
              manifolds.  Is the generic finitely presented group negatively                 
              curved, as claimed without explicit proof by Gromov?  Does every               
              negatively curved closed 3-manifold admit a Riemannian metric of               
              constant negative curvature?  Can negative curvature be recognized             
              algorithmically?  Can the space at infinity be recognized                      
              algorithmically?  Can potential constant curvature be recognized               
              algorithmically?  Cannon is using as the basis for these studies               
              his combinatorial Riemann mapping theorem developed during the                 
              previous projects, the related work by Parry, and the computer                 
              Programs of Epstein and his collaborators.                                     
                   Groups are the appropriate algebraic structures for describing            
              the notion of symmetry with precision.  For this reason they play              
              an extensive role in geometry (and topology).  While the more usual            
              interaction between group theory and geometry is the use of                    
              algebraic computations involving groups to prove theorems about                
              geometric objects possessing symmetry, there is a very significant             
              mathematical subdiscipline in which the roles are reversed and our             
              intuition about geometric objects assists us in conjecturing and               
              proving theorems about associated groups.  A fascinating recent                
              development is the influence of the computer in all this.  Not only            
              is it the ubiquitous timesaver that everyone knows, enabling one to            
              undertake computations that would otherwise be too formidable, but             
              it has actually influenced the questions in geometric group theory             
              in a more fundamental way.  Certain classes of groups have been                
              defined in terms of the types of hypothetical machines that would              
              be able to perform certain computations about them.  Real hardware             
              is not involved in this, and the same definitions could have been              
              conceived long ago, but they were not, for the existence of                    
              computing machines has influenced the way we look at the world, the            
              types of questions we ask about it, the kinds of properties that we            
              find interesting.
