Title       : An ASTRAL-Based Support Environment for Formal Software Development of Realtime
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1996       
File        : a9204249

Award Number: 9204249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210044             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Kemmerer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,
Abstract    :
                    This award addresses the need for improving system reliability  through
              better software development methods and tools, and  specifically, through
              applying formal methods to the development of  realtime systems.  The solution
              sought is a formal framework for  the specification and analysis of realtime
              systems.  This framework is  based on the ASTRAL formal specification language
              and includes the  ASTRAL language for writing requirements and design
              specifications of  realtime systems, a formal proof theory for proving
              properties about  ASTRAL specifications, and a support environment for the
              construction  and analysis of the specifications.  The tools that make up the 
              support environment are a syntax-directed editor, an ASTRAL to TRIO 
              translator, an ASTRAL specification processor, and a mechanical  theorem
              prover.  The TRIO-based model checkers, developed at the  Politecnico di
              Milano, are being integrated into the support  environment.  The main
              theoretical issues to be investigated deal with the  composability of ASTRAL
              specifications.  The research is developing a  proof theory that prescribes how
              the proofs of the individual state  machine specifications can be combined to
              produce a proof of the  entire system.  Another composability issue to be
              investigated is the  composition of two or more ASTRAL system specifications
              (i.e., a  global specification and its associated collection of state machine 
              specifications) to derive the specification for the composite system.   ASTRAL
              is being used to specify complex realtime systems  taken from a variety of
              application areas to evaluate its effectiveness and utility.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
