Title       : Taxonomic, Evolutionary, Biogeographic and Paleoecologic Studies of
               Silurian-Devonian Brachiopods and Other Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1994   
File        : a9204422

Award Number: 9204422
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97354              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur J. Boucot boucota@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This study includes the following:                                        
              1.  Completion of the series of worldwide Silurian Correlation                 
              charts:  Continental Europe and Northern Asia (Asiatic Russia,                 
              Mongolia, Korea, Japan).                                                       
                                                                                             
              2.  Obtaining biogeographically critical Silurian and Devonian                 
              brachipod collections from southern Thailand, northwestern Saudi               
              Arabia, northern Chile and adjacent Argentina, to fill in critical             
              blanks and establish better relations between large parts of the               
              World.  To further investigate the implications of the newly                   
              discovered terrestrial biogeography of the higher land plants                  
              (using spore tetrads) for the Llanvirn-Llandovery interval of the              
              Ordovician and Silurian, and compare and contrast it with the                  
              biogeography of the associated marine environments.  To further                
              extend global, studies of post-Ibexian brachipod biogeography for              
              the Ordovician at the generic level.  Description of                           
              biogeographically critical Upper Silurian brachipods from Iran will            
              also be carried out.                                                           
                                                                                             
              3.  Completion for publication of the global studies involved in               
              Project Ecostratigraphy.                                                       
                                                                                             
              4.  Gathering information on the Ibexian-Whiterockian boundary                 
              interval, which is one of the major times of both extinction and               
              subsequent adaptive radiation in the marine environment, and about             
              the minor extinction event that occurred in the earlier Wenlockian             
              for much of the World.                                                         
                                                                                             
              5.  Completing the Treatise on Invertebrate Paleontology                       
              assignment, as part of the brachiopod volume revision, on the                  
              pentameroids and Paleozoic terebratuloids.
