Title       : Continuous SPLITT Fractionation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1994       
File        : a9204086

Award Number: 9204086
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324462             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Calvin Giddings Giddings@chemistry.chem.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal studies a flow based separation technique for                    
              fractionating particles.  The separation is carried out in a                   
              rectangular flow chamber which is generally under 5 mm in                      
              thickness, and approximately 2 cm in width and 20 cm in                        
              length.  At the entrance of the channel, a splitter plate                      
              which extends lengthwise a few millimeters down the tube,                      
              partitions the inlet region of the channel into two halves.  A                 
              carrier fluid is pumped into the chamber on one side of the                    
              splitter, and the fluid containing the particles is introduced                 
              on the other side.  As the fluids pass the splitter edge, a                    
              two phase adjacent Poiseuille flow is created with fluid near                  
              the wall boundaries moving slower than fluid in the center of                  
              the channel.  As the particles are carried along the length of                 
              the channel, a field applied in a direction perpendicular to                   
              the flow axis forces the particles to migrate towards the                      
              carrier stream.  Gravitational and electric forces are two                     
              examples of fields which can be used.  The separation is                       
              effected by the fact that the magnitude of the force exerted                   
              by the field on the particles depends on a particular particle                 
              characteristic, and if that characteristic differs between                     
              particles then so does the magnitude of the force.  Examples                   
              of such characteristics are size which would result in a                       
              different gravitational force and electric charge.  Particles                  
              more strongly acted upon by the applied force migrate further                  
              into the carrier stream where they decelerate as they are                      
              entrained by slower moving fluid.  After the particles have                    
              translated a certain distance downstream, particles which are                  
              not acted upon as strongly by the force are more centrally                     
              located and have moved further downstream than particles more                  
              strongly acted upon which are nearer the boundary and have not                 
              progressed as far downstream.                                                  
                                                                                             
              During the last two and one-half decades, the PI developed the                 
              technique of collecting the particles by taking advantages of                  
              the developing separation distance between the particles along                 
              the flow direction.  As the fluid leaves the channel, those                    
              travelling near the center elute first and can be collected,                   
              while those travelling near the boundary elute later and can                   
              be collected separately.  The PI has termed this techniques                    
              FFF for field flow fractionation. In the development of FFF,                   
              scale-up proved difficult and the technique could only be used                 
              for analytical measurement since the quantities harvested were                 
              very small.  In contrast to FFF, a different technique for                     
              harvesting the separation is to use a splitter at the                          
              downstream end to divide the stream into two exiting streams.                  
              One stream would contain the particles moving near the center,                 
              while the other would contain the particles moving closer to                   
              the channel cell boundary.  The PI has termed this separation                  
              CSF for continuous SPLITT fractionation and has been working                   
              on CSF since 1985 (refs. 11-19 of the proposal).  The research                 
              suggested in this proposal is concerned with scaleup of the                    
              cell, improving its performance, and examining different                       
              separation mechanisms.
