Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Noise and Tone, A Study in Cognitive
               Ethnomusicology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1992      
File        : a9204046

Award Number: 9204046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23045              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cornelia W. Fales PORT@EDU.INDIANA.UCS  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert F. Port  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 1310,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at                       
              Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S.                      
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                 
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the             
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and                       
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit             
              by Dr. Cornelia W. Fales to the Institut de Recherche et                       
              Coordination to work with Dr. Stephen McAdams.  The purpose of                 
              this study is to explore the relationship of noise and inharmonicity           
              as timbral components.  By noise in this context, Dr. Fales means              
              the presence of random frequencies at sufficient energy to make a              
              perceptual difference in the timbral quality of the tone they                  
              surround.  Specifically, the project will have two parts, both of              
              which will test the ability of noise to disguise inharmonic partials           
              of a complex tone.  A third study is included to be undertaken if              
              time and resources allow, which tests the potential of noise to                
              induce perceptions desired by a performer.                                     
                                                                                             
              Auditory processing has been described as occurring in two                     
              directions at once:  from the bottom up, which is called primitive             
              processing, and from the top down, which is called schema-based                
              processing.  If the  cognitive heuristics which regulate primitive             
              processing of sound are truly innate then it is in the activity of             
              schema-based processing that evidence may be found for the                     
              variety of the world's music and musical behavior.  It is here that            
              we may find evidence in support of the contention that timbral                 
              sensitivity varies with a listener's use of timbre - in music or in            
              speech.  The acoustic circumstances under which a tone will fuse               
              with the noisy components that are part of, or close to its source,            
              the point at which a tone immersed in noise becomes only a series              
              of frequencies contributing to the noise and tone - these are                  
              questions which bear on the subject of instrumental timbre.  These             
              questions are equally valid for the study of instrumental music in             
              western culture. The line between noise and tone is often                      
              contextually established:  is the high-frequency hum of the dentist's          
              drill noise or tone?  are instrumental ideophones noisy or tonal?              
              As studies of the continuity illusion have shown, the very                     
              perception of noise is often dependent on its acoustic context;                
              listeners have demonstrated the ability to hear unbroken speech and            
              nonspeech sounds right through an interfering gap of noise which               
              does indeed break the sequence of sounds that surround it.  While              
              psychoacousticians have developed precise definitions to distinguish           
              noise from tone, the perceiver's categories are less clearly defined.          
              The results of this project will bear on all these issues.
