Title       : Reactions in Organized and Constricted Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1994      
File        : a9204420

Award Number: 9204420
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $394500             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Kerry Thomas thomas.3@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The ability of molecular cations to migrate and undergo                        
              chemical reactions will be determined in a variety of different                
              environments including low viscosity liquids at room                           
              temperature, glasses at 77 K, and highly viscous oligomers and                 
              polymers. Polymers to be investigated  range from                              
              chloropolymers such as polyvinylchloride to polystyrene and                    
              polyethylene. The cationic species will be generated by                        
              exposure of polycyclic hydrocarbons such as anthracene,                        
              naphthalene, and pyrene to high-energy radiation produced from                 
              a Fabretron. The resulting cationic species will be detected by                
              transient spectroscopy on a picosecond time scale. In addition                 
              to the kinetic analysis of the cation migration rate, an                       
              investigation of the rate of fluorescence quenching of both                    
              absorbed and surface bound pyrene at solid-air and solid-liquid                
              interfaces of silicon oxide will be conducted. The effect of                   
              the surface on the generation of charged species from                          
              exciplexes will also be determined by diffuse reflectance                      
              transient absorption spectroscopy. The results of these                        
              investigations will lead to a better understanding of the                      
              reactions of cationic species at surfaces and the factors                      
              governing efficient quenching processes.                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              continuing work of Professor J. Kerry Thomas at the University                 
              of Notre Dame. The studies will be directed toward                             
              understanding the effect of surfaces on the reactivity of                      
              chemical substances and will provide critical data which will                  
              allow the development of more efficient chemical systems. The                  
              investigation will utilize equipment capable of detecting                      
              events on the order of less than a billionth of a second. Thus                 
              it will be possible to measure the rapid hopping of charged                    
              species in a variety of media. The use of target molecules                     
              which undergo rapid fluorescence decay processes provides a                    
              means of monitoring chemical processes on a time scale which                   
              would otherwise be inaccessible.
