Title       : Light/Shade Adaptation of Prochlorothrix Hollandica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1993     
File        : a9204672

Award Number: 9204672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153014             (Estimated)
Investigator: George S. Bullerjahn bullerj@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The rationale for this work is based on the fact that all                 
              photosynthetic organisms must adapt to changes in environment                  
              light intensity in order to maximize photosynthetic efficiency.                
              At high light, excess energy has to be dissipated to prevent                   
              photodamage, while at low light, photon capture has be maximized               
              to allow photosynthesis to proceed efficiently.  We have been                  
              studying the photosynthetic prokaryote, Prochlorothrix                         
              hollandica, as a model system to examine the light/shade                       
              adaptation of the photosynthetic apparatus.  This bacterium is                 
              well-suited to these studies because it is structurally similar                
              to higher plant chloroplasts, but can be manipulated in the lab                
              more easily that higher plants or eukaryotic algae.  Our work has              
              characterized the events occurring during light/shade adaptation               
              in both P. hollandica and plant chloroplasts, and we have shown                
              that similar mechanisms occur in both systems.  Overall, we                    
              believe that analyzing this process in P. hollandica will reveal               
              in more detail the pathway required for plants to handle                       
              alterations in environmental light intensity.                                  
              %%%                                                                            
                                                                                             
                   Specifically, our work has shown that light/shade adaptation              
              involves in part the interplay of two separate events.  First,                 
              upon a shift to high light, the overall chlorophyll pigment                    
              system becomes reorganized in approximately 30 minutes; we                     
              calculate 40% of the accessory chlorophyll pigments are capable                
              of changing their orientation such that energy capture and                     
              transfer is altered at high light.  This mechanism appears to be               
              controlled by a light-activated protein kinase.  Second, as cells              
              experience high light for several hours, a light-activated                     
              metalloprotease activity degrades a subset of the accessory                    
              chlorophyll-binding proteins.  The function of this protease is                
              probably to limit the amount of photon capture at high                         
              irradiances.  Understanding precisely the mechanism(s) by which                
              cells sense high light and trigger these responses will help us                
              understand how photosynthesis is regulated in chloroplast (plant)              
              systems.  To date, we have cloned many of the genes encoding the               
              components involved in these mechanisms; these include the genes               
              encoding the protein kinase.  We are currently examining how                   
              light affects the expression of these genes, and how the function              
              of the kinase affects the function and organization of the                     
              photosynthetic light-harvesting antenna.  Lastly, we are                       
              examining in detail how the proteolytic activity acts to destroy               
              the accessory chlorophyll-proteins in high light; it is possible               
              that the accessory chlorophyll-proteins are targeted for                       
              proteolysis by their phosphorylation by the thylakoid protein                  
              kinase.
