Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: High-Resolution Event Stratigraphy of the
               Kope-Corryville Sequence in the Type Cincinnatian
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1995   
File        : a9204916

Award Number: 9204916
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155675             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold I. Miller arnold.miller@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The current nomenclatural framework for the type Cincinnatian             
              suggests an underlying lithostratigraphic complexity that inhibits             
              utilization of its rich fossil biota for paleoecological and                   
              macroevolutionary investigations.  However, several recent studies             
              indicate that this apparent complexity is partly an artifact of                
              difficulties with the nomenclature itself.  The purpose of the                 
              research is to develop a high-resolution chronostratigraphic                   
              framework for the Kope through Corryville Formations (Edenian-                 
              Maysvillian) in the Cincinnati region that transcends stratigraphic            
              nomenclature through the use of event horizons for correlation,                
              including:  transgressive surfaces, epiboles, earthquake-disrupted             
              beds, storm beds with unusual sedimentological features, and sea               
              level-associated stratigraphic "spikes" in lithologic and faunal               
              characteristics.   A series of field localities and cores from                 
              throughout the region will be measured and described in detail, and            
              faunal samples collected and analyzed, to delineate event horizons             
              within the study interval.  Previous investigations indicate the               
              presence of several such horizons, and it is anticipated that our              
              work designed specifically for this purpose, will permit the                   
              recognition of several more.  The result will be a series of cross-            
              sections and maps illustrating a chronostratigraphic framework for             
              the sequence.  As a first use of this framework, we will conduct a             
              series of gradient analyses on documented event horizons to                    
              calibrate the degree of lateral variability in paleoenvironments               
              and paleocommunities at specific times during the Edenian and                  
              Maysvillian stages.
