Title       : CRB: Collaborative Research: Evolutionary Genetics of Adaptive Radiation in
               Tetramolopium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1995  
File        : a9204261

Award Number: 9204261
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142261             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Whitkus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9285,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                   A major concern of Conservation Biology is the measurement                
              and preservation of genetic diversity (degree of genetic                       
              variation) particularly where rare and endangered species are                  
              involved.  This is so because genetic diversity is recognized as               
              being necessary for maintenance of healthy populations and for                 
              determining the evolutionary potential (such as the potential for              
              new species to evolve) of natural populations.  It is proposed                 
              that island plant species that have evolved through adaptive                   
              radiation (diversification into  a variety of habitats from a                  
              single introduction) can provide the model systems for analysis                
              of the amount and structure of genetic diversity for rare plants               
              in general.  The genus Tetramolopium in the Sunflower family                   
              presents a unique opportunity to analyze genetic diversity in                  
              rare species.  The genus occurs only on oceanic islands in the                 
              Pacific Ocean and has an unusual distribution among New Guinea,                
              Hawaii, and the Cook Islands.  Ten of the eleven Hawaiian species              
              are considered rare and endangered.  Based on available evidence               
              New Guinea is the source area where Tetramolopium evolved and was              
              later dispersed to the other Pacific islands.                                  
                   The two specific goals of the research are:  1. To assess                 
              the initial amount of genetic diversity that was introduced into               
              Hawaii and compare this value to those found in the present                    
              Hawaiian species.  This will be accomplished by comparing genetic              
              diversity in New Guinea species to those in Hawaii through use of              
              two independent molecular techniques.  2. To determine how many                
              genes are involved in the process of adaptive radiation in                     
              Hawaiian species and estimate the proportion of the total gene                 
              pool represented by these genes.  This will be one of the first                
              non-domesticated plant species to have the number of genes                     
              controlling morphological differences determined and mapped.  The              
              results of this research will provide detailed information that                
              will be invaluable for the management of threatened and                        
              endangered plant species.
