Title       : REU: ER:TI:LiNbO3 Guided Wave Integrated Optic Amplifier
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9204852

Award Number: 9204852
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah L. Crawford                     
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon McCaughan mccaughan@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ti:LiNbO3-based guided wave optics has                                         
              produced the largest and most                                                  
              sophisticated integrated optic structures to                                   
              date.  At present these devices lack the                                       
              ability to produce or amplify light.  As a                                     
              result design must be kept conservative to                                     
              reduce optical loss, thus placing severe                                       
              limitations on the allowable number of                                         
              integrated optic elements and their packing                                    
              density.  Certain important functions, like                                    
              signal regeneration and fan-out (i.e., the                                     
              distribution of one data stream to many                                        
              outputs), must also be done electronically-                                    
              re-imposing both the bandwidth limitations                                     
              and the added complexity of electronics.  A                                    
              solution to these limitations is an integrable                                 
              guided wave optical element gain.  One of                                      
              the goals of the proposed research is to                                       
              fabricate a LiNbO3-based guided wave                                           
              optical amplifier, incorporating Er3+ as the                                   
              amplifying medium.  (Er has a strong                                           
              emission line at ~ 1500 nm, a wavelength                                       
              of importance for telecommunications                                           
              systems and well beyond the optical region                                     
              where optical damage to LiNbO3 can take                                        
              place.)  Toward this end, the PI has                                           
              recently developed a method for locally                                        
              incorporating much higher concentrations                                       
              of Er into LiNbO3 than previously reported.                                    
              This research has several promising                                            
              waveguide circuits which take advantage of                                     
              the unique characteristics of intersecting                                     
              waveguides.  We have previously                                                
              developed a rigorous theory which                                              
              correctly explains both the coupling and                                       
              radiative loss characteristics of intersecting                                 
              optical waveguides and we are applying                                         
              this theory to the design and analysis of                                      
              Er:Ti:LiNbO3 guided wave optically                                             
              pumped amplifiers and light sources.                                           
              Preliminary measurements and calculations                                      
              indicate that reasonable gain coefficients (g                                  
              ~ 400m-1@ 1mW pump power) can be                                               
              obtained.  We propose to continue our                                          
              study of the enhanced incorporation of Er                                      
              by way of co-diffusion of Ti and to                                            
              investigate several other promising co-                                        
              diffusants.  In this study will also examine                                   
              the incorporation of pairs of rare earth                                       
              elements.  Such paired systems may                                             
              provide additional useful pump transitions                                     
              (e.g., diode laser) as well as more efficient                                  
              energy transfer mechanisms for optical                                         
              gain.  Site-selective fluorescence                                             
              spectroscopy will be used to characterize                                      
              the optical properties of rare earth ions in                                   
              the LiNbO3 matrix, as well as to identify the                                  
              substitution site and transport mechanisms                                     
              for this co-diffusion process.
