Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Localization and Periodicity in Homotopy Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1994     
File        : a9204508

Award Number: 9204508
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aldridge K. Bousfield bous@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Bousfield will continue his research in homotopy theory and               
              will focus particularly on the newly emerging theory of vn-periodic            
              localizations of spaces.  He will explore unstable versions of                 
              periodicity results and will work to analyze homotopy types by                 
              resolving them into vn-periodic parts for positive integers n.                 
              Bousfield is establishing strong links between the v1-periodic                 
              localization and the K-theoretic localization of spaces, and this              
              is leading to solutions of old problems concerning the K-theory of             
              iterated loop spaces.  He will continue his work, using homotopical            
              and K-theoretic techniques.  For instance, he will work on the                 
              development of a K-theoretic unstable Adams spectral sequence.                 
              Bousfield will also work to extend his algebraic classification of             
              K-local spectra to cover mapping classes and will continue other               
              related research.                                                              
                   The details of these parts vary, but all are concerned with               
              reducing geometric information to a subject for calculation or to              
              perfecting the algebraic machinery used for the calculations.  The             
              nature of the geometric information involved is the crux of the                
              difficulty.  While questions about lengths, areas, angles, volumes,            
              and so forth virtually cry out to be reduced to calculations, it is            
              far different with what are known as topological properties of                 
              geometric objects.  These are properties such as connectedness                 
              (being all in one piece), knottedness, having no holes, and so                 
              forth.  All systematic study of such properties, for example, how              
              to tell whether two geometric objects really differ in respect to              
              one of these properties or are only superficially different, or how            
              to classify the variety of differences that can occur, all these               
              have only truly been comprehended and mastered when they have been             
              reduced to matters of calculation, and two of the principal tools              
              for this are homotopy theory and K-theory.
