Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some Problems in Harmonic Analysis Related to Wavelets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1992      
File        : a9204323

Award Number: 9204323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Frazier 21144mwf@msu.bitnet  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The thrust of this mathematical research revolves around                  
              applications of recent developments in wavelet theory.  The first              
              application will focus on algebras of linear operators generated               
              by those of Calderon-Zygmund type.  These operators arise in the               
              analysis of partial differential equations.  The operators are                 
              too complex to study individually; the goal of current research                
              is to choose wavelet bases in which the operators may be                       
              represented as almost-diagonal matrices.  From this                            
              representation, one can read off many hidden properties of the                 
              operators.  A second line of investigation concerns wavelet                    
              decompositions in higher dimensional space.  This work will begin              
              with the representation of radial functions in term of wavelets                
              which somehow respect the symmetry.  The fundamental difficulty                
              is that one cannot symmetrize one-dimensional wavelets and                     
              maintain the desired translation properties.  Some progress has                
              been made in developing a new wavelet-type function with many                  
              desirable properties preserved.  A third direction of this                     
              research is that of distinguishing the behavior of the different               
              Riesz transforms on functions spaces using wavelet-type                        
              representations.                                                               
                   Wavelet theory has introduced an extraordinary new tool into              
              the field of harmonic analysis.  It contains the elements of a                 
              highly effective theoretical method for the representation of                  
              functions along with natural algorithms for the computation of                 
              various expansions of functions which are simultaneously local in              
              time and frequency.  There applications are only beginning to be               
              felt in the scientific and engineering community.
