Title       : Travel Support of U.S. Participants to the Seventeenth Nathiagali Summer
               College, Pakistan, June 25-July 9, 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1992     
File        : a9204603

Award Number: 9204603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Bary Malik fbmalik@physics.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5943,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:  This project supports the travel of a delegation of              
              U.S. physicists to Pakistan to participate in the "Seventeenth                 
              Nathiagali Summer College".  The meeting is an annual activity                 
              organized by the Government of Pakistan to offer to the                        
              participants a forum to discuss advances in physics and their                  
              relationships to modern needs.  The main topics for this college               
              are: computational physics, with special emphasis on multilevel                
              methods, efficient iterative techniques, and applications in                   
              fluid dynamics, radiation transport, and phase transitions in                  
              solids; plasma physics, including high density pinches, inertial               
              confinement, plasma spectroscopy and diagnostics, and space                    
              plasmas.  The program is divided into two separate week-long                   
              sessions, with participants attending either or both weeks. Short              
              workshops following the more intense lecture sessions are                      
              planned.  This format provides for close interaction and                       
              collaboration.  It is planned to provide lecture notes to                      
              participants, and an attempt will be made to publish the                       
              proceedings as was done in several of the past colleges.                       
                                                                                             
              Scope:  The proposed summer college has been held annually in                  
              Nathiagali, Pakistan, with participation from scientists                       
              throughout Asia and Africa and with lecturers from the western                 
              world.  It has received high praise in the past from participants              
              from these countries as well as from international organizations               
              such as the International Center for Theoretical Physics in                    
              Trieste.  It is receiving partial support from that Center as                  
              well as from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in Beijing.  This                 
              activity fits well within the objectives of the Science in                     
              Developing Countries Program.
