Title       : Structure/Function Relations of Threonine-Metabolizing Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1995      
File        : a9204829

Award Number: 9204829
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene E. Dekker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9119,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Amino acid metabolism, involving unusually diverse intermediates               
              and/or products, is central to all cellular processes. Amino acids             
              per se are the building blocks of proteins, and enzymes (which are             
              nearly all proteins) are amazingly effective biocatalysts.  The                
              amino acid sequence of enzymes (proteins) specifies conformation;              
              catalytic function arises from conformation which, in turn, relates            
              to the binding of substrate molecules in precise orientation and to            
              the stabilization of transition states.  Multiple techniques can               
              now be used to explore the molecular basis for specific enzymic                
              function and to modify enzymes in specific ways.  The objective of             
              the proposed of the proposed research is to study                              
              structure/function interrelationships of 2-key enzymes involved in             
              L-Threonine metabolism.  L-Threonine dehydrogenase and 2-amino-3-              
              ketobutyrate lyase, enzymes we first succeeded in purifying to                 
              homogeneity, will be the objects of in depth structure\function                
              studies.  This dehydrogenase and lyase, in sequences, are the first            
              two enzymes in the primary route for threonine utilization by both             
              eukaryotes and prokaryotes.  By the action of these two enzymes, L-            
              threonine is first oxidized to the unstable intermediate, 2-amino-             
              3-ketobutyrate, which in turn is cleaved by the lyase in a coenzyme            
              A-dependent reaction yielding acetyl CoA plus glycine.  Threonine              
              dehydrogenase is one of a number of gene products whose level has              
              been shown to be regulated by leucine-i.e. it is a member of the               
              so-called leucine regulon.  We proposed studying these two pure                
              enzymes, with primary emphasis on the dehydrogenase and secondary              
              emphasis on the lyase, but selective chemical                                  
              modification/inactivation experiments, by isolating and sequencing             
              peptides containing these modified residues, and thereby establish             
              their position in the primary structure of the molecule.  Since the            
              genes for both of these enzymes have recently been cloned and the              
              primary structure of each enzyme is now known, site-directed                   
              mutagenesis of specific amino acid residues will be carried out and            
              the effects of such changes on the enzyme's catalytic/regulatory               
              properties examined.  Attempts will also be made to crystallize                
              this dehydrogenase (primary effort) and lyase (secondary) for                  
              subsequent 3-dimensional structure determination by X-ray                      
              crystallographic techniques.  The goal are to relate specific                  
              enzyme catalysis/regulation with protein structure and to                      
              understand enzymic processes in sufficient detail so that, long                
              range, modern metabolic and protein engineering is possible.                   
              %%%                                                                            
              Advances made by studies such as this are significant in that a                
              thorough knowledge of metabolic/enzymic processes allows for modern            
              metabolic/protein engineering. By such engineering pathways may be             
              altered to remove a poisonous product, introduce a new pathway, and            
              /or enhance production of a commercially important material.
