Title       : The Late Triassic Tetrapod Fauna of the Fleming Fjord Formation, East Greenland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1994    
File        : a9204789

Award Number: 9204789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119205             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farish A. Jenkins fjenkins@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project's goal is to provide data critical to                        
              understanding vertebrate faunal evolution during the Late Triassic,            
              which includes the origin of mammals as well as other major                    
              tetrapod groups (e.g., dinosaurs, turtles, crocodylomorphs,                    
              Pterosaurs).  Although major originations took place during this               
              time, almost half of known Late Triassic tetrapod families became              
              extinct by the Early Jurassic.  The temporal, taxonomic and                    
              geographic extent of this faunal turnover has been debated,                    
              principally because well-dated, fossiliferous rock sequences are               
              rare.  The Late Triassic Fleming Fjord Formation offers a greater              
              range of stratigraphic and lithologic exposures (representing                  
              lacustrine, fluviatile  and subaerial environments) than those in              
              which Late Triassic faunas have previously been found.  The Fleming            
              Fjord fauna is now known to include a substantial representation of            
              European taxa, including prosauropod (Plateosaurus) and theropod               
              dinosaurs, a turtle (Proganochelys), an aetosaur (Aetosaurus                   
              ferratus), a pterosaur (Eudimorphodon), plagiosaurid (Gerrothorax)             
              and capitosauroid (cf. Mastodonsaurus) amphibians, as well as other            
              taxa (a phytosaur, sharks, lungfish, and semionotids).  The Fleming            
              Fjord fauna is potentially a key biostratigraphic link between                 
              continental sediments of Europe and North America.                             
                   Evidence of one of the earliest known mammals has been found              
              in the Fleming Fjord Formation.  Only the scantiest record of                  
              mammalian evolution has been found prior to the Early Jurassic.                
              The cranial and postcranial anatomy of Late Triassic mammals is                
              little understood with the result that current phylogenetic                    
              hypotheses suffer from a lack of substantive evidence.  At the end             
              of the 1991 season four fossiliferous horizons were discovered in              
              the upper Fleming Fjord Formation; these quarry sites, together                
              with investigation of new, recently identified areas for                       
              prospecting, hold great promise for producing additional material              
              of mammals as well as other constituents of this fauna.
