Title       : Dissertation Research: Community Organization at Mayapan, Yucatan, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1992     
File        : a9204580

Award Number: 9204580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11580              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford T. Brown  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. E. Wyllys Andrews, Mr Clifford T.                   
              Brown will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will                 
              conduct excavation and survey at the Post Classic Mayan site of                
              Mayapan which is located in Yucatan, Mexico. His project builds                
              on previous work at the site which resulted in extensive mapping               
              and excavation. This has shown that Mayapan was a very large and               
              very densely settled community surrounded by a massive wall over               
              9 km long. Outside the ceremonial center of the site, several                  
              thousand structures, the majority of them apparently residential               
              in function, have been located. These appear to be subdivided                  
              into geographicaly distinct groups. Mr. Brown will excavate in                 
              carefully selected areas of the site in an attempt to understand               
              spatial patterning in artifact type. He will dig in 2 meter                    
              squares and collect what are likely to be large samples of                     
              ceramics, stone tools and faunal remains. Because of their                     
              plastic nature, ceramics are often reveal fine levels of                       
              stylistic variation. Mayapan is particularly important because                 
              early Spanish settlers described the site and Yucatec-language                 
              documents are also available. These sources will aid                           
              significantly in the interpretation of the archaeological data.                
                                                                                             
              Mr. Brown wishes to understand how large Mayan sites such as                   
              Mayapan functioned. How were large numbers of people subdivided                
              into smaller groups, what patterns of interaction were observed                
              and how were people governed? While much work has been conducted               
              on the impressive ceremonial centers at Mayan sites very little                
              is known about how communities functioned. On the basis of                     
              historic documents Mr. Brown has formulated a series of                        
              hypotheses and the archaeological materials to be collected will               
              provide the data to test them.                                                 
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to a large number of archaeologists. It will                  
              shed new light on the emergence of complex societies and will                  
              assist in the training of a promising young scientist.
