Title       : UNIDATA: Equipment Proposal for Participation in the UNIDATA Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1992    
File        : a9204870

Award Number: 9204870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford A. Jacobs                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5105               (Estimated)
Investigator: L.Michael Trapasso michael.trapasso@wku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Kentucky Univ
	      Sponsored Programs, 106FB
	      Bowling Green, KY  421013576    270/745-4652

NSF Program : 1520      COMPUTING FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This project will purchase two suitable PC systems for the                
              College Heights Weather Station located in the Department of                   
              geography and Geology at Western Kentucky University.  This weather            
              station is a vital laboratory facility for  physical geography                 
              students in the Meteorology/Climatology track-Baccalaureate Degree,            
              and Meteorological Technology-Associate Degree programs.  In                   
              addition to departmental majors, students enrolled in introductory             
              weather and climate courses total 500-600 students per year.  In               
              total, no less than five faculty will derive benefit by the output             
              from the funded equipment.  The new equipment will complement the              
              recently acquired Zephyr Weather Satellite Receiving System to take            
              full advantage of the PC-McIDAS capabilities and fully participate             
              in the UNIDATA Program.  The products produced from this new                   
              hardware coupled with UNIDATA software and services will be                    
              integrated into various levels of coursework offered in the                    
              department.  The principal investigator will write a new set of                
              laboratory exercises and restructure course curriculum elevating               
              them to state-of-the-art status.  As such, new avenues for research            
              and hands-on experience will benefit students and faculty alike.               
              The newly equipped College Heights Weather Station coupled with the            
              Kentucky Climate Center (also housed in the Department of Geography            
              and Geology) will make Western Kentucky University a focus for the             
              study of atmospheric sciences in Kentucky.  It is also expected                
              that positions of employment and acceptance into graduate programs             
              will increase for our graduates as they demonstrate an enhanced                
              understanding of weather systems.
