Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Smoothing of Dispersive Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1992  
File        : a9204510

Award Number: 9204510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Kappeler kappeler@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The primary area of research supported by this award is                   
              partial differential equations, especially those used to model                 
              wave phenomena.  Work includes the investigation of smoothing                  
              properties for a large class of linear and nonlinear dispersive                
              evolution equations.  Dispersive waves are characterized by the                
              property that the group velocity depends in a nontrivial way on                
              the wave number.  An example would be Korteweg deVries equation.               
              The smoothing phenomenon refers to the observed behavior of                    
              solutions of certain equations - they are smoother than their                  
              initial conditions.  The approach to this work is the use of the               
              commutator method together with scattering theory.  One needs                  
              microlocal versions of Sobolev weighted norms to replace the                   
              standard norms which do not persist with time.  Other research                 
              directions include regularized determinants: the study of                      
              variational formulas for the regularized determinants of elliptic              
              operators on Riemannian manifolds of dimension two; global                     
              aspects of completely integrable Hamiltonian systems and the                   
              Schrodinger operator on tori and Heisenberg manifolds.                         
                   Partial differential equations form the backbone of                       
              mathematical modeling in the physical sciences.  Phenomena which               
              involve continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials               
              and energy are known to obey certain general laws which are                    
              expressible in terms of the interactions and relationships                     
              between partial derivatives.  The key role of mathematics is not               
              to state the relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative                 
              and quantitative meaning from them and validate methods                        
              for expressing solutions.
