Title       : Intense Flux Tubes on the Sun, U.S.-India Cooperative Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1992    
File        : a9204415

Award Number: 9204415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolfgang Kalkofen wkalkofen@cfa.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian-Astrophys Obs
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    716/831-3051

NSF Program : 5919      INDIA (COOPERATIVE SCIENCE)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1214,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Technical Narrative:                                                           
              In a joint research project, Dr. Wolfgang                                      
              Kalkofen of the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for                                 
              Astrophysics, Cambridge and Dr. S.S. Hasan of                                  
              the Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore                                
              will study intense flux tubes on the sun.  This                                
              investigation of small-scale solar magnetic                                    
              fields is directed towards a fundamental,                                      
              unsolved problem in solar physics, the                                         
              heating of the quiet chromosphere which takes                                  
              place mainly in magnetic flux tubes.  This                                     
              investigation seeks to examine the                                             
              stability, dynamics, energy transport and                                      
              oscillations in collapsing flux tubes by means                                 
              of 1.5-D time-dependent, dynamical                                             
              calculations.  The use of two-dimensional                                      
              radiative transfer, will be a significant                                      
              improvement over previous analyses.  The                                       
              results of this study will help in                                             
              understanding the physics of flux tubes, the                                   
              structure of the bright chromosphere, and                                      
              long-period oscillations of the atmosphere in                                  
              flux tubes.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Scope:  This project joins efforts in radiative                                
              transfer by  W. Kalkofen and colleagues at the                                 
              Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics and                                
              in magnetic fields by S.S. Hasan and colleagues                                
              at the Indian Institute of Astrophysics in                                     
              Bangalore.  It will begin collaboration between                                
              the Harvard group working on problems                                          
              in radiative transfer, static magnetic fields                                  
              and chromospheric heating and the Bangalore                                    
              group investigating time-dependent magnetic                                    
              fields, solar magnetic fields and chromospheric                                
              lines.  Drs. Kalkofen and Hasan are highly                                     
              competent researchers and the Indian Institute                                 
              of Astrophysics has an excellent tradition of                                  
              research on the Sun.
