Title       : Sedimentary Geochronology: Coupled Studies of Re-Os and U-Pb
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1993     
File        : a9204409

Award Number: 9204409
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne Bourgeois                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89894              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory E. Ravizza   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley R. Hart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This study will develop the Re-Os and U-Pb systems as organic-            
              rich sediment geochronometers. Enrichment of these elements in                 
              organic-rich sediments during early diagenesis effectively set                 
              these radiometric clocks soon after deposition.  Preliminary                   
              results demonstrate that these decay schemes can be successfully               
              employed to obtain independent and concordant age determinations               
              for the New Albany Shale, a Mississippian-Devonian boundary black              
              shale from the Illinois Basin.  The proposed research will extend              
              the Re-Os system to dating both Cretaceous sediments and                       
              Proterozoic carbonaceous shales.  By applying the Re-Os system to              
              dating black shales and associated shelf carbonates at the                     
              Cenomanian-Turonian Boundary, we will examine potential variations             
              in initial Os isotopic composition and determine whether the Re-Os             
              system can yield high precision ages for young sediments.  Our                 
              investigation of Proterozoic sediments from the Belt basin in the              
              western U.S. focuses on demonstrating the utility of coupled                   
              studies using the U-Pb, Pb-Pb and Re-Os systems to date Precambrian            
              sediments.  Sampling across the east-west gradient in metamorphic              
              grade within the Belt basin will enable us to evaluate the                     
              robustness of these chronometers under a variety of conditions.
