Title       : Lysosomal Proenzyme Sorting: A New Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1994   
File        : a9204834

Award Number: 9204834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297466             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann H. Erickson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9119,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 A heretofore unidentified receptor which may be critical for                
              protease targeting to lysosomes has been identified in this                    
              laboratory.  Two lysosomal proproteases, procathepsins L and D, are            
              membrane associated at acidic pH in microsomal vesicles derived                
              from mouse fibroblasts.  The binding, which is specific for the pro            
              but not the mature enzymes, is saturable and is mediated by a                  
              factor which can be removed from the membranes by protease                     
              treatment, suggesting that this is a specific interaction with a               
              receptor protein.  As the association occurs at the pH at which                
              lysosomal enzymes are released from mannose-6-phosphate receptors,             
              the membrane association could be involved in protein sorting in               
              prelysosomes.  Synthetic peptides based on the amino-terminal                  
              sequence of procathepsin L will be used in binding assays to                   
              establish which region of the capthepsin L propeptide associates               
              with membranes.  Specific amino acids in the receptor binding                  
              regions will be altered by site-directed mutagenesis.  These                   
              analyses will identify specific amino acids responsible for correct            
              subcellular targeting.  Altered recombinant protein will be                    
              expressed from an SV40 promoter in COS cells, isolated from cell               
              culture medium, and assayed for membrane binding ability.                      
              Following this initial screen in which an altered protein is                   
              identified with has lost its ability to associate with membranes in            
              a pH-dependent manner, an in vivo functional assay will be                     
              performed.  The cDNA plasmid will be expressed in HeLa cells which             
              have been demonstrated to target wild-type recombinant lysosomal               
              enzymes correctly.  These studies will establish whether the                   
              stretch of amino acids responsible for the pH-dependent membrane               
              binding contains information essential for lysosomal targeting.                
              %%%                                                                            
              The interior of a eukaryotic cell is highly compartmentalized, in              
              order for the cell to carry out its necessary functions.  One set              
              of critical functions, involving the hydrolytic degradation of                 
              endocytosed or autophagocytosed macromolecules, is restricted to a             
              membrane-enclosed acidic compartment called the lysosome.  These               
              degradations are catalyzed by proteolytic, glycosidic, and other               
              acid hydrolytic enzymes, which are contained within the lysosomes.             
              This project addresses the question of how the hydrolytic enzymes              
              get into the lysosomes.  Some years ago, it was found that many                
              lysosomal enzymes shared a common oligosaccharide structure,                   
              specifically a mannosyl-6-phosphate residue, which is recognized               
              and bound by two membrane bound man-6-P receptors.  These receptors            
              traffic through the endosome-lysosome system and deliver bound                 
              lysosomal enzymes to the endosomal-lysosomal compartment.  However,            
              evidence has been accumulating in the literature that the man-6-P              
              receptors cannot account for all instances of lysosomal enzyme                 
              targeting in cells.  The discovery of a new lysosomal enzyme                   
              binding membrane protein, which does not act via the man-6-P                   
              residues on lysosomal enzymes, is therefore an important finding               
              which will undoubtedly broaden our view of how lysosomal enzymes               
              get into lysosomes.
