Title       : SBIR Phase II: Non-Intrusive Diagnostics for Sooting Combustion Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1996  
File        : a9204322

Award Number: 9204322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249734             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Serio mserio@AFRInc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Fuel Research Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  06138    860/528-9806

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              0313010   Air Pollution                           
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  Serio  9204322     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II will
              combine tomography, Hadamard signal encodement, and a patented Fourier
              Transform Infrared (FT-IR) emission/transmission (E/T) technique to perform
              spatially and temporally resolved soot and gas species measurements during
              combustion. One of the most important processes in combustion is the formation
              and destruction of soot. The concentration of soot controls the energy radiated
              by the flame and the effectiveness of soot destruction controls the combustion
              efficiency and the environmental acceptability of the combustion device. FT-IR
              E/T spectroscopy is currently the only means of simultaneous measurement of gas
              species compositions and temperatures and soot particle size, number density
              and temperature in a combustion flow. The effort to develop and validate the
              method of FT-IR E/T tomographic spectroscopy for sooting flames was
              accomplished during Phase I. The major advance achieved during Phase I was the
              inclusion and demonstration of Hadamard data processing as applied to FT-IR
              tomography. The primary objective of the Hadamard technique is to increase
              signal throughput, increase S/N and increase the speed of measurement. This was
              demonstrated for FT-IR tomography, but the Hadamard technique also adds a
              significant simplification in the tomography apparatus. Experiments on a
              co-annular diffusion flame clearly showed that the technique can identify
              hidden three-dimensional structure. The Phase II program will greatly improve
              time resolution and develop techniques for practically probing combustors that
              have limited optical access. The FT-IR E/T instrument can detect species which
              are important precursors to soot and is expected to lead to advances in
              understanding the chemistry and physics of soot formation.   The Phase II
              program will lead to the development of a low-cost (under $50,000), portable,
              versatile, in-situ combustion diagnostic instrument which can be applied to
              combustion process control, pollution monito ring, or research and development.
              Applications include measurements in industrial gas turbines, industrial and
              residential furnaces, utility boilers, process heaters, jet engines, and diesel
              engines.  ***  p:\sbir\yhashimi\9204322b.doc
