Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Homotopy Theory and its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1994     
File        : a9204291

Award Number: 9204291
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas C. Ravenel drav@math.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Neisendorfer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Ravenel will investigate several questions in stable homotopy             
              theory raised by his counter-example to the telescope conjecture.              
              He also has a program to compute the complex cobordism of                      
              Eilenberg-MacLane spaces and some ideas about computing the                    
              cohomology of the Lambda algebra.  Neisendorfer plans to pursue the            
              discovery of the fact that, up to completion, finite complexes may             
              be recovered from their connected covers.  He also intends to                  
              investigate the preservation and lack of preservation of                       
              homological finiteness in covering spaces.                                     
                   This project is concerned with tools for reducing geometric               
              information to a subject for calculation.  The nature of the                   
              geometric information involved is the crux of the problem.  While              
              questions about lengths, areas, angles, volumes, and so forth                  
              virtually cry out to be reduced to calculations, it is far                     
              different with what are known as topological properties of                     
              geometric objects.  These are properties such as connectedness                 
              (being all in one piece), knottedness, having no holes, and so                 
              forth.  All systematic study of such properties, for example, how              
              to tell whether two geometric objects really differ in respect to              
              one of these properties or are only superficially different, or how            
              to classify the variety of differences that can occur, all these               
              have only truly been comprehended and mastered when they have been             
              reduced to matters of calculation.  Modern algebra furnishes many              
              of the tools and the attitudes toward the tools that are needed,               
              and the interplay between the algebra and the topology remains a               
              fascinating subject.
