Title       : Studies in Cost-Effective Software Portability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1993      
File        : a9204461

Award Number: 9204461
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170707             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Mooney jdm@cs.wvu.wvnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,
Abstract    :
                   This research addresses unsolved problems in software                     
              portability.  Portability of a software unit (application program or           
              component) is its ability to be transported and adapted to a new               
              hardware/software environment at a cost significantly less than                
              complete redevelopment.  As far as possible, portable software should          
              also take advantage of the specific capabilities of the target                 
              environment.  The continuing proliferation of both applications and            
              environments has made portability an increasingly critical need which,         
              in many cases, is largely unfulfilled.                                         
                   The goal is to develop and validate new methods to improve                
              portability of software units during the design process, and to                
              improve support for portability in computing environments.  These              
              methods will improve portability for conventional software, and extend         
              portability to new software classes such as real-time and concurrent           
              software.  Part of our work is to explore relationships between                
              portability and reusability.  Another important part of our study is           
              the investigation of methods to specify and measure portability                
              requirements and attributes.  The research will use both analytical            
              and experimental methods.  Planned activities include a survey of              
              existing strategies and methods; analysis of portability problems for          
              selected new classes of software; development of methods to specify            
              portability requirements and attributes, and metrics to quantify the           
              costs and benefits of portability; comparison of potential strategies          
              for specific classes of software using these specifications and                
              metrics; and evaluation of promising strategies by selected                    
              experimental implementations.
