Title       : Defenses Against Solar Ultraviolet Radiation-induced Photooxidative Stress in
               Sea Urchins: Dietary Accumulation and Functions of Mycosporine-like Amino Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1992  
File        : a9204982

Award Number: 9204982
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25765              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Malcolm Shick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The regulation of defenses against solar ultraviolet radiation-                
              induced photooxidative stress in sea urchins will be studied. Like             
              other marine organisms, sea urchins contain mycosporine-like amino             
              acids (MAAs), which absorb environmentally relevant wavelengths of             
              UV (310-360 nm). MAAs are presumably algal, bacterial or fungal                
              products, animals not being known to synthesize them, so their                 
              provenance in sea urchins is uncertain. Various seaweeds are rich              
              in MAAs, and preliminary chromatographic analyses indicate                     
              concordance between the MAA complements in seaweeds and in sea                 
              urchin tissues, especially ovaries. Maintenance of sea urchins on              
              controlled diets of seaweeds lacking or rich in MAAs, subsequent               
              analysis of gut contents and tissues, testing the ability of gut               
              tissues to absorb MAAs should confirm whether MAAs are so obtained.            
              Dietary fortification of sea urchin ovaries should confer a greater            
              resistance to UV in eggs and larvae, and UV effects on                         
              fertilization, development, and larval survival will be assessed in            
              MAA-rich and deficient specimens. It is also planned to discern the            
              particular membrane fractions. Possible radical scavenging                     
              functions of gadusol (structurally similar to MAAs) present in eggs            
              will be assessed in parallel experiments, since some UV effects are            
              mediated by oxyradicals. The results will have implications for the            
              mechanism of accumulation of photooxidative defenses in marine food            
              chains, a genuine concern as the protective ozone layer                        
              deteriorates.
