Title       : U.S.-Czechoslovakia Materials Research on Diffraction Studies of Excited
               Electron States and of Dynamic Processes on Crystal Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1996        
File        : a9204023

Award Number: 9204023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17070              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. A. Van Hove VANHOVE@LBL.BITNET  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lawrence Berkeley Lab
	      1 Cyclotron Road
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/486-4000

NSF Program : 5930      U.S.-CZECHOSLOVAKIA PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1765,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This US-Czechoslovak research project between Dr. M. A.                        
              Van Hove of Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory and Dr. I. Bartos                     
              of the Institute of Physics of the Czechoslovakian Academy                     
              of Sciences will study diffraction of excited electron                         
              states and of dynamic processes on crystal surfaces.  The                      
              researchers will explore the dynamic electron processes at                     
              metal surfaces, which are relevant for understanding many-                     
              body effects that will clarify the behavior of electrons                       
              in lower-dimensional systems.  Such inelastic effects will                     
              be studied in the diffraction of low-energy electrons, by                      
              fitting model optical potentials to experimental data.                         
              Results may shed light on the electronic structure of                          
              unoccupied states above the vacuum level, such as the                          
              usual inelastic mean free path in transition metals at                         
              energies close to the vacuum level.  The work also should                      
              benefit the understanding of lifetimes in photochemistry                       
              cynamics at surfaces with adsorbates.  A further benefit                       
              would be better access to very light elements, principally                     
              hydrogen, which can induce surface reconstruction.  These                      
              results would be important in understanding catalysis,                         
              crystal growth and properties of nanostructures.                               
                                                                                             
              This research project in materials science fulfills the                        
              program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by                         
              enabling leading experts in the United States and Eastern                      
              Europe to combine complementary talents and pool resources                     
              in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.
