Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Integrated Biostratigraphy and K-Bentonite
               Chronostratigraphy in the Ordovician of the Northern Appalachian Basin:
               Geochemical and Geochrono......
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1992       
File        : a9204757

Award Number: 9204757
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne Bourgeois                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58859              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott D. Samson sdsamson@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The late Middle and early Upper Ordovician carbonate and                  
              siliciclastic rocks of the Trenton Group in the northern                       
              Appalachian foreland basin enclose a large number of altered                   
              volcanic ash beds (K-bentonites) deposited from Plinian eruptions              
              on an off-shore volcanic arc.  These strata also form part of the              
              standard reference section of the North American Ordovician time               
              scale as well as the reference standard for the conodont and                   
              graptolite biozonations commonly used for temporal correlation in              
              this interval.  The goal of the research is to employ geochemical              
              fingerprinting of unaltered phenocrysts within the K-bentonites                
              together with new and detailed studies of the ranges of graptolite             
              and conodont species to integrate these separate stratigraphies                
              into a unified chronostratigraphic network.                                    
                   We propose to accomplish this by 1) establishing precise ties             
              between the graptolite zones and the North Atlantic and                        
              midcontinent conodont zones based on detailed collecting of range              
              data from numerous measured sections that each span the facies                 
              transition from Trenton Group carbonates into the Utica Shale and              
              2) establishing precise ties between the laterally equivalent                  
              siliciclastic and carbonate facies based on the identification of              
              synchronous time planes through geochemical fingerprinting of the              
              K-bentonites.  The techniques to be employed for K-bentonite                   
              correlation include analysis of 1) major and trace element                     
              composition of melt inclusions within quartz phenocrysts.                      
              Additionally, we propose to use high precision U-Pb zircon                     
              geochronometry to calibrate our chronostratigraphy.                            
                   The resulting chronostratigraphy will provide a temporal                  
              framework, calibrated in years, that will provide a direct test of             
              the accuracy of the existing graptolite and conodont                           
              biostratigraphies as well as sequence stratigraphic and                        
              coenocorrelation studies of these rocks.  This chronostratigraphy              
              will constitute the temporal framework necessary for studies of the            
              rate of evolution among graptolites and other organisms that occur             
              in the studied sections.  Simultaneously, the K-bentonite                      
              geochemical and geochronological data will provide unique insights             
              about the tectonic provenance of these altered volcanic ash beds               
              and the nature and duration of Taconic orogenic events.
