Title       : Support for the Primate Facility at Field Museum of Natural History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1992      
File        : a9204356

Award Number: 9204356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25537              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Patterson bpatterson@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Fooden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan Haas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support, the Field Museum of                  
              Natural History will rennovate and equip space to serve as a                   
              study area for its extensive primate specimen collection. A large              
              formica work counter will be constructed and overhead fluorescent              
              lights installed. Electrical outlets will be situated along the                
              counter to permit convenient and multipe access for lights,                    
              computers and other electric-powered equipment. Shutters will be               
              removed from windows near the counter to permit reseachers to                  
              utilize natural light to study materials. Finally the floor will               
              be painted and sealed.                                                         
                                                                                             
              The Field Museum in Chicago houses one of the finest collections               
              of primate specimens in the world. The total of ca. 4,500                      
              individuals includes all families, most genera and a majority of               
              species and subspecies of primates worldwide. The taxonomic and                
              geographic composition of the collection is excellent and the                  
              majority of the individuals were taken from the wild at a time                 
              when it was legally and ethically possible to do so. These                     
              specimens document natural distributions and habitat associations              
              of species and reveal the morphological effects of natural foods,              
              movement patterns and social conditions. It would be impossible                
              to duplicate the materials today. While the museum has undertaken              
              major work in restoring the materials to make them more                        
              accessible to reseachers, lack of a proper study area still                    
              hampers access. This grant will remedy that situation.                         
                                                                                             
              This project is important because it will make a significant                   
              national scientific resource more readily accessible to a large                
              number of interested reseachers.
