Title       : US-France Cooperative Research: Magnetic Fields in Star Forming Regions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1992       
File        : a9116356

Award Number: 9116356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Troland troland@pa.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Crutcher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Kentucky
	      University Station
	      Lexington, KY  405060001    606/257-9000

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1216,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This three-year award will support U.S.-France cooperative                     
              research in galactic astronomy involving Thomas Troland,                       
              University of Kentucky, Richard Crutcher, University of Illinois,              
              and Ilya Kazes at the Observatoire de Meudon in France.  The                   
              investigators propose to continue their successful research on                 
              magnetic field strengths in the evolution of interstellar clouds and           
              star formation.  Magnetic fields have emerged as a mechanism for               
              explaining star formation and other cosmic phenomena.  The only                
              known technique for measuring magnetic field strength is detection             
              of the Zeeman effect in radio frequency spectral lines.                        
                                                                                             
              The U.S. and French investigators will continue their survey                   
              observations of the OH Zeeman effect of dark clouds using the                  
              VLA (Very Large Array), Green Bank and the Arecibo telescopes.                 
              They will extend their research to denser regions by observing the             
              Zeeman effect in the 3-mm lines of CN using the IRAM 30-m                      
              telescope.  This experiment will allow direct probing of magnetic              
              fields at a crucial stage in star formation when core fragmentation            
              and collapse are taking place.  Observations with the IRAM                     
              telescope is essential since its collecting area is sizeable and will          
              allow for observations in denser regions of space.  The project will           
              benefit from French expertise in observation and access to the                 
              IRAM facility in Europe.  Through the observational program, the               
              investigators will be able to test fundamental theories of magnetic            
              fields in interstellar clouds and enhance our understanding of the             
              role of magnetic fields in star formation.
