Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Fundamental Heat Transfer Studies in Polymer
               Processing and Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1992     
File        : a9116585

Award Number: 9116585
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19730              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond Viskanta   (Principal Investigator current)
              Satish Ramadhyani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              51        Engineering-Aeronautical                
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1406,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a two-year U.S.-Japan cooperative                      
              research project between Professor Raymond Viskanta, Department                
              of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University, and Professor                    
              Yasuo Kurosaki, Director of the Heat Transfer Laboratory,                      
              Department of Mechanical Engineering for Production, Tokyo                     
              Institute of Technology.  Professor Satish Ramadhyani of the                   
              Department of Mechanical Engineering at Purdue will also be                    
              involved in the project.  The goal of the project is to develop basic          
              understanding of both polymer flow in molds and the mechanisms                 
              of residual stress generation within molded polymers during                    
              injection molding processes required for production of precise                 
              molded polymer components.  This is to be achieved by use of in                
              situ, noninvasive experimental techniques to obtain test data,                 
              modeling of the processes, and development of computational                    
              techniques for simulating real systems.                                        
                                                                                             
              The theoretical models will be developed at Purdue to simulate                 
              processing of polymers during injection molding.  Predictions of               
              these models will be compared with experiments carried out on the              
              apparatus at the Tokyo Institute of Technology.  The U.S. and                  
              Japanese researchers will work together to validate the                        
              mathematical models developed at Purdue using experimental data                
              obtained in Tokyo employing non-intrusive optical (birefringence)              
              techniques for making temperature and flow measurements during                 
              the cooling stage of a polymer being molded.  This is a unique                 
              method that has the potential of determining the frozen layer                  
              thickness, melt front position, shear stress, and temperature fields           
              without interfering with the process.
