Title       : Paleoecology, Biogeography and Systematic Paleontology of Ordovician Sponges
               from Eastern Canada and Western United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1998   
File        : a9116202

Award Number: 9116202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92199              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. K. Rigby   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Early Paleozoic poriferans of the Western Hemisphere are among            
              the least known of fossil invertebrate phyla, even though they are             
              important constituents of reefs and inter-reef faunas, and even                
              though North America seemed to have functioned as a major center               
              of sponge evolution during the early Paleozoic.  Objectives of the             
              research are to publish monographic and synthesis papers on major              
              Lower and Middle Ordovician faunas, from North America, including              
              those from classic stratigraphic sections in western Newfoundland              
              and from the Mingan Islands of eastern Quebec.  These faunas are               
              from the northern part of the Appalachian-Maritime region, which               
              was on the southeastern margin of the Ordovician paleocontinent.               
              Other major faunas to be studied are from Lower and Middle                     
              Ordovician rocks in the Confusion Range (Ibex area) of western                 
              Utah, and from equivalent rocks of the Toquima Range-Eureka-Ruby               
              Mountain are of central and east-central Nevada.  These latter                 
              faunas represent those from the northwestern margin of the                     
              Ordovician North American paleocontinent.  Fossil sponges to be                
              studied were generally collected from measured stratigraphic                   
              sections that have been selected as type or reference sections and             
              that characterize broad regions in North America.  Fossils will be             
              studied using standard thin-section and acetate-peel techniques                
              because the originally siliceous skeletons have been largely                   
              replaced by calcium carbonate in most fossils in the collection.               
              A few potentially etchable sponges have been collected from Utah               
              and Nevada, and they will be processed in dilute acids.  Even                  
              fragments of such sponges have proven to be important because they             
              show skeletal details that are often obscure in calcareous                     
              preservations.  Taxonomy, paleoecology, stratigraphic and                      
              paleogeographic distributions and potential for biostratigraphic               
              zonation, along with evolution of the assemblages, will be treated             
              in an effort to present uniform data and synthesis of the scattered            
              and uneven literature.
