Title       : The Role of Human Operators in Automated Discrete Manufacturing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1993     
File        : a9116449

Award Number: 9116449
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: N. John Castellan                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neville P. Moray nmoray@s.psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Philpott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Penelope M. Sanderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The research will investigate how human operators interact with                
              automated manufacturing systems, with a view to developing models              
              to support the rational design of the role of human operators in               
              such systems.  In particular, it will investigate the conditions               
              which lead to human intervention in the control of automated                   
              systems.  A real time interactive simulation will allow operators              
              to experiment with different modes and strategies of intervention,             
              and discover when to take control and when to hand it back.                    
              Particular attention will be paid to the human role under two                  
              system control policies.  The first is hierarchical, where the                 
              human interacts with the system through one central controller.                
              The second, which has not been empirically investigated in this                
              context before, is heterarchical, where control is distributed                 
              among all the machines in the manufacturing cell and the human is              
              just one of many entities.  This research will further our                     
              understanding of human-machine symbiosis, and will lead to                     
              improvements in advanced manufacturing systems which, having a                 
              sound scientific basis, will help to make such systems more                    
              productive and competitive.
