Title       : Processing Heterogeneous Data In Scientific Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1994      
File        : a9116770

Award Number: 9116770
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Y. T. Chien                             
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arie Segev segev@haas.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6855,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a three year continuing award.               
              Many important information systems applications require access to              
              data stored in multiple autonomous databases. These databases often            
              use different hardware, software, database management systems and              
              are distributed among various geographical locations. Heterogeneity            
              among the databases, in the systems, semantics and data                        
              distribution poses challenge to the conventional data retrieval                
              techniques. In this project, key issues related to the processing              
              of heterogeneous data are investigated. In particular, the focus               
              of the work is on joining of the records of the same instances                 
              across disparate databases. A new operator, the Entity Join, has               
              been defined. It uses the common attributes present in the joining             
              data to probabilistically estimate the correctness of the result.              
              The model is extended to cover all types of data heterogeneity                 
              problems including temporal heterogeneity. Additional operators are            
              defined to enhance the data manipulation capability of the model,              
              and their optimization explored. This project also examines the use            
              of rules in the process of matching objects. The different                     
              algorithms are first simulated to assess their performances,  and              
              then prototypes built to further evaluate the optimization                     
              concepts. The results of this work will facilitate data analysis               
              and exploration in many statistical and scientific applications                
              including census, surveys, epidemiology, biology, astronomy and                
              other areas.
