Title       : Dissertation Research: Source Analysis and Hydration Dating of Post-Formative
               Period Obsidian Artifacts From the Valley of Oaxaca, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  1991   
File        : a9116523

Award Number: 9116523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8480               (Estimated)
Investigator: James Elam  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Benfer, Professor of                         
              Anthropology at the University of Missouri, Mr. Michael Elam will              
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. During the course of               
              fieldwork in 1991 Mr. Elam collected obsidian (volcanic glass)                 
              samples from the archaeological site of Monte Alban, located in                
              the Valley of Oaxaca in central Mexico as well as from other                   
              sites in the region.  These cover the Terminal Formative, Classic              
              and Postclassic periods and date from ca. AD 1 - 1520. These                   
              materials, which have been returned to the U.S. with Mexican                   
              government approval, will be subjected to two kinds of analysis.               
              A subseries will be dated by means of obsidian hydration.                      
              Secondly, concentrations of 28 elements will be determined                     
              through neutron activation analysis and through comparison with                
              samples from known geological deposits the origin of the                       
              archaeological specimens can be pinpointed.  With these data, Mr.              
              Elam will be able to determine how exchange in obsidian materials              
              changed over time and the role which Monte Alban played in this                
              process.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Obsidian has provided a focus for many archaeological studies in               
              Middle America.  Prehistorically, it was a rare and extremely                  
              valuable material both because it was easy to flake into tools                 
              and because it produced razor sharp cutting edges.  Since                      
              obsidian results from volcanic eruption, it is found only in                   
              discrete highly localized areas.  Because chemical composition                 
              differs from region to region, it is possible to analyze                       
              archaeological specimens and match them to a specific source.                  
              Thus, it is possible to determine how obsidian moved through                   
              prehistoric social systems and gain insight into both their                    
              economic and political organization. Monte Alban exhibits the                  
              characteristics of many other Middle American centers.  It rose,               
              achieved a regional dominance as the center of a small state, and              
              then declined.  The processes which underlie this transformation               
              however are not well understood and this research will help to                 
              elucidate them.                                                                
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              data of interest to a large number of archaeologists.  It will                 
              shed new light on the role which trade played in the emergence of              
              social complexity and will assist in the training of a promising               
              young scientist.
