Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Development of Advanced Infrared Astronomical
               Instruments for Detailed Studies of the Formation Processes of Galaxies and
               Stars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  1994    
File        : a9116813

Award Number: 9116813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26230              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald N. B. Hall hall@uhifa.ifa.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lennox L. Cowie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan N. Stockton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Claude Roddier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francois J. Roddier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1218,5921,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a two-year research collaboration between                  
              Professor Donald Hall and his group at the Institute for Astronomy             
              at the University of Hawaii and Dr. Keiichi Kodaira, Project                   
              Scientist at the National Astronomical Observatory of Japan.  The              
              goal of the collaboration is to design and construct a novel type of           
              infrared camera as a prototype instrument for the Japanese National            
              Large Telescope (JNLT) and to have discussions on adaptive optics              
              techniques and technology for applications on the JNLT.                        
                                                                                             
              The Japanese astronomical community is now far along in plans to               
              construct an 8.3-meter class optical/infrared telescope, the Japanese          
              National Large Telescope, which would be put into operation on                 
              Mauna Kea, Hawaii this decade.  Much work has already been                     
              conducted on the telescope design, site characterization, mirror               
              control system, instrument complement, and site agreements                     
              between the University of Hawaii and the National Astronomical                 
              Observatory of Japan.  This award will permit University of Hawaii             
              scientists to travel to Japan to continue discussions on the                   
              development of instrument concepts and the construction of                     
              prototype instruments that can lead to major facility instruments on           
              the JNLT.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              This award is also supported by the NSF Division of Astronomical               
              Sciences, Advanced Technologies and Instrumentation Program.
