Title       : US-Hungary Joint Fund Research on Evolutionary Analysis of the Neural Substrate
               for Avain Song
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1992      
File        : a9116386

Award Number: 9116386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 15,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Tamas Szekely   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kossuth Sci Univ
	      
	      Debreceu, HU  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5965      U. S. - HUNGARY JOINT FUND
Fld Applictn: 0510404   Sensry Physiology & Perc                
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this U.S.-Hungary cooperative                         
              research project between Dr. Tamas Szekely of Kossuth                          
              University, Debrecen, and Dr. Timothy DeVoogd of Cornell                       
              University, Ithaca, is to examine and compare contrasts                        
              between six bird species exhibiting very different song                        
              characteristics.  The researchers will study the                               
              interconnected brain nuclei responsible for song                               
              acquisition and production in order to determine how song                      
              system nuclei differ between species or whether variation                      
              in anatomy between species is systematically related to                        
              differences in song.  Results should contribute to our                         
              fundamental understanding of the relationship of brain and                     
              behavior by drawing upon complementing strengths in                            
              evolutionary biology and neurobiology.  Funds for the                          
              project are awarded through the US-Hungary Joint Fund,                         
              Budapest, in accordance with established guidelines.                           
                                                                                             
              This project in zoology fulfills the program objective of                      
              advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts                     
              in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine                             
              complementary talents and pool resources in areas of                           
              strong mutual interest and competence.
