Title       : Low-Frequency Noise Measurements as a Characterization and-Testing Tool in
               Solid-State Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1993      
File        : a9116209

Award Number: 9116209
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah L. Crawford                     
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205025             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zeynep Celik-Butler zcb@seas.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : ___,
Abstract    :
              The proposal describes a new of                                                
              nondestructive testing and characterization for                                
              semiconductor and high Tc superconductor                                       
              devices.  The technique involves Low-                                          
              Frequency Noise (LFN) measurements                                             
              performed at different temperatures and bias                                   
              conditions to characterize the mechanism(s)                                    
              generating these fluctuations.  Measurements                                   
              on three different devices are proposed here.                                  
                                                                                             
              The first one involves that characterization of                                
              electromigration parameters and prediction of                                  
              the life-times in VLSI metallization layers and                                
              vias.  By performing LFN measurements in                                       
              accelerated electromigration (EM) conditions                                   
              such as elevated temperatures and at stressing                                 
              current densities, one can evaluate the EM                                     
              parameters like activation energy and current                                  
              exponent.  Then, these parameters are used to                                  
              establish a correlation between the life-time of                               
              the metallization layer and the LFN the film                                   
              exhibits, which in turn can be used as a                                       
              predictor of life-time.  These measurements                                    
              will be performed on multi-layer metallization                                 
              layers of TiW/W/A1 and via/stud structures.                                    
                                                                                             
              Secondly, LFN measurements will be utilized                                    
              to characterize YBaa2CU3O7-8 thin films and to                                 
              determine the quality of the film related to its                               
              composition, crystallinity, Resistance-                                        
              Temperature (R-T) characteristics, and the                                     
              critical current.                                                              
                                                                                             
              LFN measurements will be performed also on                                     
              HgCdTe MIS photodiodes to characterize the                                     
              insulator-semiconductor interface and to                                       
              enhance the noise performance of these                                         
              devices as infrared detectors.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The significance of the noise characterization                                 
              techniques lies in their ease, flexibility and                                 
              most important of all, nondestructiveness.
