Title       : U.S.-Indonesia Cooperative Research: Geodetic investigation of oblique plate
               convergence in Sumatra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1993 
File        : a9116211

Award Number: 9116211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yehuda Bock   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 5927      EAST ASIA, OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1555,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Yehuda Bock, Scripps                
              Institution of Oceanography, University of California, San Diego,              
              to pursue with Dr. Jacub Rais, Indonesian National Coordination                
              Agency for Surveys and Mapping (BAKOSURTANAL), for 24 months, a                
              study of the tectonics of the Indonesian archipelago, using                    
              measurements of the Global Positioning System (GPS).  They will                
              study deformation associated with oblique plate convergence in                 
              Sumatra.  Specifically, they will examine the mechanism of                     
              decoupling of the oblique slip into normal subduction and shear                
              slip on faults parallel to the convergent margin by measuring the              
              deformation both southwest and northeast of the Sumatran fault                 
              zone.  The long-range goal of this project is extend GPS                       
              measurements across the entire Indonesian archipelago,                         
              concentrating on specific tectonic problems such as the                        
              distribution and rates of slip associated with arc-continent                   
              collision in the Banda arc in eastern Indonesia.                               
                                                                                             
              In the Indonesian region, many tectonic processes that result in               
              mountain building, continental accretion, destruction of                       
              continents, displacement of ophiolites, development of subduction              
              zones, arc polarity reversal, basin closure, etc. are now                      
              active.  This project will provide U.S. scientists a unique                    
              opportunity to observe such phenomena.  Because Indonesia lies in              
              a zone of high seismicity and volcanic activity, monitoring of                 
              crustal deformations has potential humanitarian and economic                   
              value as well.  The U.S. and Indonesian collaborators are highly               
              respected scientists who have records of successful research in                
              the field of this project.  The present project will allow the                 
              collaborators to combine their talents and interests for mutual                
              benefit.  This project is relevant to the objectives of the                    
              Science in Developing Countries Program which seeks to increase                
              the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers                 
              and their counterparts in developing countries through the                     
              exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques              
              and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  Primary              
              support for this project is provided by NSF Grant No. EAR8817067,              
              the Indonesian government, and the World Bank.
