Title       : Marine Humic Substances: Formation Via Vascular Plant Degradation and Biological
               Availability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1992  
File        : a9116450

Award Number: 9116450
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180266             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Hodson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Ann Moran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1650,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Lignocellulose is a major component of intertidal vascular plants              
              and resulting detritus. It is a quantitatively important, although             
              highly refractory, store of organic matter in coastal wetland                  
              environments such as salt marshes and mangrove swamps.  As such, it            
              represents a major source of carbon and energy to marine food webs,            
              although microbially mediated transformations to particulate and               
              dissolved degradation products or microbial biomass are required               
              before the carbon from this abundant organic polymer can be                    
              utilized by metazoans.                                                         
                                                                                             
              As lignocellulose is degraded by natural marine microbial                      
              populations, a significant fraction (as high as 20-50%) of the                 
              total degradation products is released into the bulk pool of                   
              dissolved organic carbon (DOC).  Importantly, up to half of this               
              lignocellulose-derived DOC (LC-DOC) fits the operational definition            
              of "humic" material.  Recent geochemical studies have shown that               
              humic material originating in vascular plant-dominated aquatic                 
              systems is compositionally distinct from humics originating in                 
              plankton-dominated pelagic systems.  Humic material has                        
              traditionally been considered to be highly recalcitrant to                     
              microbial transformation and thus, implicitly, not to be a                     
              significant carbon and/or energy source fueling bacterioplankton               
              secondary production.  This assumption has not yet been directly               
              challenged experimentally in marine ecosystems, although there is              
              evidence that bacterioplankton production at the expense of the                
              humic component of DOC can be trophodynamically important in some              
              systems, and that availability may be related to the source (and               
              chemical composition) of the humic substances.  This project                   
              involves field and laboratory studies to improve our understanding             
              of the formation of dissolved humic substances from vascular plant             
              lignocelluloses and determine the importance of LC-derived and                 
              natural marine humics in the support of bacterioplankton                       
              production.
