Title       : A Major New Biochemical Fraction in Phytoplankton Phoptosynthates: Chitan in the
               Protein Fraction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1992   
File        : a9116004

Award Number: 9116004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256296             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Smucker   (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Correll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rodger Dawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles L. Gallegos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chespke Res Consrtium Inc
	      P.O.Box 1280
	      Solomons, MD  206881280    301/261-4190

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The P.I. will determine the prevalence of chitan and other                     
              chitins in primary production.  Major phytoplankton taxa will be               
              screened for chitan production.  Chitin-positive phytoplankton in              
              addition to the known chitan producers, Thalassiosira and                      
              Cyclotella, will be studied in depth to determine the                          
              physiological conditions relevant for chitin or chitan                         
              production.  Seasonal trends in the seasonal significance of this              
              new biogeochemical polymer, chitan, will be monitored at a mid-                
              Chesapeake Bay site.  Diel variance will be evaluated twice                    
              annually at this site and once in the second year at the Bermuda               
              Times Series Station.                                                          
                                                                                             
              A new biochemical fractionation step will be developed in course               
              of this work, which will permit resolution of the interference                 
              that chitan has in the conventional trichloroacetic acid protein               
              precipitation step used in previous studies.  Efficacy of the new              
              extraction procedures will be dtermined by specific HPLC-linked                
              enzyme hydrolyses and HPLC and planar (TLC) analyses of amino                  
              acids, amino sugars, reducing sugars.  Radiocarbon budgets with                
              discrimination of individual sugars, amino sugars and amino acids              
              will be accomplished with the aid of an imaging proportional                   
              counter designed for automatically and quantitatively mapping                  
              radioisotopes on TLC plates.
