Title       : National Science Foundation-NCS Earthquake Workshop: Modeling the Impacts of
               Major Earthquakes on Communication Lifelines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1991       
File        : a9116437

Award Number: 9116437
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Mahendra P. Singh                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17500              (Estimated)
Investigator: B E. MORRISS   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald T. Eguchi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis I. Parsons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judy Vandegriff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NCS-D
	      Office of the Manager
	      Arlington, VA  22204    703/692-8020

NSF Program : 1497      ARCHITECTURE & MECHAN SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Communication lifelines, such as those                                         
              provided by the nation's public switched                                       
              networks, are essential to effective and                                       
              speedy recovery from damaging earthquakes.                                     
              However, communication lifelines, including                                    
              those used for emergency governmental                                          
              communications, are themselves vulnerable.                                     
              There is, therefore, a need to develop a                                       
              capability to project the extent, duration,                                    
              and failure modes of telecommunication                                         
              lifelines service outages for two purposes:                                    
              1) to estimate the potential magnitude of the                                  
              communications problem that can be                                             
              anticipated in the aftermath of major                                          
              earthquakes, and 2) to identify measures or                                    
              system enhancements for preventing or                                          
              mitigating those problems.                                                     
                                                                                             
              This effort will develop a forum to bring                                      
              together the practical experience of the                                       
              telecommunications industry with the                                           
              theoretical knowledge and methodological                                       
              techniques of the research and academic                                        
              communities in a multi-disciplinary Workshop                                   
              that provides a unique opportunity to share                                    
              the theoretical and practical understandings                                   
              of the impacts of major earthquakes on                                         
              communication lifelines.  The primary purpose                                  
              of the Workshop is to exchange ideas and                                       
              thereby stimulate improved approaches to                                       
              projecting, and ultimately reducing,                                           
              communication lifeline damage and service                                      
              outages from major earthquakes.                                                
                                                                                             
              This activity will provide a critical                                          
              component of the technical basis required for                                  
              the development and implementation of                                          
              mitigation measures focusing on the planning                                   
              and design safety of communication networks                                    
              and systems exposed to the threat of                                           
              earthquakes.  It is also intended to serve                                     
              program development in research efforts                                        
              related to the seismic resistant design of                                     
              urban lifeline systems.
