Title       : Airborne Studies of Ocean-Particle-Cloud Interactions in the Arctic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1995      
File        : a9116371

Award Number: 9116371
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter V. Hobbs phobbs@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dean A. Hegg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald J. Ferek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5213      POLAR OCEAN SCI (ARCTIC RES)
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project is an airborne field investigation of the physical                
              characteristics of leads in arctic sea ice using a lidar and multi-            
              frequency radiometers to remotely probe the ice surface, as well               
              as of the emission of dimethylsulfide (DMS) from the ocean of its              
              effects on cloud condensation nuclei (CCN), the structure and                  
              radiative properties of arctic haze and stratus clouds.  The                   
              project will make use of an instrumented C-131 aircraft owned by               
              the University of Washington, and will be a component of the Arctic            
              Lead Dynamics Experiment (LEADEX) and the Arctic Gas and Aerosol               
              Sampling Program (AGASP-IV).                                                   
                                                                                             
              Although leads, or areas of open water in the sea ice cover,                   
              account for only a few percent of the Arctic Ocean, they play a                
              major role in the turbulent transfer of heat to the atmosphere, and            
              in the transfer of volatile biogenic material.  This project will              
              concentrate on the flux of oceanic DMS, which is an important                  
              contributor to the atmospheric sulfur budget and, through oxidation            
              to sulfur dioxide and sulfates, is a primary source of cloud                   
              condensation nuclei in the marine atmosphere.                                  
                                                                                             
              The principal investigator will also study the effect of DMS on                
              arctic haze, which is an atmospheric phenomenon considered to be               
              important in a variety of arctic processes.  It affects the                    
              radiation budget directly by modifying the albedo and the thermal              
              infra-red flux at cloud top levels, and indirectly through the                 
              modulation effect on cloud radiative properties by cloud                       
              condensation nuclei.  If it can be shown that local Cloud                      
              Condensation Nuclei concentrations depend upon DMS emissions, it               
              may be possible to identify a biological control of the arctic                 
              marine stratus albedo.  It may also be that deposited trace                    
              elements from arctic haze contribute significant fluxes of                     
              contaminants to sensitive arctic ecosystems.
