Title       : Barite in the Central Equatorial Pacific: Implications for Marine Chemistry,
               Productivity, and Circulation of the Modern and Past Oceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1992   
File        : a9116010

Award Number: 9116010
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger W. Baier                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169698             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miriam Kastner mkastner@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy D. Herbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The mineral barite BaSO4) is an ubiquitous component of particulate            
              material in the water column, and of pelagic sediments.  Many                  
              workers have noted a correlation between the abundance of barite in            
              sediments and productivity in overlying surface waters.  Barite is             
              clearly important in the geochemical cycle of Ba, and it is also               
              quite insoluble and therefore resists dissolution and diagenetic               
              exchange in sediments.  Furthermore, three elements for which the              
              seawater isotopic composition is important for solving many                    
              paleoceanographic problems (Sr, S and Nd) occur in barite in                   
              amounts that permit precise isotopic measurements to be made on                
              very small amounts of the separated phase.  For all of these                   
              reasons, barite appears to be an important tracer of productivity,             
              geochemical cycling, and a host of processes that may affect                   
              seawater chemical and isotopic compositions, e.g. climate,                     
              tectonics, sealevel change and rates of marine hydrothermal                    
              activity.  Nevertheless, the present understanding of the sites and            
              mechanisms of barite formation, transport, and fate in the                     
              sedimentary column is very incomplete and the linkage between Ba,              
              barite and C fluxes need to be clarified.  In this research a mass-            
              balance, morphological, geochemical and isotopic approach to the               
              study of the cycling of barite in upper sedimentary layers of the              
              equatorial Pacific and its relation to the C cycling will be made              
              Novel aspects of the work include the use of Nd, Sr  and S isotopes            
              as clues to the environment of formation and possible recycling of             
              barite.  This study will make use of sediment trap, filtered and               
              bottom sediment samples, and will be closely coordinated with                  
              geochemical and isotopic investigations of the water column by                 
              other workers.  It will also be undertaken with close attention to             
              the potential of barite as a contemporary as well as a paleo                   
              monitor of biogeochemical and isotopic characteristics of seawater.
