Title       : SGER/Collaborative Research: Character Weighting of Nucleotide Sequence Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1991      
File        : a9116395

Award Number: 9116395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18240              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rytas Vilgalys fungi@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              Molecular data offer the possibility of helping to resolve                     
              relationships among distantly related organism.  Nucleotide                    
              sequence data have the potential to be especially informative.                 
              But one difficulty is that there are only four character states                
              (representing the four different nucleotides) at any one position              
              in the sequence.  If the molecule is changing rapidly or the time              
              since divergence is long, multiple substitutions at any particular             
              position may obscure information about relationships of the                    
              organisms.  If we knew which positions were most likely to have                
              sustained multiple substitutions we might give that information                
              less weight in an analysis of relationships.  This project will                
              test one method of determining which positions are more likely to              
              have sustained multiple substitutions.  We will obtain sequence                
              data of a particular chloroplast gene for genera within one family             
              of flowering plants and determine which nucleotide positions vary              
              within that family.  We will then obtain sequence data of that same            
              gene from a number of divergent angiosperm families for which we               
              have a reasonable idea of the true relationships.  We will use the             
              information on variation in nucleotide sequence within one family              
              to help decide which nucleotide positions provide accurate                     
              information on the relationships of the divergent angiosperms.  The            
              similarity of results of analyses of relationships using                       
              information on the likelihood of multiple substitution with the                
              true relationships will be used to evaluate the efficacy of the                
              method.
