Title       : Ceramic Production and the Economic Organization of Protohistoric Zuni Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1991      
File        : a9116686

Award Number: 9116686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41168              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Mills bmills@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Barbara Mills will               
              conduct an analysis of two Zuni pottery samples.  One derives                  
              from complete vessels collected from living individuals in the                 
              19th and early 20th centuries.  The other comes from                           
              archaeological materials excavated from known Zuni sites which                 
              were occupied from the 15th to 17th centuries A.D.  The goal of                
              the study is to use the ethnographic samples as a control and on               
              this basis, reconstruct both pottery making and social                         
              organization during the earlier period.  Dr. Mills will focus on               
              both shape and size of vessels as well as the raw materials from               
              which they are constructed.  In particular, she is concerned with              
              degrees of standardization since this can be taken as an indirect              
              measure of social organization.  She will analyze raw material                 
              through use of Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis,                       
              Inductively-Coupled Plasma Emission Spectroscopy and electron                  
              microprobe analysis.  The degree of standardization in raw                     
              material preparation will be determined through visual imaging                 
              techniques.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Careful ethnographic studies in the United States began in the                 
              late 1800's and much first hand data are available for groups                  
              like the Zuni from that period.  However, it is uncertain how                  
              stable native American social organization is over time, given                 
              increasing influence of European contact.  For anthropologists,                
              this poses a major problem since 19th and 20th century models are              
              usually (and with doubtful validity) extended back in time.  Dr.               
              Mills postulates that organization of ceramic manufacture                      
              reflects societal organization: especially degree of authority                 
              centralization.  Through analysis of well controlled ethnographic              
              and archaeological pottery samples, she will be able to examine                
              social change through time.                                                    
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will increase              
              our understanding of native American history and prehistory.  It               
              will also serve to develop techniques which will be of                         
              anthropological use in many parts of the world.
