Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research on Stochastic Partial Differential Equations:
               Approximations and Asymptotic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1996    
File        : a9116174

Award Number: 9116174
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20106              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Li pli@math.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rene A. Carmona  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1259,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This three-year award will support cooperative research between                
              Rene A. Carmona of the University of California at Irvine and                  
              Jean-Pierre Fouque, of the Center of Applied Mathematics at the                
              Ecole Polytechnique in Paris.  Jean Lacroix of the University of               
              Paris X and Etienne Pardoux of the University of Provence in                   
              Marseille are also part of the French team.  The investigators will            
              examine the probabilistic properties and the asymptotic behavior of            
              the solutions of some stochastic partial differential equations.  They         
              will consider equations which are important to mathematical models             
              in oceanography.                                                               
                                                                                             
              Dr. Carmona is a leader in the field of stochastic partial differential        
              equations.  Collaboration with the French investigators will                   
              enhance different aspects of this project.  J.P. Fouque is an expert           
              on partial differential equations and Lacrois is experienced in the            
              theory of Luyapunov exponents, programming and random                          
              simulation.  Their respective backgrounds will contribute to solving           
              problems on the asymptotic properties of these equations. Pardoux              
              has interest and experience in mathematical problems in                        
              oceanography.  He will contribute to the development of                        
              mathematical models in this area.  Combining these complementary               
              strengths and interests will benefit the project.  The results will            
              advance our understanding of the theory of stochastic partial                  
              differential equations, an important and active area in the modern             
              theory of statistics and probability.
