Title       : Precipitation of Trace Elements and Stable Isotopes in Reef Corals: a Process
               Study of Species, Growth Rate, and Diagnetic Influence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1993  
File        : a9116289

Award Number: 9116289
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160724             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glen T. Shen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              Of all the mineral phases found in the marine environment,                     
              carbonates of various biological origins have proven to be the                 
              richest repository of paleoceanographic/paleoclimatic                          
              information.  Two classes of chemical indicators, stable isotopes              
              and trace elements, have been developed in two principal host                  
              phases, foraminiferal calcite and coral aragonite.  As biological              
              systems, however, foraminifera and reef corals are capable of                  
              leaving metabolic imprints on top of chemical signals which                    
              record environmental change.  The nature of these imprints must                
              be understood to accurately reconstruct oceanic conditions during              
              Earth's history.  Over the last several decades, a process                     
              framework has evolved to permit the interpretation of such                     
              signals in ancient foraminifera.  The intent of this proposal is               
              to initiate a similar framework for metal incorporation by                     
              corals.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              4 fundamental process issues and their effect on metal (including              
              Cd, Mn, Pb, V, Ba, U) and isotopic precipitation (18O and 13C)                 
              will be addressed in this work: (1) growth rate, (2)                           
              species variability, (3) reef spatial variability, and (4)                     
              digenetic influences on thousand year timescales, taking                       
              advantage of existing samples and the ease of cross dating short               
              growth intervals within specimens from a single reef to form                   
              detailed comparisons.  This approach offers many advantages to a               
              difficult and costly culturing study.  Numerous species collected              
              live from Pacific, Atlantic, and Caribbean sites will form the                 
              sample basis.  The diagenesis study component will utilize                     
              precisely dated (U-Th) materials from Barbados to address the                  
              feasibility of interpreting Pleistocene trace metal records in                 
              fossil corals.
