Title       : A Study of Magnetic Fields in Interstellar Molecular Clouds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1994   
File        : a9116917

Award Number: 9116917
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Crutcher crutcher@astro.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas H. Troland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Richard Crutcher, at the University of Illinois, together with             
              his colleague Dr. Thomas Troland, at the University of Kentucky,               
              will continue a very successful long term program to measure                   
              magnetic field strengths in interstellar clouds, and they will                 
              extend the program into new areas.  Using the Very Large Array in              
              New Mexico, a major effort will be made to map the distribution of             
              the Zeeman effect in lines of neutral atomic hydrogen and hydroxyl             
              from interstellar clouds.  Another part of the project is to                   
              continue survey observations of the Zeeman effect on spectral lines            
              of hydroxyl toward central regions of dark clouds using telescopes             
              at the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in West Virginia and               
              at the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center in Puerto Rico.                
              Single-antenna measurements of magnetic field strengths will be                
              extended to denser regions by observations of the Zeeman effect in             
              the 3-mm lines of CN.  This experiment will allow for the first                
              time direct probing of magnetic field strengths at the crucial                 
              stage in the star formation process when core fragmentation and                
              collapse are taking place.  The observational program supported by             
              this award will provide fundamental tests of theoretical studies               
              of magnetic fields in interstellar clouds.   This research will                
              therefore lead to the essential empirical framework for                        
              understanding the role of magnetic fields in the evolution of dense            
              interstellar clouds and in star formation.
