Title       : Electron Density Mapping of Silicon and Germanium Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1994      
File        : a9116934

Award Number: 9116934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith H. Pannell kpannell@utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic                  
              Program and the Office of Special Projects is made to Dr. Keith                
              H. Pannell of the Chemistry Department, University of Texas at                 
              El Paso for collaborative work in the area of silicon and                      
              germanium chemistry.  The collaboration will involve members of                
              Dr. Pannell's research group and members of the research group                 
              of Dr. Laszlo Parkanyi of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences in                 
              Budapest.  Because the presence of dicarbonyl(cyclopenta-                      
              dienyl)iron as a substituent has been shown to promote                         
              photochemically-induced rearrangements, isomerizations, and                    
              deoligomerizations of oligosilanes and polysilanes, the details                
              of bonding in such systems will be studied.  The method of                     
              mapping the locations of the silicon atoms will be an X-ray                    
              technique jointly developed by Drs. Pannell and Parkanyi.  The                 
              investigation will be extended to include systems containing                   
              germanium as well as silicon.                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              A method for examining the bonding in polymeric materials of                   
              silicon and germanium containing metals will be developed.                     
              Such materials have potentially useful electronic and optical                  
              properties.  In addition, the project promotes scientific                      
              collaboration between the United States and Hungary.
