Title       : Integrated Data Exchange and Concurrent Designs for Engineered Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1993 
File        : a9116646

Award Number: 9116646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $650000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey D. Ullman ullman@db.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kincho H. Law  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Teicholz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Craig Howard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1039,6855,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The architecture-engineering-construction industry is highly                   
              fragmented, both vertically (between project phases, e.g.,                     
              planning, design, and construction) and horizontally (between                  
              specialists at a given project phase, e.g., design).  The                      
              industry needs an integrated computing environment that will                   
              support concurrent design with fast data exchange and powerful                 
              change management capabilities.  The long-term potential benefits              
              are improved designs, reduced construction time, fewer design                  
              errors and omissions, minimization of costly rework, and better                
              life-cycle facility management.  The key contributions of this                 
              research project are methods to (1) translate and communicate                  
              project data dynamically, overcoming both logical barriers                     
              (differing views of overlapping data) and physical barriers (data              
              distribution); and (2) detect, analyze, and manage changes                     
              efficiently during concurrent design processes.  These                         
              contributions are demonstrated in prototype software that                      
              integrates systems for CAD, drafting, analysis, and simulation                 
              along with relational and object-oriented databases.  The first                
              software component is an integrated set of object-oriented,                    
              multi-machine utilities to provide fast, flexible, intelligent                 
              data translation and transfer.  The second component is a set of               
              constraint handling and change management utilities that will                  
              support declarative definition of data dependencies, constraints,              
              and conflict resolution strategies.  The project will take                     
              advantage of industry links through Stanford University's Center               
              for Integrated Facility Engineering to develop a test bed of                   
              industrial-strength databases to demonstrate the software.
