Title       : Moana Wave Wind
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1991      
File        : a9116114

Award Number: 9116114
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Emma R. Dieter                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith W. Kaulum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Office of Naval Res
	      Attn: Code 511, Dept. Of Navy
	      Arlington, VA  22217    /   -

NSF Program : 5416      SHIPBOARD SCIENTIFIC SUPP EQUI
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project will support shipboard scientific support equipment               
              for the research vessel MOANA WAVE a Navy-owned ship operated by               
              the University of Hawaii and dedicated to use in support of ocean              
              science research.                                                              
                                                                                             
              The Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment Program provides funds              
              for ship equipment deemed essential to the proper and safe                     
              conduct of ocean science research. This Program provides support               
              for such items as deck equipment including winch systems for the               
              deployment and retrieval of scientific instruments, navigational               
              equipment such as radars, gyroscopes and earth satellite                       
              receivers to pin point the location of research sites,                         
              communication equipment including radio transceivers and                       
              satellite transceivers for voice and scientific data                           
              communications and other equipment such as motorized workboats                 
              for transporting scientists to and from data retrieval sites.                  
                                                                                             
              The Project Director, Keith W. Kaulum is fully qualified to                    
              direct this project having had considerable experience in                      
              managing the acquisition and installation of shipboard                         
              equipment.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              This action transfers funds to the Office of Naval Research,                   
              (ONR).  NSF and ONR are contributing equal shares toward a new                 
              hydrographic winch for the R/V MOANA WAVE.
