Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Theoretical and Methodological Issues in the
               Comparison of U.S. and Japanese National Character
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1992      
File        : a9116574

Award Number: 9116574
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8340               (Estimated)
Investigator: Alex Inkeles   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              80        Social Sciences                         
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 1331,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a two-year U.S.-Japan cooperative                      
              research project between Professor Alex Inkeles, Senior Fellow,                
              Hoover Institution on War, Revolution and Peace, Stanford                      
              Univesity, and Professor Tatsuo Suzuki, Department of                          
              Interdisciplinary Statistical Mathematics, Institute of Statistical            
              Mathematics, Tokyo.  Professor Inkeles will travel to Japan to                 
              work with Professor Suzuki and Professor Chikio Hayashi, also                  
              affiliated with the Institute of Statistical Mathematics, on                   
              developing a common methodology for further comparative study                  
              of U.S. and Japanese national character.  These two distinguished              
              Japanese social scientists have been involved with the Japanese                
              Research Committee on the Study of the Japanese National                       
              Character.  Professor Inkeles, who is one of the leading experts on            
              the study of national character, will bring a comparative viewpoint            
              to the study, which will very likely lead to new developments in               
              this topic.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Although national character is often treated in qualitative terms that         
              do not admit of scientific testing, one well established approach              
              does rest on basic methods of social science.  This approach                   
              defines national character as a set of relatively enduring psycho-             
              social characteristics of individuals that are predominant in, or              
              distinctive, or modal to a given national population.  It thus                 
              becomes a special element in the general methodology for                       
              comparing nations.  Taking that approach permits empirical testing             
              to establish the actual characteristics of national and sub-national           
              populations using either tests of personality, or, more commonly,              
              attitudes and value scales applied to representative national samples          
              at periodic intervals.  This approach has been most systematically             
              and consistently applied in the studies of the Research Committee              
              on the Study of the Japanese National Character.
