Title       : Welfare Use, Welfare Dependency, and Labor Markets in the Deep South
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1994      
File        : a9116969

Award Number: 9116969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86198              (Estimated)
Investigator: Samson Kimenyi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9135,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Recent studies of welfare recipients in the United States                      
              have found that most of them remain on welfare for only                        
              short periods of time.  However, the evidence also shows                       
              that a small number of recipients are highly dependent on                      
              public support and have long welfare careers.  These long                      
              term recipients are also responsible for the largest portion                   
              of welfare expenditures.  Although much has been learned                       
              about this important phenomenon, a wide range of issues                        
              related to the process and patterns of welfare dependence                      
              remain to be investigated.                                                     
                                                                                             
              This project proposes to study the patterns and determinants                   
              of welfare use and dependency in the Deep South, an area                       
              which has a higher concentration of poverty, larger numbers                    
              of poorly educated people, and a higher concentration of low                   
              wage employment than other parts of the country.  Due to                       
              these factors, among others, the Deep South region provides                    
              particularly suitable conditions for testing hypotheses                        
              related to welfare dependency.  One of these, on which                         
              attention is centered, is the so-called culture of poverty                     
              hypothesis.  This states that high concentrations of                           
              poverty, existing over many years, may lead to the emergence                   
              of a welfare culture which translates into long term welfare                   
              use and to inter-generational transmission of welfare                          
              dependency.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The study will investigate empirically individual, social,                     
              cultural, labor market, and institutional factors that lead                    
              to long term welfare use.  The main thrust will be to                          
              specify lifetime models permitting the estimation of the                       
              duration of time on welfare.  In addition, the study will                      
              focus on labor market models incorporating job search,                         
              unemployment durations, and wage determination as they                         
              relate to welfare use and dependency.  Survey data of AFDC                     
              recipients from the state of Tennessee and from the Survey                     
              of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) will be utilized.                   
                                                                                             
              The investigator is asking very important policy-related                       
              questions, the answers to which promise to provide                             
              information crucial to welfare reform.  The empirical work                     
              involved marks one of the first SIPP analyses of the problem                   
              of welfare dependence.  The new evidence will enable                           
              valuable comparisons with earlier studies based on PSID and                    
              NLSY surveys.
