Title       : SGER: Development of the Plan for Long Term Impact Assessment of Recent
               War-Related Pollution Events in The Gulf: The Marine Chemistry Component
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1991       
File        : a9116480

Award Number: 9116480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn A. Burns   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bermuda Biol Sta Research
	      17 Biological Station
	      Ferry Reach, GE 01, BD      /   -

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              The Gulf has long been recognized as an important biologically                 
              productive ecosystem which supports a diversity of coastal and                 
              oceanic habitats.  These include mangroves, seagrass beds, reef                
              flats, reefs and well as pelagic and benthic oceanic habitats.                 
              Commercial fisheries and shellfish industries provide income to                
              regional fisherman and The Gulf provides a critical habitat to                 
              some endangered species including dugongs and birds.  The massive              
              oil spills and the depositions of oil burn products resulting                  
              from the 1991 war activities have potential for long term impact               
              on both the oceanic and coastal biology.  These events are                     
              superimposed on coastal habitat destruction due to military                    
              activities such as mines, bombs, vehicular movement and related                
              mechanical disturbances.  All of this additional stress must be                
              assessed in the framework of the recent history of oil                         
              exploration and production activities and past wars.   Many                    
              national and international groups have undertaken preliminary                  
              impact assessment work in the Northern Gulf.  These include the                
              USCG, US EPA, NOAA consultants sent by several UN agencies and                 
              regional Gulf state authorities.  These efforts have been                      
              directed at initial animal rescue activities, clean up and                     
              assessment in coastal habitats.  The UN agencies, in                           
              collaboration with ROPME, have intentions of developing and                    
              implementing a plan for the long term impact assessment of recent              
              war related pollution and habitat destruction events on the                    
              marine ecology or The Gulf.  To do this the UN requires input by               
              appropriate expert.  This effort will be conducted under the                   
              SGER Program to undertake this long range Plan Development                     
              regarding the marine chemical component.
