Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: The Nature and Distribution of Dark Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1995     
File        : a9116569

Award Number: 9116569
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Sadoulet sadoulet@cfpa.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph I. Silk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence J. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary K. Gaillard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              11        Astronomy                               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1216,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in             
              astrophysics between the NSF Science and Technology Center (STC)               
              for Particle Astrophysics at the University of California, Berkeley,           
              and the Theoretical and High Energy Physics Laboratory of the                  
              University of Paris, South.  The U.S. and French research teams                
              will be led by Bernard Sadoulet, Director of the STC at Berkeley,              
              and Jean Kaplan, director of the French research group.                        
              Specifically, support will be provided to advanced U.S. graduate               
              students and young postdoctoral researchers affiliated with the                
              Berkeley STC for travel to France.  The objectives are to provide              
              these young investigators with research experience at a French                 
              center of scientific excellence and to establish long-lasting links            
              between the research programs in the U.S. and France, thereby,                 
              enhancing the scientific productivity of both groups.                          
                                                                                             
              The U.S. and French teams will focus on the fundamental problem                
              of dark matter, a topic identified as the highest priority in                  
              astrophysics research.  Evidence indicates that 90% or more of the             
              universe is made of dark matter, and that this matter may be in the            
              form of particles dating back to the beginning of the universe.  The           
              study of the dark matter problem has important implications for                
              understanding the origin of the universe and the fundamental                   
              nature of matter.  The U.S. and French teams will focus their                  
              efforts on:  (1) experimental searches for dark matter either in the           
              form of weakly interactive particles or in the form of massive                 
              astrophysical compact halo objects;  (2) theoretical investigations of         
              various dark matter particle candidates and their signatures in the            
              atrophysical environment; and (3) development of a theory of                   
              galaxy formation and clustering in the universe, in which dark                 
              matter may play a central role.
