Title       : The Evolution of Intelligence in Response to Social Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9630667

Award Number: 9630667
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kay E. Holekamp holekamp@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura Smale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marlene Zuk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                          ABSTRACT                                      PI:
              Holekamp  Proposal Number IBN96-30667:     The evolution of intelligence in
              response to social complexity      The primary purpose of this research is to
              examine predictions of  an  hypothesis  suggesting that the evolution of
              intelligence  in  mammals  has  been driven by selection pressures associated 
              with  life  in  a  complex  social environment. If this  hypothesis  is 
              correct,   then some or all of the impressive cognitive abilities  observed  in
               primates should also occur in  non-primate  mammals  living   in  primate-like
               societies.  Spotted  hyenas   (Crocuta  crocuta)  are  large carnivores that
              live in social  groups  like  those of old-world monkeys. Thus the social
              complexity hypothesis  predicts  that spotted hyenas should possess many or all
               of  the  same  features of social intelligence as do these primates.  Here  we
               propose  to  determine what spotted hyenas know  about  their  social  worlds,
              how they use this knowledge, and how  it  differs  from  that  described  for 
              monkeys by earlier  workers.  Subject  animals are members of one large hyena
              clan in  Kenya.  Age, sex,  kin relations, and social status are known for all
              natal animals,  and  most  adult clan members wear radio collars so they  can 
              be  regularly  relocated and observed. Using videotaped responses  of  hyena 
              subjects to playbacks of recorded vocalizations,  we  will  determine  whether 
              hyenas, like monkeys, can discriminate  among  conspecific vocalizations based
              on group membership, kinship, and  association  patterns.  A secondary goal of
              this research  is  to  continue on-going work on hormone-behavior relationships
              in free-  living  hyenas, and to supplement this with preliminary  analyses  of
               patterns of variation in their immune system function.   This  research will
              generate three types of useful information: it will  (1)   elucidate  the 
              functions of  animal  intelligence  in  the  natural habitat, as well as the 
              selection pressures favoring  its  evolution,  (2)  yield  rare  data 
              documenting  the  extent   of  variation  in  disease exposure and
              immunocompetence  among  wild  animals,  and  (3)  enhance  understanding  of 
              carnivore  social  behavior  and  immunocompetence to facilitate
              decision-making  by  wildlife  managers  and  others concerned with 
              biodiversity  and  conservation of African ecosystems.
