Title       : 1996 Chemistry at Interfaces Gordon Conference: Interfacial Structure, July
               21-26, 1996 Meriden, New Hampshire
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1996       
File        : a9630029

Award Number: 9630029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Texter   (Principal Investigator current)
              T. Kyle Vanderlick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Vanderlick  9630029    This proposal requests funds in partial support of the
              Interfaces Gordon Conference to be held 21-26 July 1996 at Kimball Union
              Academy in Meriden, New Hampshire.  The funds requested will be used to defray
              travel and conference expenses for some of the speakers attending the
              conference and principally for promising students and junior faculty attending
              the conference.    The purpose of the conference is to encourage the transfer
              of ideas at the frontiers of chemistry at interfaces, among several groups of
              scientists, including electrochemists, biophysicists and membrane biologists,
              chemical engineers, and colloid and surface scientists, and to focus on the
              topic of Interfacial Structure as it relates to liquid/air, liquid/liquid, and
              liquid/solid interfaces.  The spatial arrangement of interfacial molecules
              normal and parallel to the interfaces is the key structural issue that will be
              focused upon.  This resolution will range from atomic scale to supramolecular. 
                The conference topic is an important focal point for examining physical
              pheomena that occur in colloidal systems such as micellar solutions,
              microemulsions, emulsions, dispersions, slurries, etc.  This symposium will
              serve to summarize our current understanding of interfacial structure in these
              systems, and the relation of this structure to chemical and physiochemical
              phenomena.  Simulations and experiments are becoming complementary approaches
              to investigating the structure of these interfacial systems, so the proposed
              conference is particularly timely.  In addition to papers that address our
              ability to resolve structural issues, are papers that address chemistry
              occurring at these same interfaces, and the relation of the resulting chemistry
              to the interfacial structure.    The format of the conference is built around
              invited speakers detailing the scientific frontiers of their research.  Half of
              the formal conference time is devoted to discussion of topics addressed by the
              speakers and by the discussion leade rs.  The formal sessions are held in the
              morning and after dinner in the evening.  One afternoon workshop is scheduled,
              and two poster session are scheduled in later afternoon time slots.  Posters
              are contributed by the various conferees, and afford a venue for additional
              contributions relevant to the conference theme.  ***
