Title       : Scientific Process, Practice and Presentation: Applying Resources and Knowledge
               (SP3ARK)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a9630117

Award Number: 9630117
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $715034             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rashid Shaikh rshaikh@nyas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lori D. Skopp  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : N Y Acad of Sciences
	      
	      New York, NY  11021    /   -

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Skopp  9630117    The New York Academy of Sciences mentors a professional
              development and school reform program that enables teachers and students in
              three selected middle schools in New York City to learn, practice and
              understand the scientific research process.  Each year all students participate
              in and present the results of projects based on controlled experiments.  The
              mentoring is carried out over a three year cycle.  In year one, the school
              performs a needs assessment and buys into the program when the teacher,
              administrative and parent leadership sign an agreement.  Team building includes
              professional development by the New York City Science and Technology Assistance
              Centers (STAC) and a several-day field trip to a nearby forest preserve.  The
              Academy provides mentors for each teacher and funds for library improvement. 
              The FOSS Variables unit is done by all students and they report on articles in
              science journals.  During the first year teacher leaders emerge at each school.
               These leaders attend a summer workshop at which they engage in inquiry,
              develop templates for student projects, and make concrete plans for their
              schools.  In year two, all teachers in the school receive professional
              development and implement the science fair. Communications among teachers,
              between teachers and administrators and between teachers and parents are
              developed electronically and through newsletters and faculty meetings.  In year
              three, the schools  plan for sustainability and replication by other sites with
              mentorship support, and communications help.  The project is evaluated by an
              external evaluator.
