Title       : The Numerical Simulation of Weather Modification By Cloud Seeding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1998   
File        : a9630008

Award Number: 9630008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1996  
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $427500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold D. Orville horville@ias.sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Farley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9630008  Orville        This research continues ongoing investigations into the 
              numerical simulation of cloud seeding effects on the cloud scale  and
              mesoscale.  The work is broad based, treating stratiform   orographic clouds
              and hailstorms over the northern High Plains.   Models have been developed at
              the South Dakota School of Mines and  Technology (SDSM&T) that simulate the
              development of clouds, rain,  snow, and hail.  Methods have been developed that
              treat the  numerical simulation of the seeding of convective and stratiform 
              clouds. The simulation of the seeding agent involves the release of  the agent,
              the spread of the seeding agent throughout the  atmosphere, and the interaction
              of the seeding agent with the  supercooled liquid water in the cloud.  Only in
              the past few years  have these methods been incorporated into fully three- 
              dimensional, time-dependent models. This allows, for the first  time, the many
              hypotheses of the cloud seeding community to be  tested in the strongest
              scientific frameworks, although many  useful insights and greater understanding
              have resulted from lesser  dynamic frameworks.          Studies of
              winter/spring situations will be carried out.  In  addition, the pattern of
              summer convection, as detected by radar  pattern climatology leads to much
              different precipitation patterns  than in the winter.  The Principal
              Investigators also will simulate  those patterns.  These summertime cloud
              situations will allow  testing of the effects of simulated seeding on the
              merging of cloud  cells, an important effect detected in field experiments in 
              previous research.          The seeding of hailstorms has been simulated and is
              revealing  intriguing results. Whether or not the storms have an active 
              coalescence process and the lifetime of the cells  determine the degree of
              response to the seeding.  Also, the timing  and the placement of the seeding
              material are important for the  seeding to be effective.  Further work is
              needed to  strengthen the theoretical basis.  The m odel being used for this 
              work simulates the formation and development of the precipitating  ice particle
              spectra.  Such detail is necessary if  conclusions are to be drawn concerning
              the effects of cloud seeding  on hailstorms.          The Principal
              Investigators also have developed models that  simulate the processes of
              atmospheric electricity in clouds.  The  numerical simulations of seeding
              effects on the storm s   microphysics will be applied to a vigorous
              thunderstorm and  analyzed as to their effects on the   storm electrification. 
                      Successful completion of this research should lead to  increases in
              understanding of the microphysical processes involved  in precipitation
              production and storm electrification.
