Title       : Genetic and Developmental Dissection of Integrin Function in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9630783

Award Number: 9630783
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229853             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Fristrom   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630783  FRISTROM    Vertebrate integrins, transmembrane adhesion proteins, are
              implicated in the organization of the cytoskeleton as well as in signalling
              pathways that regulate gene expression.  These properties of integrins suggest
              that they play important roles in development and in cancer.  This proposal
              aims at elucidating through genetic analyses pathways of integrin function
              during Drosophila development.  The components of the Drosophila integrin
              pathways should have homologs in vertebrates.  Drosophila integrins have
              already been shown from mutational and immunological studies to have roles in
              maintaining adhesions between muscle and tendon cells (as they do in
              vertebrates) and between the two epithehal layers of wings.  The failure of
              these junctions in mutants lacking integrins often has clear consequences
              (muscle detachment and consequent lethality in embryos and blisters in wings). 
              Wings are not essential for the viability of fhes, so otherwise lethal
              mutations can be isolated and studied in homozygous clonal wing patches
              produced by somatic recombination.  The genetic analyses proposed here continue
              to make use of a highly efficient technique for generating somatic
              recombinants, a technique utilizing the yeast FLP recombinase gene that has
              been introduced into Drosophila.  The high frequency of recombination obtained
              with this recombinase permits developmental analysis of clonal patches and
              facilitates screens for mutations that produce wing blisters in clonal patches.
                 The goal is to identify genes, other than those encoding integrins, that
              encode components of PS integrin pathways.  The approach is based on the belief
              that PS integrin pathways will be similar (though not identical) in wing cells
              and in tendon cells (epidermal cells to which muscles attach).  In both these
              cell types integrins localize to highly organized intercellular junctions that
              interact with the cytoskeleton.  The PI will continue to screen for new
              mutations by identifying wing blisters that arise within  clonal patches
              created by FLP-recombinase-dependent somatic recombination.  Using this
              approach, they have already identified 50 mutations in 19 different
              complementation groups.  Many more genes, however, remain to be identified. The
              investigator will determine whether the new mutants also disrupt myotendon
              junctions in embryos, interact with known integrin mutants to produce wing
              blisters and exhibit other abnormalities characteristic of integrin mutants. 
              Mutants with most of these abnormalities are expected to encode components of
              PS integrin pathways. The PI will also determine when in wing development
              blisters arise in clonal patches.  Early blisters (as in integrin null mutants)
              suggest the normal product of the mutant gene has a signalling function.  Late
              blisters suggest that the normal product of the mutant gene has only a
              structural function.  One new gene they have identified, emu, is strongly
              implicated in integrin-dependent junction formation and signalling.  The
              investigators propose a molecular and developmental characterization of emu to
              understand its fupktion in integrindependent junction formation.
