Title       : Microbiology and Ecology of Filamentous Sulfur Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1998     
File        : a9630054

Award Number: 9630054
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334985             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig D. Taylor ctaylor@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl O. Wirsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9630054  Taylor    The  microbial  oxidation  of geothermally  produced  sulfur 
              compounds, principally hydrogen sulfide, is the energy  base  for supporting
              dense animal communities surrounding deep-sea  hydrothermal vents.  To  broaden
              our understanding  of  this  process  in  warm  water vents laboratory 
              enrichments  were  established  where seawater in contact with  coastal  marine
               sediments  were  exposed to hydrogen sulfide  in  continuous  flow  reactors. 
              A self sustaining white flocculant material  became  established that was found
              to be comprised of  solid  sulfur  filaments  that were 0.5-2.0  micrometers 
              wide  and  ranged  between  20-500 micrometers in length.   Preliminary 
              studies  have  shown  that the filaments  are  produced  via  direct  excretion
               by a motile bacterium and  the  filaments  produced   become  a  site  for 
              attachment  and   continued  excretion by other members of the population.  An
              intriguing  observation  in  our laboratory indicates  that  filamentous 
              sulfur  may be an abundant product of free-living  microbial  sulfide 
              oxidation  in  subseafloor regions  of  warm  water  hydrothermal  vents. 
              Recent descriptions  of  an  extensive  discharge  from so-called called
              "blizzard" or  "snowblower"  vents  on  the East Pacific Rise indicated large
              amounts  of  white flocculant material was released and accumulated  into  mats
              of 5 cm thickness.  We have examined this material  and  found   it  to  be 
              microscopically  and  chemically  nearly  identical to the filamentous sulfur
              material produced in our  laboratory reactors.    The  overall  goal  of this
              project will  be  to  study  the  microbial  ecology of filamentous sulfur
              formation,  and  to  apply  this  information to a greater understanding  of 
              the  microbial  processes  occurring in warm  water  hydrothermal  vents  and
              other sulfidic open flow environments.   We  will  focus  on  three 
              interdependent  areas  of  research:   (A)  Characterization  of  the  process 
              and  physiology  of  the  sul fide   oxidizing   organism  directly  
              responsible   for  filamentous  sulfur formation, and study of the interactions
               between  these  organisms and the filamentous  product  that  presumably  
              allow  their  existence  in  high  fluid   flow  environments.  (B)  Determine
              the taxonomic and phylogenetic  characteristics   of  coastal  filamentous 
              sulfur-producing  organisms.    (C)    Determination  of   the   morphological 
              mechanism of filamentous sulfur formation.  The oxidation of  hydrogen sulfide
              to elemental sulfur of filamentous form  is  a  unique and undescribed
              phenomenon, and suggests  a  novel  solution to a microbial existence in
              turbulent environments.  Proposed studies, we believe, will provide the
              beginnings of  an  interesting  new  chapter in our  understanding  of  the 
              microbiology of the marine sulfur cycle, and will  introduce  a  novel  form 
              of  sulfur that may have  future  industrial  application.
