Title       : Mechanisms by Which Root Disease Induced Changes in Ponderosa Pine Physiology
               Effect Bark Beetle Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1998     
File        : a9630934

Award Number: 9630934
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Wood   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9630934  Wood    The  physiological responses of trees to root pathogens, and 
              the  resulting  effects  on plant-feeding insect behavior  are  poorly 
              understood.  The studies outlined here aim to characterize:       1)      the 
              biochemical  changes  in  ponderosa  pine  (Pinus  ponderosa)  in  response to
              annosus root disease  (Heterobasidion  annosum),  emphasizing induced changes
              in parts of the  tree  not  infected by the fungus (i.e., systematic
              induction).  Preliminary  evidence  indicates  that a systemic response occurs,
               especially  with  respect  to  stilbenes,  and  that  these  substances   are 
              associated with development of disease symptoms.  Greenhouse  and  field 
              experiments  will be carried out to  further  characterize  this unexpected and
              novel phenomenon in conifers.       2)      the  influence of compounds
              produced by  the  host  in  response  to the root pathogen (including stilbenes
              and ethylene,  among  others),  and  by  the pathogen  itself,  on  bark 
              beetle  behavior  mountain pine beetle (Dendroctonus ponderosae) and  the 
              western  pine  beetle (D. brevicomis) (Coleoptera:  Scolytidae) .  The  role of
              compounds produced during the physiological response  of  the  host  tree  to
              the root pathogen as  attractants  and/or  feeding  stimulants will be
              determined in the laboratory and  the  field,  in  order  to  better understand
              how these  bark  beetles  detect suitable host tissue for colonization.      
              This   work  will  significantly  advance  our  knowledge   of  fundamental 
              ecophysiological interactions, integrating  partners  as diverse as fungal
              pathogens, forest trees, and associated bark  beetles.  A greater knowledge of
              this three way interaction  will  also   ultimately  lead  to  a  greater 
              understanding  of  other  plant/herbivore systems and provide the basis for
              elucidating the  physiological  mechanisms  of  host  resistance  to  
              herbivores.  Hence,  this investigation may also result in modified strategies 
              for  forest disease and bark beetle man agement, based  on  better  knowledge
              of tree decline and the role of host physiopathology in  bark beetle
              colonization.
