Title       : Database Tools for Analyzing Forest Canopy Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2000   
File        : a9630316

Award Number: 9630316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234855             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nalini M. Nadkarni nadkarnn@evergreen.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Maier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry F. Franklin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith B. Cushing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Evergreen State College
	      
	      Olympia, WA  98505    206/867-6000

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9139,9169,9184,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The forest canopy is increasingly regarded as a region of  great ecological
              importance. Canopy communities are poorly  understood, partly due to access
              problems and partly due to  a lack of expertise and software tools to analyze
              complex  three-dimensional tree crown data.  The PIs propose an 
              interdisciplinary effort to develop database systems to  manage, analyze, and
              disseminate shared data pertaining to  complex ecological questions using
              forest canopy data.    The demonstration project will be carried about among
              seven  cooperating but independent researchers at a forest canopy  research
              site, the Wind River Canopy Research Facility in  Washington State. Data from
              existing projects that focus at  different spatial and temporal scales will be
              linked to  allow efficient use of site data and to solve novel  questions that
              could not be addressed by a single  researcher's data sets. The resulting
              database management  tools will allow researchers to easily gain access to
              site-  specific data and each others' data, which will enhance the 
              productivity both of the individual scientists and of the  site as a whole.   
              The initial research focus will be on the development of  data models and
              prototype data structures and data sets for  one concurrent study of forest
              canopy structure and  hydrology. That research examines the role of forest 
              canopies in intercepting, modifying, retaining, and  conducting water from
              atmospheric sources (rain, mist, snow)  to the forest floor. Forest canopy
              structure has obvious  implications in these processes, but the complexity and 
              three-dimensional nature of forest canopies (especially  those of old-growth,
              structurally complex forests) has  prevented ecologists from gaining a
              quantified understanding  of the patterns and processes underlying these
              interactions.    The PI will also continue refining the two database browsers 
              for the Wind River Site data and will extend the data model  for those browsers
              to show the connection with the canopy  structure and hydro logy model.
              Development of a sound data  model will allow forest canopy scientists to
              organize,  visualize, and analyze their data in powerful ways. It will  also
              provide the means to link forest canopy structural data  with relevant
              environmental data sets (such as  meteorological data) and with other forest
              functional data  sets (e.g., photosynthesis of canopy organisms).
