Title       : Three Dimensional Visualization Methods for Phylogenetic Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1998    
File        : a9630313

Award Number: 9630313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174976             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Bailey mjb@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9139,9169,9184,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Phylogenetic analysis is a powerful methodology  with  broad  explanatory  
              power  derived  from  its  ability   to   make  predictions about evolutionary
              process. However, the process  of arriving at a classification involves
              decisions about how  to  reconcile multiple tree solutions, how to visualize
              data  changes  on  phylogenetic tree topologies, how to  represent  conflicts
              among solutions based on different data  sets  and  finally, methods for
              presenting these results in publishable  form.    The  field  of scientific
              visualization specializes  in  the  development  of  visual  display techniques
               to  reveal  (1)  patterns  and structure within a data set, and (2)  patterns 
              and  structure between data sets. The phylogenetic tree,  or  cladogram,  is an
              example of type (1) visualization  because  it reveals the relationships among
              taxa within a single data  set.   Type  (2)  visualizations  instead  focus 
              upon   the  simultaneous presentation of multiple data sets or  multiple 
              representations of the same data set.    Within  this proposal we outline a
              series of highly  visual,  data   driven  methods  for  data  inspection, 
              simultaneous  multiple tree visualization, evaluation of assumptions about  the
               analysis  (e.g.,  choice of root  taxon),  presentation  techniques  for
              hierarchical data and methods  for  linking,  through the World Wide Web (WWW),
              phylogenetic trees to  the  data  that  generated the result(s). Few or  none 
              of  these  techniques are in current use in systematics, in fact,  they 
              represent  very recent research within computer science.  We  -believe  that 
              the richness and complexity of  phylogenetic  analysis  invites new methods for
              visualizing the analytical  process.  MacClade   Maddison92 , a  Macintosh 
              program  for  visualizing  data  change  on a single  tree,  enhanced  our 
              understanding  of  the  how character  changes  occurred  on  single tree
              topologies. We will expand that type of analysis  to  include far richer visual
              metaphors for viewing the da ta  matrix to phylogeny pathway.    The  research
              we are proposing is exploratory and by  design  we  will investigate methods
              that may not prove fruitful for  all  data sets. However, the applicability of
              these  methods  for  other  forms of hierarchical data makes the  likelihood 
              high  that some or even most of the visualization tools will  assist 
              researchers in all areas of comparative biology.  In  addressing the
              visualization problem, the assumptions--a 2D,  static  medium,  Euclidean
              drawing space, separate  figures,  data  and  explanations and homogeneous
              levels of detail  in  single illustrations--implicit in current tree
              visualization  techniques  must  be  re-examined.  We  envision   that   as 
              electronic journals become ever more prominent in  all-areas  of  science  the 
              need  will exist  for  display  techniques  optimized  to on-line viewing. This
              research should  provide  significant    insight    into    means    for   
              displaying  classifications  and  systematic analyses  within  this  new 
              medium.    Although  a  large  number of the specific deliverables  for  this 
              research will be "backend" programs for  creating  the  visualizations .and
              database architectures for storing trees  and  data,  we  will provide access
              to the entire  suite  of  technologies through WWW browsers (by mid-1996,
              browsers for  all  major  workstation and PC platforms should  incorporate  the
               capability for viewing these results).  Users  will  be  able  to  input  and
              store trees and NEXUS (a standard  file  format  for  phylogenetic data) data
              matrices for subsequent  analysis, all within their browser.
