Title       : Development of User-friendly Graphical Interfaces for Ecological Simulation
               Models and Spatial Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1997       
File        : a9630264

Award Number: 9630264
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: THOMAS QUARLES                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349879             (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra P. Peters   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ingrid C. Burke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Parton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William K. Lauenroth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9216,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Regional to global-scale analyses of ecological dynamics is  a crucial
              research activity for assessing large-scale  phenomena that are relevant to
              global change. Large-scale  modeling analyses require complex computational
              technology  and efforts. Both spatial databases and simulation models  are
              critical components of these analyses. Unfortunately,  most simulation models
              as well as links with spatial  databases are complicated and used primarily by
              the  ecologists who developed them. We have identified three  needs that must
              be met before this technology is readily  accessible to ecologists: (1)
              user-friendly, portable, and  easily accessible simulation models are needed
              that can  represent numerous interacting components of ecosystems; (2) 
              user-friendly models are needed that can represent spatial  processes across
              spatial scales; and (3) user-friendly  simulation models linked with GIS
              software are needed. The  overall objective of our proposed work is to address
              these  needs of the ecological community by developing a modular, 
              windows-based graphical user-interface (GUI) for four  different kinds of
              ecological simulation models and the GIS  software, Arc/Info. We propose to
              build upon and expand a  prototype GUI called EcoVision that we developed under
              prior  NSF funding. We will expand EcoVision to be user-friendly,  portable,
              and easily accessible with three functionalities  with different software and
              hardware requirements: (1) runs  of the 4 models either alone or in linked
              combination on a  PC; (2) simulation of grids of interacting plots using one 
              or more models to represent spatial processes on a UNIX  workstation; and (3)
              simulations for regional analyses on a  UNIX workstation using Arc/Info. Our
              product will be a menu-  driven, user-friendly GUI that will allow input files
              and  parameters to be easily selected and changed, and visual  display of input
              parameters and output variables through  time and space. Multiple graphs will
              be viewed  simultaneously using input and/or out put from one or more  models.
              Statistical analyses and on-line user documentation  will also be included
              within the interface.  We will develop EcoVision for four specific models that
              can  represent vegetation dynamics of grasslands and shrublands  (STEPPE),
              nutrient cycling (CENTURY), soil water dynamics  (SOILWAT), and trace gas
              exchange (NGAS). The models can  either be run alone or linked to allow for
              interactions and  feedbacks among various components of ecosystems. Spatial 
              processes are simulated using interacting plots. Using these  four models, we
              can represent a large portion of the earth's  land resources as well as make
              important links with Global  Climate Models (GCMs) for global scale predictions
              of  effects of climate and landuse changes. In addition, our  focus in
              developing EcoVision will be on generality and  flexibility to allow for
              additional or different models to  be used. We foresee a large national and
              international  demand for user-friendly versions of these models and links 
              with Arc/Info. since a similar product is currently  unavailable. We will work
              in close collaboration with other  ecologists to ensure that our product will
              meet the current  and future needs of the ecological community. The software 
              will be distributed at-cost, and user support will be  provided with a WWW home
              page.
