Title       : Group Decision-Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1998     
File        : a9630159

Award Number: 9630159
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Seeley tds5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                PI:  Seeley  Proposal Number:  9630159  The goal of this project is to
              elucidate the mechanisms underlying one of the most impressive examples of
              group decision making in animals:  the selection of a new nest site by swarms
              of honey bees.  The bees' methods of choice enable the several hundred scout
              bees in a swarm to reach a consensus about a future dwelling place with both
              speed and accuracy.  Understanding how the members of a honey bee colony form
              an effective decision-making unit may well have practical applications, for we
              humans also often function as members of a group responsible for making
              decisions with important consequences.  Prior studies of nest-site selection by
              honey bee swarms have concentrated on determining the bees' criteria of choice
              (what they base their decision on).  This study will focus on the bees' methods
              of choice (how they form their decision).  In particular,  the bees' process of
              consensus building will be analyzed.  Among other things, this will involve
              following the actions of scout bees labeled for individual identification and
              noting how each scout bee adjusts her behavior as a function of the quality of
              the nest site that she has found.  Somehow, the bees that have located sites
              that are less than the best must become aware of this and then switch their
              "allegiance" to the best site. This investigation is likely to reveal that none
              of the scout bees possesses a synoptic knowledge of the various alternatives
              under consideration in the decision-making process.  Instead, what seems most
              likely is that each bee functions merely as one small part of a group-level
              unit in which the tasks of generating, evaluating, and choosing among
              alternatives are accomplished collectively.  Thus this study will provide a
              strong example of an important idea in sociobiology:  that the members of a
              group, by working together cooperatively, can form a group-level
