Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Diet and Habitat of Australopithecus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1996    
File        : a9630105

Award Number: 9630105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11470              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmel Schrire cschrire@gandalf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Carmel Schrire, Mr Matt Sponheimer will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. His research will be both methodological and
              substantive, the first aspect directed to improvement of the technique to
              determine indigenous carbon isotope ratios in tooth enamel and the second
              towards reconstructing prehistoric diet and environment. In a widely used
              anthropological and biological technique, researchers determine the carbon
              12-13 isotopic ratio in bone or tooth and use these data to reconstruct aspects
              of an animal's diet. Because different categories of plants follow different
              photosynthetic pathways they vary in carbon isotope ratio and this differential
              is reflected in the animals which eat these plants. Through analysis of fossil
              remains it is possible to gain insight into both diet and environment. While
              this technique has produced intuitively reasonable results, a number of aspects
              require refinement. One involves diagenesis - alteration of fossil material
              after burial - and in individual analyses it is often uncertain whether all
              measured carbon was incorporated before the organism's death or whether some
              derives from surrounding soil. Mr. Sponheimer will conduct experiments to
              investigate this question. He will also compare isotope ratios from different
              teeth of modern day pigs fed controlled diets to determine whether
              between-tooth variation exists.  In the second part of his study, Mr.
              Sponheimer will analyze both hominid and non-hominid mammalian remains from the
              South African site of Makapansgat. This cave infilling is extremely important
              to paleoanthropologists because the fossil-rich material contains abundant
              early hominid remains which are classed in the species Australopithecus
              africanus.  It is known that several hominid species existed in southern Africa
              and paleoanthropologists wish to understand the different adaptational
              strategies followed by each. While isotope ratio data is available for one of
              these, no work has been done on A. africanus. The data which Mr. Sponheimer
              collects will be of interest to many paleoanthropologists. It will shed new
              light on early hominid adaptations and the environment which they inhabited.
              This project will also contribute to the training of a promising young
              scientist.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        
