Title       : Dissertation Research: Use of Ancient mtDNA D-Loop Sequences to Test Hypotheses
               of Prehistoric Native American Population Movement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1996       
File        : a9630926

Award Number: 9630926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9575               (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Smith dgsmith@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The colonization of the Americas and prehistoric movements by Native Americans
              have been  central issues for American archaeologists. Although research has
              centered on archaeological  and linguistic evidence, recently genetic evidence
              has also been applied to these questions.  This  project seeks to utilize
              mitochondrial DNA extracted from the skeletal material of at least 47  ancient
              Native Americans, excavated from archaeological sites in the Stillwater Marsh
              and the  margins of Pyramid Lake in western Nevada which date between
              approximately 290 and 9500  years before present, to genetically characterize
              the prehistoric Native Americans of western  Nevada.    Most modern Native
              Americans belong to one of four maternally inherited mitochondrial  lineages
              whose frequencies vary significantly among language and geographic groups.  The
               distribution of these four mitochondrial lineages among the ancient
              individuals will be  characterized, as will the existence of any additional
              lineages.  High resolution sequence data  from the mitochondrial hypervariable
              region (D-Loop) will also be gathered. Comparison of  these ancient Native
              Americans to modern Native Americans, based both on the frequency of 
              mitochondrial lineages and phylogenetic analysis of the sequence data, should
              contribute to the  resolution of current debates regarding the existence and
              timing of the spread of modern  Numic-speaking peoples into the Great Basin and
              the identity of the pre-Numic inhabitants of  that region.  In addition,
              analysis of these data may help to identify (or delimit) probable Asian  source
              populations, the presence of founder's effect or a bottleneck, and the number
              of migration  events contributing to the peopling of the Americas.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
