Title       : Distributive Justice Norms in Marriages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9630898

Award Number: 9630898
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319026             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret S. Clark mc0z+@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to gain a better understanding of some processes
              underlying the successful maintenance versus deterioration of marriages. 
              Sub-goals include: a) further development of a theoretical model of the giving
              and acceptance of benefits in intimate relationships (Clark & Mills, 1979;
              1993), b) integrating the currently large and confusing literature on the use
              of distributive justice norms in intimate relationships, c) forging ties
              between work on communal exchange theory, attachment theory and interdependence
              theory, and d) identifying personality characteristics of marital partners that
              predict their marriages are at risk.  Most partners begin marriage holding a
              norm of mutual, unconditional responsiveness to needs (i.e. a communal norm) as
              their ideal, striving to live up to that norm, and feeling moderately high
              satisfaction.  Over time some couples, particularly those whose members have
              secure attachment styles, continue striving to meet communal norms and will
              succeed much of the time.  When their partners fail to meet their needs they
              will be distressed but resilient and constructive.  Their satisfaction is
              maintained over time while their feelings of trust and security will grow. 
              Other couples, particularly those whose members have insecure attachment
              styles, will falter according to one of two patterns.  Both patterns begin with
              at least one partner perceiving his or her needs to be neglected.  This
              perception will be followed with complaints, neglect of the other's needs and,
              importantly, loss of faith in the communal norm.  These couples then either: a)
              switch to exchange norms and remain together less satisfactorily and without
              growing trust, or b) begin behaving in primarily self-interested ways with
              lowered satisfaction and declining trust.  Depending upon factors such as
              investments in the relationship and available alternatives their relationship
              will either break up or remain together with low levels of satisfaction.  This
              model will be tested in a longitudinal study covering the period from
              engagement through the early years of marriage.  Data collection techniques
              will include behavioral observations, daily diaries and standard survey
              methods.  %%%  The goal of this research is to gain a better understanding of
              some processes underlying the successful maintenance versus deterioration of
              marriages.  A primary focus will be on the rules marital partners follow for
              giving and receiving benefits in their relationships, how use of such rules may
              change over the course of the relationship and how use of such rules may relate
              to the success versus failure of the relationship. Another important focus of
              the research is on how people's past relationship histories influence the rules
              they implicitly follow in their marriages.  Most partners begin marriage
              holding an ideal norm of mutual, unconditional responsiveness to the needs of
              their partner.  They strive to live up to this ideal, and they feel moderately
              high satisfaction.  As time goes by, some couples continue striving to meet
              this ideal and they succeed much of the time.  When their partners do fail to
              meet their needs they are distressed but they are resilient and retain the
              ideal.  Their satisfaction is maintained over time and their feelings of trust
              in one another and security in the relationship grows.  Other couples will
              falter according to one of two patterns.  Both patterns begin with at least one
              partner perceiving his or her needs to be neglected.  This perception will be
              followed by complaints, neglect of the other's needs, and loss of faith in a
              norm of mutual responsiveness to one another's needs.  These couples then
              either: a) switch to benefiting each other only in return for receiving
              specific benefits in return, and as a result satisfaction drops and trust does
              not grow or b) begin behaving in primarily self-interested ways with even lower
              satisfaction and declining trust.  Couples who switch to benefiting each other
              only if they receive something in return may switch again to being guided
              almost entirely by self-interest, and satisfaction may drop further. 
              Ultimately many of these relationships will break.  Others may stay together
              (for a variety of reasons including investments being high or alternatives not
              being attractive) but these relationships will be characterized by very low
              satisfaction.  This model will be tested in a longitudinal study covering the
              period from engagement through the early years of marriage.  Data collection
              techniques will include behavioral observations, daily diaries and standard
              survey techniques.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
