Title       : Processing the Polyprotein Precursor to Euglena LHCPII
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2000     
File        : a9630817

Award Number: 9630817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368775             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Schwartzbach   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              96-30817  Schwartzbach    Most of the proteins in chloroplasts are
              nuclear-encoded, synthesized in the cytoplasm, and imported
              post-translationally into the chloroplast. Precursors of chloroplast proteins
              contain topogenic information for targeting to and import into chloroplasts.
              Precursors of Euglena light harvesting chlorophyll a/b binding protein of
              photosystem 11 (pLHCP11) and of the small subunit of ribulose bisphosphate
              carboxylase (pSSU) are polyproteins that are composed of mature polypeptides
              covalently linked by a conserved decapeptide. In vivo pulse chase experiments
              demonstrated that pLHCP11 and pSSU are transported as integral membrane
              proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to the Golgi apparatus prior to
              chloroplast localization rather than being imported directly into the
              chloroplast. Once the polyproteins are in the chloroplast they are processed by
              an endoproteolytic polyprotein processing peptidase. PLHCP11 and pSSU each
              contain a signal peptide for targeting to the ER and a stop-transfer signal
              C-terminal of the signal peptide. Studies using canine microsomes and deletion
              constructs demonstrated that the stop-transfer signal anchors the protein in
              the membrane with the N-terminus in the microsomal lumen and the C-terminus in
              the cytoplasm. Previous work described the import and processing pathway of
              Euglena chloroplast proteins. The objective of this research is to understand
              the molecular mechanism of this novel trafficking pathway for Euglena
              chloroplast proteins. This will be achieved by developing an in vitro system
              that reconstitutes the Golgi apparatus to chloroplast transport event. This
              system should allow for the biochemical characterization of  this step as well
              as for the identification of components that are essential for this process.
              This includes the isolation and characterization of the polyprotein processing
              peptidase(s).  %%%    Most of the proteins in chloroplasts are nuclear-encoded,
              synthesized in the cytoplasm, and imported post-translationally int o the
              chloroplast. Precursors of chloroplast proteins contain topogenic information
              for targeting to and import into chloroplasts. The objective of this research
              is to investigate a novel trafficking pathway for nuclear-encoded chloroplast
              proteins to Euglena chloroplasts. The precursors of chloroplast proteins are
              first targeted to the endoplasmic reticulum, transported to the Golgi apparatus
              and are then transported to the chloroplast. Nothing is known about the
              molecular mechanism of this novel trafficking pathway for precursors of
              chloroplast proteins to the chloroplast.   ***
