Title       : Interactions Among Sequences, Structures and Proteins Involved in Viral
               Replication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1999  
File        : a9630191

Award Number: 9630191
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319754             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne E. Simon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630191  Simon  Virus-encoded RNA-dependent RNA polymerases (RdRp) are
              responsible for a two-stage replication process: the RdRp synthesizes
              complementary minus-strands that in turn become templates for plus-strand
              synthesis. A number of different structural elements have been implicated in
              replication including pseudoknots, stem-loops and tRNA-like structures. Less
              understood  viruses whose genomic RNA(s) end in a 3'-terminal hydroxyl group
              such as turnip crinkle virus (TCV) will be utilized as a model to study
              sequences and structures involved in replication. TCV is among the smallest and
              simplest of the plant RNA viruses and is associated with subviral sat-RNAs and
              DI RNAs, making possible the use of these simple, non-protein-coding RNAs as
              templates for replication studies. Protoplast and in vitro systems have been
              developed to study replication of genomic and subviral RNAs and virus-encoded
              RdRp subunits have been expressed in insect cells using baculovirus vectors. A
              29 base sequence at the 3' end of plus-strand satC (356 bases), which includes
              a stable hairpin and the CCUGCCC motif found at the ends of all TCV-associated
              RNAs, is required and sufficient for minus-strand synthesis in vitro.  
              Mutagenesis studies indicated that the stability of the stem, and not the
              sequence of the stem or loop, is important for promoter function. Minus-strand
              satC was found to have two independent promoters, one within the 3' terminal 49
              nucleotides and a second near positions 310 to 334.  The following experiments
              will be performed: (1) The sequence/structural requirements for plus-strand and
              minus-strand promoters of satC will be determined using further mutagenesis and
              an in vitro selection strategy (SELEX), where a large pool of random
              polynucleotide sequences are "selected" for further amplification if they
              comprise a functional promoter. (2) Cis-signals involved in replication in vivo
              and transcription in vitro for satD will be determined using deletions and
              site-directed mutagenesis. (3) The importa nce of the sequence and location of
              the CCUGCCC 3'-terminal motif in relation to the 3' hairpin for satC and TCV
              will be examined. In addition, we will determine if deletion of the 3' end of
              TCV and satC also result in the formation of "new" RNAs in vivo with
              replacement of the CCUGCCC terminal motif as was found for satD. (4) Binding
              studies using the TCV-encoded RdRp subunits p28 and p88 to promoter sequences
              associated with satC and satD will be performed using gel retardation analysis,
              filter binding, and hydroxyl radical footprinting. (5) The effect of coat
              protein on replication of TCV subviral RNA plus and minus strands in
              protoplasts will be determined using wild-type TCV and TCV with a coat protein
              open reading frame deletion (TCV(CP). In addition, using RdRp-active extracts
              from protoplasts inoculated with TCV(CP, we will assay for the effect of
              different amounts of highly purified TCV(CP on in vitro transcription of satC
              and satD plus- and minus -strands.  %%%  The process by which a plant RNA virus
              can reproduce itself by copying its gene is very complex.  Turnip crinkle virus
              RNA replication can be carried out in a test tube.  These studies will focus on
              the contribution of specific sequences  of the RNA interacting with the
              enzymatic activities that produce new viral RNA copies.  These studies may lead
              to understanding how to manipulate and control RNA virus activities in plant
              and animal systems.  ***
