Title       : A Portable Client-Server Data Management System for the Comparative Analysis of
               Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1996   
File        : a9630339

Award Number: 9630339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424355             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip E. Bourne   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ilya N. Shindyalov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Gribskov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : General Atomics
	      
	      San Diego, CA  92118    /   -

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9139,9184,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This project will develop a data management system to support a  variety of
              data of importance to molecular biologists interested  in groups of related
              proteins. The system will be distributed by  the San Diego Supercomputer Center
              (SDSC) as part of an existing  biological data resource supporting, among other
              things, data on  the protein kinase family of enzymes 
              (http://www.sdsc.edu/kinases) and temporal 3-dimensional  structure data
              derived using X-ray crystallography. The system  will permit queries
              integrating sequence homology, structure  homology, function, and disease in a
              way not possible with the  current generation of molecular biology resources.
              The overall  goal is to provide to the community a non-proprietary system that 
              is efficient, extensible and, for the molecular biologist, simple  to use for
              loading their own data.  These data could be subsets  of data available from
              existing sources and/or their own private  data. The system, will be coded in
              Java (or language of  equivalent functionality), will run on a local computer
              or in a  client-server environment using a local area network or the  Internet.
                 Specific deliverable are: (I) compact binary data storage, object  oriented
              in-memory representation of macromolecular features, and  query methodology
              suitable for analyzing comparative features  found in proteins. This is an
              extension of technology already  found in the software WPDB 
              (http://www.sdsc.edu/CCMS/Packages/wpdb.html) and MOOSE 
              (http://www.sdsc.edu/moose). (II) A client-server environment  which is beyond
              the current stateless access provided by the  World Wide Web. (III) Porting of
              existing methods written in C++  to Java and the creation of new methods
              providing an applet  library for use in molecular biology. (IV) A low-level
              graphics  library written in Java specifically for use in molecular  biology.
              (V) A molecular biology viewer (i.e., a domain-specific  browser, editor and
              interpreter). This viewer will be built from  the graphics library and provide
              th e features of the current  generalized stateless browsers, but also respond
              to specific  types of data and methods peculiar to molecular biology. The 
              interoperability between display objects, used successfully in  other software
              packages (WPDB and PDBtool,  http://www.cse.ogi.edu/DlSC/PDBTool/) will provide
              the  appropriate level of intuitive interaction.    The proposed data
              management system addresses limitations  perceived in the current generation of
              World Wide Web-based  servers supporting molecular biology and many other
              disciplines.  Notable limitations are: (i) the difficulty of keeping servers 
              current; (ii) the information content is broad but not deep;  (iii) tools for
              visualizing results of Web-based query are  limited and hampered by the
              stateless nature of the interaction  and the disproportional utilization of
              computing resources  between client and server; (iv) tools for the Web-based 
              comparative analysis of proteins could be expanded; (v) there are  few generic
              tools for the molecular biologist to use in building  and maintaining this type
              of resource for either local or global  use.
