Title       : Initiation of Transcription by T7 RNA Polymerase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1999   
File        : a9630447

Award Number: 9630447
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272503             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig T. Martin CMartin@Chem.UMass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630447  Martin  These studies address a detailed characterization of the
              mechanisms of promoter binding and transcription initiation on wild type and
              modified promoters of T7 RNA polymerase.  Stopped-flow fluorescence studies
              using nucleotide analog reporters within the promoter, combined with the direct
              measurement of RNA synthesis in single or limited turnover quench-flow studies
              will provide quantitative kinetic analyses.  An initial goal will be the
              elucidation of the rate limiting step(s) along the initiation pathway.  The use
              of ordered-addition kinetic experiments, the temperature dependence of
              individual steps in initiation, and the introduction of specific structural
              perturbations in the promoter will provide insight into the individual steps
              leading to the synthesis of the first phosphodiester bonds. In parallel with
              these studies, various approaches will be taken to characterize the structure
              and dynamics of the open complex.  Footprinting will be combined with
              spectroscopic probes to characterize the extent of the open complex and the
              nature of the interactions between the polymerase and the individual template
              and nontemplate strands of the promoter.  The time course of these interactions
              will be compared with the time course of RNA synthesis to complete the
              mechanistic picture.  In order to more completely map the complex mechanism of
              transcription initiation, temperature, limiting components, and template
              perturbations will be exploited to alter the rate limiting step. The new rate
              determining step will be characterized as before, to provide mechanistic detail
              on key elements of the initiation pathway.  A map of recognition contacts along
              the promoter has been previously prepared via functional group mutagenesis and
              steady state kinetic analyses.  Following the preliminary identification of
              individual steps along the initiation pathway, the contributions of some of the
              previously identified promoter contacts to each of these steps will be
              assessed.  This will provide the first de tailed correlations between structure
              and mechanism in this or any other RNA polymerase.  Near the start site for
              transcription, the roles of specific DNA functional groups in the positioning
              of the DNA template at the active site will be explored by the incorporation
              into the promoter DNA of simple base analogs, abasic sites, and vicarious
              linkers.  The fidelity of start site selection will be analyzed as
              substitutions become increasingly more perturbing.  Modifications which
              decrease the start site fidelity may also be expected to perturb kinetic steps
              in initiation. These will be characterized kinetically in order to tie template
              positioning to specific mechanisms for initiation.  Tools will be developed to
              follow the binding of substrate ribonucleotides to the DNA template during
              initiation.  This approach will be used to characterize the binding of the
              initiating ribonucleoside triphosphates, but later may prove useful in
              monitoring substrate binding in subsequent stages of transcription.  %%% 
              Biomolecular mechanistic studies of the enzyme that replicates the genome of a
              bacterial virus, T7 RNA polymerase, are proposed involving the association of a
              multisubunit enzymatic complex associating with polymeric DNA sequences.  These
              studies will reveal the molecular interactions involved in the early stages of
              the replication process of the viral genome.  Genetic and biochemical
              manipulation of the DNA sequences recognized by the enzyme will be studied by
              sophisticated methods to yield a detailed series of molecular snapshots of the
              components of the complex associating with particular sequences on DNA and
              producing polymeric RNA sequences.  These studies will contribute to a detailed
              understanding of how the process of RNA synthesis is achieved by this simple
              enzyme complex for application to the study of more complicated RNA
              polymerases.  ***
