Title       : Analysis of Avian Primordial Germ Cell Emergence In Vivo and In Vitro
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1999  
File        : a9630617

Award Number: 9630617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Petitte J_Petitte@NCSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  9630617  PI: J. N. Petitte    Primordial germ cells (PGCS) are cells
              that give rise to eggs or sperm and segregate from somatic lineages early in
              embryo development.  As such, germ cells are responsible for the continuation
              of a species and are the genetic link between generations.  Recent work on the
              origin of PGCs in the early avian embryo indicates that definitive germ cells
              begin to appear prior to gastrulation with the expression of immunological
              markers such as Stage-Specific Embryonic Antigen-1 (SSEA-1).  Similar
              immunological markers are also expressed by mammalian primordial germ cells. 
              In the chick embryo, SSEA-1 first detects PGCs at the time of oviposition prior
              to incubation (Stage X) and at later stages marks cells in the hypoblast (Stage
              Xill).  SSEA-1 also identifies germ cells after gastrulation during their
              period of migration and following settlement in the gonad.  Although the origin
              of the avian germ line has been studied for several decades, several questions
              remain concerning the time of germ cell restriction and the cellular and
              molecular mechanisms of avian PGCs emergence.  Therefore, the objectives of
              this study are to determined the developmental potential of SSEA-1 positive
              cells of the hypoblast in vivo and to analyze the function of candidate growth
              factors/cytokines involved in the emergence of avian PGCS.  The first goal will
              be assessed using the classical quail/chick embryo transplant model.  SSEA-1
              positive and negative quail hypoblast cells will be injected into the
              subgerminal cavity of stage X chicken embryos and the fate of the quail cells
              will be traced using a quail specific antibody.  The role of cyotkines/growth
              factors such as stem cell factor, leukemia inhibitory factor and fibroblast
              growth factor-2 will be analyzed using a culture system developed in our
              laboratory that allows the normal processes of germ cell development to occur
              in vitro.  Does-response effects of candidate peptide growth factors on
              emergence and proliferation will be  assessed.  As confirmation of growth
              factor responses , attempts will be made to inhibit the in vitro and in vivo
              emergence of PGCs using neutralizing antibodies, inhibitors, or anti-sense
              oligonucleotides to active growth factors or their receptors.  This study
              should provide significant insights towards our understanding of germ cell
              development in the avian embryo and vertebrate in general.
