Title       : The Structural Basis of RNA Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1998      
File        : a9630610

Award Number: 9630610
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve C. Schultz schultz@mmoc.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig Kundrot  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630610  Kundrot  Ribonucleic acid (RNA) molecules play a myriad of roles in the
              life cycles of cells and viruses that require RNA to adopt well-defined three
              dimensional structures.  The long term goal of this project is to understand
              how the structure of an RNA allows it to perform its biological function.  The
              immediate goal is to understand how the structures of two types of RNA
              molecules dictate their functional properties.  The first molecule is called a
              pseudoknot and it is closely related to pseudoknots that cause ribosomes to
              shift reading frames when making proteins from messenger RNA.  Professor
              Kundrot and his colleagues will determine the x-ray crystal structure of this
              pseudoknot.  The second type of RNA molecule studies in this proposal contains
              unusual, or non-canonical UU base-pairs within a duplex.  These types of
              base-pairs are very common in RNAs.  This work will explore the conformational
              flexibility of a dodecamer containing tandem non-canonical UU base-pairs by
              high resolution X-ray crystallography and will also conduct crystallographic
              studies of other non-canonical base pairs in the context of dodecamer
              sequences.  %%%  RNA is a molecule found in cells and viruses that carries
              genetic information and that catalyzes biochemical reactions.  The goal is to
              determine the three dimensional structure of RNAs from diverse systems and
              connect their functional properties to the underlying structure.  While
              thousands of high resolution, three dimensional protein structures are known,
              less than twenty RNA structures have been determined.  This work will examine
              the structure of two different types of RNA molecules.  The results will be
              helpful in understanding protein-RNA interactions, ribosomal frame-shifting,
              non-canonical base pairing and ribozyme catalysis.  It will provide insights
              into how two types of RNA molecules function in cells and viruses.  ***
