Title       : Analysis of a MAP kinase in Yeast that is Required for Spore Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9630656

Award Number: 9630656
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1996  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Winter winter@lac.jci.tju.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Thomas Jefferson Univ
	      1020 Locust Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19107    215/503-6976

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Winter  9630656  A large amount of signal transduction in eukaryotic cells
              depends on conserved kinase cascades that activate a family of enzymes called
              mitogen activated protein (MAP) kinases.  MAP kinases are required for adaptive
              responses to changes in the environment, proliferative responses to mitogens,
              and differentiative responses to signals that occur during development.  SMKI,
              encodes a developmentally regulated MAP kinase that is required for sporulation
              in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  Sporulation in yeast represents an excellent
              model system with which to study developmental processes.  Similar to
              differentiation programs in higher eukaryotic cells, induction is controlled by
              a combination of cell-type and environmental signals.  Once initiated, a
              precisely controlled, transient expression pattern is observed for
              sporulation-specific genes that ultimately leads to a cell (or spore) that is
              both genetically and biochemically distinct from its precursor.  Molecular and
              cytological analysis show that the early sporulation program (including meiosis
              I and II) occurs normally in homozygous smk1 diploids.  However, both
              microscopic and functional assays show that smk1 asci are defective for
              executing spore wall morphogenesis and subsequent developmental events.  A
              collection of conditional and partial-function smk1 alleles have already been
              isolated that display a variety of distinct developmental defects.  We will
              characterize the developmental and morphogenetic defects of different smk1
              alleles.  The biochemical defects of the corresponding mutant Smk1 pathway
              using dosage suppression approaches in selected smk1 genetic backgrounds.  The
              high degree of evolutionary conservation in MAP kinase signaling pathways make
              it likely that this study will provide fundamental insights into the role of
              these signaling pathways in coordinating developmental processes in a wide
              variety of organisms.
