Title       : Anthropological Field Research on the Giant Lemurs and Associated Fauna of
               Madagascar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a9630350

Award Number: 9630350
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288826             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elwyn L. Simons esimons@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Recent years have seen an explosion of interest among scientists attempting to
              understand the  long term effects of interaction between humans and plant and
              animal species which have only  recently become extinct in Madagascar.  This
              involves documenting environmental change there  through time.  Such change is
              also reflected by variations in primate community structure in  different times
              and places on that island.   As humans and the fauna and flora of this island
              increasingly come into conflict, scholarship  relating to the causes of
              extinction, the proper husbanding of biological resources, and insights  about
              the protection of endangered life forms have gained prominence.  Research on
              extinction  processes comes from analyzing the past.  Specifically, advances in
              knowledge of the  human-animal/plant interaction can come about by gathering
              new dates for times of occurence  of various animals in the past by finding new
              and more informative skeletal parts of these  vanished animals, especially
              giant lemurs.  This research elucidates their lifestyles and  potentially will
              provide better dated evidence of contemporaneity between humans and giant 
              lemurs.  These findings document human predation on the vanished lemurs.  Much
              light should  be shed on the timing and causes of giant lemur extinction. 
              Through this award, the team of  researchers expects to extend previous
              collections and produce new publications.  The timing of primate extinctions in
              Madagascar will be further documented by radiocarbon  dates for plant and
              animal fossils from particular sites.  A controversy exists as to the primary 
              cause for giant lemur extinction in Madagascar:  whether by disease,
              environmental change, or  human hands.  The project proposes to discover new
              dates that should establish the temporal  length of the wave of extinctions in
              Madagascar and better document environmental change.   The giant extinct lemurs
              of Madagascar include most of the kinds of really bizarre relatives of  humans
              ever to have existed on earth.  Better anatomical knowledge of these animals
              will  contribute significantly to understanding the extremes of potential
              adaptive range within our  own Order of mammals.   Many of these fossils are
              found in extremely remote parts of Madagascar in nearly inaccessible  caves
              causing the project to make heavy demands on field equipment and to make use of
              trained  caving experts.  The project is a continuation of a long time research
              cooperation between the  Cenozoic Research Group of the University of
              Antananarivo and the Duke University Primate  Center.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
