Title       : Chromosome Aberration Frequencies and Chromatin Geometry: Algorithms and
               Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9630735

Award Number: 9630735
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: THOMAS QUARLES                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237433             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn R. Hlatky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Engl Deaconess Hosp
	      185 Pilgrim Rd
	      Boston, MA  022155324    /   -

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The recent development of FISH (chromosome painting) technology has 
              revolutionized radiobiology. The interpretation of the large amount of  FISH
              data now being collected on chromosome aberrations can be greatly  facilitated
              by computer codes modeling the mechanisms involved.    Chromosome aberrations
              are molecular rearrangements following DNA  double strand breakage. They are
              relevant to cell death, DNA damage  repair, carcinogenesis, biological
              dosimetry and most other aspects of  radiobiology.  Significantly for this
              grant, aberration yields are  influenced by large-scale chromosome geometry
              during cell-cycle  interphase, and act as probes for the geometry. The geometry
              dependence  is in the form of "proximity" effects, i.e. effects caused by 
              chromosome localization within a cell nucleus and by spatial  limitations on
              DNA double strand break induction or interactions.    With the advent of
              (FISH), a rich spectrum of detail has become  available in the 90's on various
              kinds of aberrations, including quite  complicated ones. It is non-trivial to
              evaluate systematically the  implications of the yield pattern for chromatin
              geometry and for the  mechanics of double strand break reactions, because of
              multiple DNA  double strand break interactions, of the dependence of yields on 
              individual chromosome arm lengths, and of influence of radiation track 
              geometry.  In addition, different experiments often use different  painting
              schemes, making more difficult intercomparisons or comparisons  to older,
              non-FISH experiments.    However, Monte Carlo methods are well-suited for
              analyzing the  molecular reshufffling problems involved, and a code has been
              developed  by  members of our team and coworkers which gives  methods for 
              interpreting data, comparing experiments, and predicting; it uses only  one
              adjustable parameter (corresponding to the radiation dose), and  gives good
              results for some experimentally observed ratios, e.g. when  comparing
              chromosomes of different lengths for aberration yields.    Thi s algorithm does
              not incorporate the proximity effects discussed  above, although there is clear
              experimental evidence, involving the  ratio of ring aberrations to exchange
              aberrations or the ratio of  complex aberrations to simple aberrations, that
              such a generalization  is needed. Moreover, the code is applicable only to
              sparsely ionizing  radiation, not to densely ionizing radiation, whose known
              geometric  properties can lead to additional geometric information about the 
              biological target.  Consequently the code is not yet useful for  analyzing the
              relations between aberration yields and chromosome  geometry.  The object of
              the grant is to develop better algorithms,  which do incorporate geometric
              effects, and check them experimentally.    The simplest new algorithm will
              incorporate proximity effects by an  extension of the present code with just
              one extra adjustable parameter  (for a total of two). Further extensions of the
              algorithms will use  recently published data and quantitative models for
              large-scale  interphase chromosome structure and cell nucleus ultrastructure. 
              In  addition, up-to-date algorithms for simulating ionizing radiation  tracks
              will be developed and included, as will a number of technical  refinements.   
              The resulting algorithms will be tested by chromosome aberration  experiments
              which use different cell types and different FISH painting  schemes in a
              controlled comparison. The code will also be compared to  experiments using
              sparsely or densely ionizing radiation reported in  the literature from various
              laboratories, world wide. The algorithms  will be used to critically test and
              extend modern models, including  polymer models, for large-scale chromatin
              geometry during the Gl phase  of the cell cycle.  The work will be a joint
              effort by scientists with  primary training in radiobiology, mathematics,
              cytogenetics, or  radiation biophysics. Individual team members have extensive 
              interdisciplinary experience in programming for biology.  The  algorithms
              developed will  be important for the increasing number  of  scientists using
              FISH technology to study DNA damage processing,  to  probe chromosomal
              structure, or in applications.
