Title       : Biochemistry of Luminescence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1997      
File        : a9630861

Award Number: 9630861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Osamu Shimomura shimomur@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630861  Shimomura  Technical abstract  Bioluminescence occurs in a wide variety
              of organisms, involving diverse types of compounds and reaction mechanisms in
              the chemical process of light emission.  This research is  focused on the
              biochemical understanding of the bioluminescence of fungi, which has been
              challenged by several groups in the past 40 years without success.  The
              bioluminescence of fungi is unique and distinctly differs from all other
              bioluminescent systems presently known.  Their glow is continuous and nearly
              constant for days, and the light-emitting reaction is catalyzed by surfactants,
              not by conventional luciferases.    In the chemical study of bioluminescence,
              the identification and characterization of the key components involved are most
              important.  Thus, the central theme of this project is the structure
              determination of various fungal luciferins and their precursors.  The luciferin
              of the luminous mushroom Panellus stipticus was found to have a complicated
              structure consisting of three molecules of the precursor (ketoaldehydes PS- A
              and PS-B) and two molecules of methylamine; the molecule contains an unusual
              9-membered ring.  In order to determine the complete structure of the P.
              stipticus luciferin, a luciferin sample that contains C-13 atoms at the key
              positions of the molecule will be prepared, and the sample will be analyzed by
              a NMR technique newly developed at Dr. Kishi's lab at Harvard.    From the
              luminous fungus Mycena citricolor, more than 10 kinds of luciferin precursor
              were recently isolated in pure states;  their structures are now being
              elucidated.  These precursors readily form luciferins when reacted with
              decylamine; the structures of the M. citricolor luciferins thus obtained will
              be determined.  It seems apparent that the luciferin of all luminous fungi are
              derived from a precursor of aldehydic type, such as PS-A and PS-B, and a
              primary amine, and that all of them contain an identical light-emitting
              chromophore.  Such a chromophore will be identified from t he structures of
              more than two different types of  fungal  luciferins.    In the luminescence
              reaction of fungi, a luciferin is oxidized by molecular oxygen in the presence
              of superoxide anions and a cationic surfactant, in which the emitted photons
              play no apparent role, but by which the reaction can eliminate harmful
              superoxide anions in the tissue; the proposed study might uncover other
              important roles for the reaction.  The involvement of a surfactant that mimics
              a luciferase suggests that the study may contribute to the understanding of
              enzymatic action.  The high sensitivity of fungal luciferin to superoxide
              anions suggests its possible use as a superoxide probe.    Non-technical
              abstract  In the chemical study of bioluminescence, it is most important to
              identify and characterize the key substances involved in the light emitting
              reaction.  Luciferin is a type of substance that exits in luminous organisms
              and emits light when it is oxidized.  The central theme of this research is to
              find out the structures of various fungal luciferins and their precursors.  The
              luciferin of one type of luminous mushroom, named Panellus stipticus, was found
              to be a complicated compound that includes and unusual ring of 9 carbon atoms. 
              The PI plans to determine the complete structure of this luciferin by preparing
              a luciferin sample that contains a heavier-than-average carbon atom (13C) at
              the key positions of the molecule, and then analyzing this sample  by a process
              known as nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy.  The luminous Costa
              Rican tobacco fungus (Mycena citricolor) contains more that 10 kinds of
              luciferin precursor which have been recently isolated  and purified; we are now
              trying to determine their chemical structures.  These precursor molecules are
              readily converted to luciferins when treated  with a substance called
              decylamine; we plan to investigate the chemical structures  of these
              luciferins.  Now it seems apparent that the luciferins of all luminous fungi
              are derived from similar mat erials, and that all of them contain an identical
              light-emitting structure called a chromophore.  We plan to identify such a
              chromophore based on the chemical structures of more than two different types
              of fungal luciferins    In luminous fungi, light is emitted when a luciferin is
              oxidized by molecular oxygen, in the presence of certain negative ions (called
              superoxide anions) and a detergent; in this reaction, the emitted photons play
              no  apparent role, but the reaction can eliminate the superoxide anions, which
              are harmful, from the tissue.  The involvement of the detergent that mimics an
              enzyme suggests that the study described here may also contribute to the
              understanding of enzymatic action.  The high sensitivity of fungal luciferin to
              superoxide anions also suggests the possibility of using this material as a
              means of  detecting the presence of harmful superoxide anions in biological
              systems.
