Title       : Biogeochemical Cycling of Redox-Sensitive Metals During Surface-Subsurface Water
               Exchange in a Shallow Alluvial Aquifer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1997 
File        : a9630285

Award Number: 9630285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura J. Crossey lcrossey@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              H. Maurice Valett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1584      ENVIRO GEOCHEM AND BIOGEOCHEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1043,1584,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9630285  Crossey   Understanding the linkage between dissolved  redox-sensitive
              species and solid reactive phases in an aquifer matrix is crucial to the
              prediction of nutrient pathways, biogeochemical cycling of carbon, and
              contaminant transport in ground water systems.   In many alluvial aquifers
              redox-sensitive metals play an important role in terminal electron-accepting
              processes.  Because these metals are critical to aquifer energetics and
              biogeochemistry, this research focuses on the temporal and spatial controls and
              redox-sensitive metal mobility in a shallow alluvial aquifer influenced by
              surface-subsurface water exchange.   The study comprises two Research Elements.
               Research Element I will examine temporal/seasonal controls on redox-sensitive
              metal mobility.  Through systematic surface-subsurface water and sediment
              sampling and analysis; aquifer characteristics, aqueous geochemistry, and
              biological functioning will be identified at Rio Calaveras (a
              heavily-instrumented, unperturbed site in the Jemez Mountains of New Mexico). 
              The shallow alluvial fill will be characterized with respect to fine-scale
              aquifer structure (stratigraphic elements), sediment geochemistry (e.g.,
              extractable metals, organic matter content, and extractable carbon), and
              aqueous biogeochemistry (dissolved gases, organic and inorganic solutes). 
              Bi-monthly sampling of an extensive well network will permit measurement of
              dynamic geochemically, and biologically to seasonal and precipitation event
              perturbations.  Observation  of several complete cycles are assured over the
              time period of  the study.  Multi-level water sampling instrumentation will
              allow the high vertical resolution necessary to quantify links among sediment
              characteristics (bioavailable carbon and metals), aqueous geochemistry, and
              microbial functioning.     Research Element 2 focuses on spatial heterogeneity
              within the alluvial aquifer, and poses a series of hypotheses and tests to
              assess the control on metal mobility exerted by (a) position along gro undwater
              flow paths, (b) chelation by dissolved organic carbon species, and (c)
              microbially-mediated iron reduction reactions.  Hydrologic controls will be
              assessed through sampling geochemical parameters along flow paths (defined by
              an existing site-specific hydrologic model) and through application of
              geochemical models (for aqueous speciation and reaction path modeling). 
              Controlled laboratory experiments will be conducted using sediment incubations
              to distinguish abiotic (chelation) and biotic (microbial reduction) mechanisms
              of iron mobilization.  Aquifer heterogeneity will be a primary organizing
              factor in the experimental design.   This proposal  was submitted in response
              to the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry solicitation, and the
              project is being jointly supported by the Divisions of Earth Sciences  and
              Divisions of Ocean Sciences (Geosciences).
