Title       : Structure and Relaxation Processes in Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1998     
File        : a9630061

Award Number: 9630061
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Boyd boyd@poly2.mse.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9630061  Boyd  The general goal of this research is to develop a better 
              understanding of relaxation processes, especially at the  molecular level.  Two
              approaches are to be used.  One takes  advantage of the impressive ability
              developed recently for  carrying out molecular level computer simulations of
              the  structure and dynamic processes in bulk, dense-packed  polymers.  The
              other approach is experimental and employs  the dielectric relaxation technique
              to locate and  characterize relaxation processes.  Part of the simulation 
              effort will be directed toward developing a better molecular  understanding of
              the melt to glass transition process.  Our  recent research showed that as the
              glass forms the dynamic  processes become spatially heterogeneous.  Molecular 
              dynamics (MD) simulations are to be used to characterize the  local structure
              and relate it to the chain dynamics.  This  will be done both in polymers that
              possess subglass  relaxations and those that do not.  In a more practical 
              vein, the simulations will be used to develop structure-  property
              understanding of the connection between the glass  transition temperature and
              chemical structure.  In fact the  use of MD simulations to predict Tg values
              from the polymer  chemical structural formula will be pursued.  Dielectric 
              measurements will be used to generate better data for  comparison with the MD
              results.  Liquid crystalline polymers  (LCPs) are an intermediate case between
              the broad classes of  amorphous and crystalline polymers.  MD simulations are
              to  be applied to main-chain thermotropic LCPs in order to  better understand
              the relaxation processes that occur in  them.  Another class of LCP concerns
              the case where the  mesogenic unit is incorporated in a side-chain.  Dielectric
               studies are to be carried out to characterize the  relaxations in side chain
              mesogenic LCPs.  %%%  Polymeric materials form one of the cornerstones of
              modern  technology.  Amorphous polymers, both as glasses and as  elastomers,
              comprise an important compone nt of these  materials.  Their behavior as
              materials, including  differentiating between their glassy or elastomeric 
              behavior, is largely determined by the presence and  associated time
              temperature location of relaxation  processes.  In turn, relaxation processes
              have their source  in molecular motions of various types.  ***
