Title       : Sperm Entry; Excitation and Activation of the Egg
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a9630380

Award Number: 9630380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299981             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Landowne   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward L. Chambers  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch of Med
	      Research Administration, RMSB
	      Miami, FL  33136    305/243-6232

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                95-30380  Chambers    The aim of the research is to identify the primary
              signals that lead to the sperm-induced excitation and activation of the egg.
              The nature of these signals is not understood.    The specific ion fluxes
              responsible for generation of the sperm-induced phase 1 and phase 2 membrane
              currents in the voltage clamped egg will be investigated. The phase 1 current
              (~12 see) of abrupt onset, coincides with excitation of the egg, when no
              morphological changes can be detected. The phase 2 current (~18 see) coincides
              with activation, when exocytosis occurs.    Whether a surface
              sperm-ligand-egg-receptor interaction has a role in initiating excitation of
              the egg will be investigated. This will be done by applying a suspension of
              bindin (soluble phase in equilibrium with the insoluble), or other sperm
              components, will be applied by micropipette to the surface of the homologous
              unfertilized eggs clamped at different membrane potentials. The ability of the
              applied bindin to initiate changes in membrane conductance similar to that
              induced by a sperm during the phase of excitation will be determined.   
              Experiments will be conducted to determine when, and if, cytoplasmic coupling,
              analogous to gap junctions, between sperm and egg occurs relative to (a) the
              sperm-induced inward current Ion, and (b) the actual fusion event of sperm and
              egg plasma membranes. Evidence for the existence of gap junction type pores
              will be the passage of Lucifer Yellow from egg to sperm prior to the detection
              by electron microscopy of cytoplasmic bridge formation between the gametes at
              the site of their apposition.    While an increase of cytosolic  Ca2+ i is
              generally associated with activation, data obtained in the P.I.'s laboratory
              indicated that when this increase occurs prematurely at the site of sperm-egg
              interaction, activation, but not excitation, can be abrogated due to reversal
              of the sperm-egg fusion event. The "target" for this effect of an increase of 
              Ca2  i is likely the mechanism responsible for dra wing the sperm into the egg.
              The possibility that this mechanism is an actin based myosin I motor will be
              investigated.    The gametes of sea urchins will be used. The methods comprise
              a combination of membrane potential measurements, voltage clamp analysis,
              quantitative fluorescence imaging, microinjection, and electron microscopy.
