Title       : Altered Apoptotic Responses in Chemically-Resistant Mammalian Cell Variants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1996    
File        : a9630362

Award Number: 9630362
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300021             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Wyche James_Wyche@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric A. Hendrickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              96-30362  Wyche      Programmed cell death is a normal part of animal
              development, is actively controlled by specific gene products, and is an event
              that occurs in various cells in the embryo and in adults. Programmed cell
              death, or apoptosis, can be induced in various cultured cell types by chemical
              and by physical treatment. Yet little is known about the molecular mechanism of
              apoptosis. This is partly caused by the fact that the positive and negative
              regulators of apoptosis are as yet unknown and partly to the lack of suitable
              mutants in the apoptotic signaling pathway. The objectives of this proposal
              are: a) isolation of chemically-resistant apoptosis cell variants from a human
              cell line (HL-60) and classification of the variants into complementation
              groups; b) identification of sequential cellular changes, structurally and
              biochemically, that are specifically associated with early progression of
              chemically-induced cell apoptosis; d) characterization of specific events
              leading to the activation of proteases as well as alterations in protein and
              DNA target sites in apoptotic cells and their variants. These studies should
              lead to the construction of the apoptotic signaling pathway and to insights
              into the relationship between apoptosis regulatory gene products and to
              specific events in the apoptotic signaling pathway.  %%%  Programmed cell death
              is a normal part of animal development, is actively controlled by specific gene
              products, and is an event that occurs in various cells in the embryo and in
              adults. Programmed cell death, or apoptosis, can be induced in various cultured
              cell types by chemical and by physical treatment. Yet little is known about the
              molecular mechanism of apoptosis.  ***
