Title       : Molecular and Genetic Analysis of the Indeterminate Gene of Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1996      
File        : a9630622

Award Number: 9630622
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Colasanti   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630622  Colasanti   The id1 gene from maize has been partially cloned by
              transposon tagging and both the gene and the encoded protein product will be
              further characterized during this study. The gene is of interest because it has
              been genetically shown to be of critical importance in the switch of the corn
              plant  from vegetative to reproductive growth. cDNA clones from different times
              of development will be isolated. The clones will be used to determine the RNA
              expression patterns of this gene with the goal of defining the timing and
              domain of action of the Id1 gene message. Antibodies to the Id1 protein will be
              produced and used to follow the expression pattern of the encoded protein
              during plant development and those patterns will be correlated with the mRNA
              patterns. Chimeric plants with sectors of normal and mutant tissue will be
              generated and examined to ascertain if the mutant phenotype can be corrected by
              adjacent normal tissue; i.e., whether Id1 regulates the synthesis of a
              diffusible product that is required for the transition to reproductive growth. 
              %%%  One of the most important events in the life cycle of higher plants is the
              transition from vegetative to reproductive growth. Although there is an
              abundance of information spanning decades that describes the physiological
              basis of the transition to flowering, very little is known about how this
              process is controlled at the molecular level. Further advancement in
              understanding this developmental mechanism will be achieved through the
              molecular and genetic characterization of genes that specifically mediate this
              transition.  ***
