Title       : Molecular-Genetic Study of Aspartate Aminotransferase Genes/Isoenzymes in
               Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9630604

Award Number: 9630604
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gloria M. Coruzzi gloria.coruzzi@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630604  Coruzzi     A combined molecular-genetic and biochemical approach is
              being used to study the function of distinct isoenzymes of aspartate
              aminotransferase (AspAT) in the model genetic plant Arabidopsis thaliana.  A
              major goal is to identify the in vivo role played by individual AspAT
              isoenzymes localized in the cytosol, chloroplast, mitochondria or peroxisome. 
              Arabidopsis mutants deficient in either of the two major AspAT isoenzymes
              (cytosolic AAT2 or chloroplastic AAT3) have been isolated and partially
              characterized. Additional Arabidopsis mutants defective in the other "minor"
              AspAT isoenzymes, (mitochondrial AATl and peroxisomal AAT) will be created
              using a dominant-negative approach. Arabidopsis mutants defective in each AAT
              isoenzyme will be subject to physiological and metabolic analysis to define the
              in vivo role of the "missing" isoenzyme. In addition to these genetic studies,
              the cloned genes encoding each AspAT isoenzyme are also under investigation.
              RFLP mapping has been used to determine which ASP cloned genes co-segregate
              with an isoenzyme mutation.  Preliminary results demonstrate that the mutants
              are deficient in cytosolic AAT2 are affected in the ASP2 gene for cytosolic
              AAT2.  The phenotypic analysis of the aat2 mutant suggests that ASP2 encodes a
              key isoenzyme controlling the assimilation of nitrogen into aspartate used for
              intercellular nitrogen transport.  Gene expression studies have also shown that
              ASP2 plays a key regulatory role as its expression is regulated by light and/or
              metabolic control. The specific aims of this project are to:  1) Demonstrate by
              in vitro organelle uptake that ASPl and ASP3 encode mitochondrial and
              peroxisomal forms of AspAT.  2) Determine the cell-specific expression pattern
              of each ASP gene by in situ hybridization and/or by using promoter-GUS fusions.
               3) Elucidate the mechanism of metabolic regulation for ASP2.  4) Map all the
              ASP genes.  5) Determine whether the aat3 mutation deficient in chloroplast
              AAT3 is in an ASP structural or re gulatory gene.  6) Define the molecular
              lesion in each aat2 and aat3 mutant.  7) Isolate deletion alleles of aat2, aat3
              and/or regulatory mutants.  8) Create mutants in mitochondrial AATl or
              peroxisomal AAT using anti-sense or dominant-negative transgenic technology. 9)
              Perform a detailed characterization of the aat mutants including genetic,
              physiological and biochemical tests. 10) Create transgenic plants which
              ectopically express specific ASP genes defined to be key by mutant analysis. 
              %%%  This project is a molecular genetic analysis that focuses on an important
              family of related enzymes, aspartate aminotransferase, (AspAT) involved in
              nitrogen metabolism in higher plants.  AspAT functions to 1) convert
              assimilated nitrogen into aspartate for intercellular nitrogen transport to
              developing organs (e.g. seed), 2) act as the catalyst in innumerable
              transamination reactions to donate nitrogen for the synthesis of nitrogen
              containing compounds, 3) maintain a balance between organic nitrogen and
              carbon, 4) shuttle reducing equivalents between subcellular compartments. These
              molecular-genetic studies in Arabidopsis will help define which particular
              AspAT isoenzyme is involved in each of the above processes.  Moreover, the
              engineering of the ASP genes in transgenic plants has potential for improving
              nitrogen-use in transgenic crop plants. Finally, these studies will also serve
              as a model for ways in which to dissect steps in other complex multi-isoenzyme
              pathways in plants.  ***
