Title       : Functional and Molecular Regulation of Actomyosin by Microtubules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1998        
File        : a9630860

Award Number: 9630860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278920             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Bement wmbement@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630860  Bement     Directed cortical movement is a fundamental feature of a
              broad variety of biological phenomena, including cytokinesis, cell migration,
              and movement of developmental information in early embryos.  Cortical flow is
              one of the most common mechanisms by which directed cortical movement is
              achieved.  Cortical flow is manifest as movement of actin filaments, cell
              surface proteins and, in some cases, cortical organelles toward a particular
              site.  It is well known that cortical flow is actin filament-dependent, but
              what regulates the magnitude and direction of the flow is unknown. 
              Microtubules have been hypothesized to somehow regulate cortical flow, but
              uhether they stimulate or inhibit flow is contentious, largely because of
              technical difficulties entailed by study of cortical flow in most systems.  The
              oocyte of the frog, Xenopus laevis, has been developed as a model for cortical
              flow.  Xenopus oocytes treated with the phorbol ester, PMA, undergo rapid,
              synchronous cortical flow which is easily quantified.  This cortical flow
              exhibits all of the hallmarks typical of cortical flow in other systems,
              including dependence on actomyosin, directed movement of cortical organelles
              and filamentous actin, and a requirement for free movement of cell surface
              proteins.  The features of this system have permitted the parallel analysis of
              cortical flow and microtubule levels following treatments that promote
              polymerization or depolymerization of microtubules.  Rates of cortical flow are
              inversely correlated with levels of microtubules, and this effect is mediated
              by the microtubules themselves rather than by microtubule dynamics or free
              tubulin.  Microtubule levels are inversely correlated with levels of myosin-II
              filaments, the functional form of myosin II.  Preliminary results have narrowed
              the possible mechanisms by which microtubules exert their inhibitory effect on
              cortical flow to three:  1, a transport-based mechanism, wherein microtubule
              motors transport factors that modulate myosin-II  biochemistry to or from the
              cortex; 2, a competition-based mechanism wherein microtubules compete with
              actomyosin for binding sites in the cortex; or 3, a microtubule-associated
              protein (MAP)-based mechanism, wherein microtubules bind to and sequester a
              factor that promotes cortical flow and myosin-II filament formation.  A
              combined microscopic, biochemical, and molecular approach will be used to
              distinguish between these three hypotheses.  These will rely heavily both on
              the attributes of the intact Xenopus oocyte and the approaches possible using
              oocyte lysates .  This model system permits analyses that are essentially
              impossible in most other models of cortical flow that are currently studied. 
              The work will provide insights applicable to a number of distinct cellular and
              developmental phenomena, including cytokinesis, cell locomotion, and transport
              of developmental information during embryogenesis.  ***
