Title       : Biosynthesis of Methanopterin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1998       
File        : a9630186

Award Number: 9630186
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. White rhwhite@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630186  White  At some time during the evolution of the different organisms
              living on our planet, a fundamental divergence occurred in the biochemistry of
              the carrier coenzymes responsible for the metabolism of C1 units. There are a
              group of different C1 carrier coenzymes, known as the modified folates, that
              have been discovered in the members of the domain Archaea.  The current
              evidence indicates that these modified folates completely replace the typical
              folates in archaeal metabolism and, as a result, they are able to carry out all
              of the biochemical reactions normally performed by the folates in the other two
              domains, the Bacteria, and the Eucarya.  This substitution of
              structurally-modified coenzymes for another coenzyme with the same function is
              unprecedented, since the structures of coenzymes utilized in biochemical
              reactions have in general been found to be the same regardless of their origin.
               This project will attempt to obtain answers as to why this divergence in the
              structures of the C1 carrier coenzymes has occurred. By studying and comparing
              the details of the reactions involved in the biosynthesis of folates, and
              especially the biosynthesis of one of the most studied modified folates in the
              Archaea, methanopterin, this question may be answered.  %%%  All of the
              organisms found on our planet are can be divided into three domains: Archaea,
              Bacteria, and Eucarya,  all of which evolved from a common ancestor, billions
              of years ago.  As the organisms in these different domains evolved, major
              fundamental biochemical differences in their metabolism arose.  The recent
              discovery of one of these biochemical differences, novel enzyme cofactors in
              Archae, is the subject of this project. This research that may provide us with
              a better understanding of the origin of these differences and the early
              development of life.  ***
