Title       : Molecular Regulation of Pronephric Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1999   
File        : a9630621

Award Number: 9630621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter D. Vize pvize@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630621            Vize    This proposal aims to investigate the genetic
              interactions required for pronephric specification and patterning. Xenopus
              orthologs of a number of genes previously demonstrated to play essential, but
              poorly defined, roles in development of the mammalian adult kidney have been
              isolated. These genes include frog orthologs of the Wilms' tumor suppressor
              gene WT1, pax2, wnt4, c-met, HGF, N-myc and lim~1.  A novel Xenopus pax gene
              which is expressed at high levels very early in kidney development has also
              been identified.    Vertebrates form at least two different forms of kidney
              during their life span, normally an embryonic kidney of low or moderate
              complexity, and an adult kidney of much greater complexity. Once the more
              complex kidney is functional, the embryonic kidney either degenerates or
              becomes integrated into the reproductive system. The pronephros is a simple
              embryonic kidney used by the embryos and larvae of the lower vertebrates to
              excrete wastes and control water balance. The structure of one entire
              pronephros resembles a much larger version of a single nephron from an adult
              kidney. A pair of these large nephrons sustain the embryo until the adult
              kidney is functional, which in amphibians is around the time of metamorphosis.
              In comparison, the human adult kidney requires around one million nephrons to
              perform all of its required functions.    The pronephros has a number of
              advantages as an experimental model for studying organogenesis of the kidney.
              The simple organization and large size of the organ make it easy to visualize,
              and as it undergoes a stereotypical pattern of morphogenesis, subtle changes in
              its development are easy to detect. Molecular markers are available for each of
              the different components of the pronephros. The pronephros is fully formed in
              under three days in a Xenopusembryo, so the effects of experimental
              interventions can be rapidly analyzed. This early development also means that
              this organ is induced and patterned in the period of develo pment that is
              easily manipulated in Xenopus by either microdissection or microinjection.   
              In this proposal the mechanism by which ectopic Xenopus WT1 disrupts kidney
              development will be determined by analyzing the effect of this gene product on
              cell proliferation, apoptosis, and the expression of other pronephric genes.
              The second part of the proposal will examine the role of each of the genes
              listed above in pronephric development. All of these experiments will be
              performed by microinjecting either in vitro synthesized mRNA encoding the gene
              product, or expression plasmids into early blastulae, that will then be allowed
              to develop to tadpole stages. The effects of aberrant gene expression will be
              analyzed by examining the effect on the expression of other pronephric genes,
              and by studying the structure of the differentiated pronephros with
              immunohistochemistry and confocal microscopy.    These experiments will use a
              simple model system to determine how these genes interact to pattern and form a
              nephron. The results will have direct relevance not only to organogenesis of
              other types of kidney, but also to kidney disease, as a number of these genes
              are involved in the development of Wilms' tumor, a pediatric tumor of the
              urogenital system.
