Title       : Structural Basis for Electron Transfer Between the Bacterial Reaction Center and
               Cytochrome c2 in Rhodobacter Sphaeroides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1998       
File        : a9630215

Award Number: 9630215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melvin Y. Okamura mokamura@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630215  Okamura  The aim of this project is to study the molecular basis for 
              the binding and electron transfer reactions between  cytochrome c2   and the
              bacterial reaction center (RC) from  the photosynthetic bacterium Rhodobacter
              sphaeroides.  Site  directed mutagenesis will be used to modify residues on
              both  the RC and cytochrome in the interfacial region.  The types  of mutations
              to be constructed are: 1) Charge reversals:  carboxyl groups on the RC will be
              changed to Lys and Lys on  the cytochrome will be changed to carboxyls.  The
              binding of  Rcs and cytochromes with compensating mutations at  interacting 
              site should show improvement in the binding. 2)  Formation of hydrophobic
              binding domains: polar residues on  both proteins in the binding domain will be
              converted to  hydrophobic residues to increase stability of the complex.  3)
              Site directed crosslinking: Cys residues will be  introduced at putative
              interacting sites on both RC and  cytochrome and used to crosslink the two
              proteins into a  stable configuration.  The binding constants and electron 
              transfer rates of the complexes formed by mutated proteins  will be measured
              and correlated with the structural changes  in order to deduce the structure of
              the RC-cytochrome  complex.  Mutations will be made to improve the binding of 
              the cytochrome to the RC to facilitate structural studies of  the RC-cytochrome
              complex by x-ray diffraction.  %%%  Electron transfer reactions in biological
              membranes are  essential to provide energy necessary for life processes.  The
              reaction between cytochrome c2 and the RC in  photosynthetic bacteria displays
              both the specificity in  binding and high rate of interprotein electron
              transfer  within the bimolecular complex necessary to maintain a fast  electron
              transfer through the electron transfer chain.  These studies of the binding and
              electron transfer reactions  of between cytochrome c2 and the bacterial RC are
              aimed at  determining fundamental principles of protein association  and
              electron transfer  in biology that should provide the  basis for understanding
              energy conversion processes in other  important biological systems.  ***
