Title       : Substructure and Communication in Myosin and Actin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1998     
File        : a9630997

Award Number: 9630997
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369789             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emil Reisler reisler@mbi.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630997  Reisler  The contraction of skeletal, smooth, and cardiac muscles is
              fueled by the hydrolysis of ATP which is coupled to cyclic interactions between
              the two main muscle proteins, myosin and actin. These proteins, along with
              other motor proteins, are involved also in diverse functions of non-muscle
              cells including their locomotion, division, organelle transport, etc. According
              to prevalent views, motion and force are generated by myosin and actin as a
              result of cyclic changes in their interaction and structures during the
              different steps of ATP hydrolysis by myosin. A major goal of our research is to
              clarify the molecular basis of these events. To achieve this goal we will map
              those sites on actin which bind myosin in the presence of ATP and will analyze
              their role in specific steps of ATP hydrolysis and force and motion generation.
              The experimental materials that will be used in the mapping of the dynamic
              changes in myosin binding to actin during ATP hydrolysis include engineered
              actin mutants and chemically modified actins. These materials will be used in
              the in vitro measurements of actin filament motion and the force generated with
              myosin and ATP, and in biochemical, biophysical, and kinetic assays of
              actomyosin interactions.  In another part of this program, the role of actin
              filament structure in actomyosin-based cellular functions will be clarified.
              The specific aim of this project is to determine the relationship between the
              functional interactions of actin with myosin and the dynamic changes in the
              organization of actin filaments. Proteolytically cleaved actin, chemically
              crosslinked actin, and actin mutants will be studied in this project by
              functional and structural analysis methods, by assays of actomyosin
              interactions, and by spectroscopic methods.  The results of the proposed work
              will provide a structural description of the evolution of actomyosin
              interactions during force and motion generation by these proteins. This
              information will lead to the understanding of the basic  molecular mechanisms
              by which chemical energy is converted into mechanical events in biological
              systems.  On a broader scope, such an understanding will be instrumental in the
              design of biomimetic devices that will generate force or motion.  %%%  Muscle
              contraction involves the interaction between actin and myosin in a process that
              is dependent upon energy in the form of ATP hydrolysis.  This project will
              investigate actin-myosin interactions and the mechanism by which these
              interactions contribute to the generation of force and motion in muscle as well
              as non-muscle cells.  A variety of methods will be used including in vitro
              motility assays, force measurements, fluorescence spectroscopy, and biochemical
              characterization of the actomyosin interactions.  These studies will improve
              the understanding of muscle contraction and the transduction of chemical energy
              into work in biological systems.  ***            .. .                          
                                                                          __,
