Title       : Processes Controlling the Export of Trace Metals from Contrasting Watersheds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9630277

Award Number: 9630277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Armstrong armstrong@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Hurley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin M. Shafer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1584      ENVIRO GEOCHEM AND BIOGEOCHEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1043,1584,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9630277  Armstrong    Watersheds have a major influence on water quality. 
              Concern over the impacts of metals on receiving waters emphasizes the need for
              information on the factors controlling the forms and amounts of metals exported
              from watersheds and the influences of extreme hydrologic events and changes in
              land use. Our premise is that the forms, concentrations, and loadings of metals
              in streams can be used to discern the watershed processes controlling metal
              export. We also postulate that the nature and amounts of dissolved organic
              carbon (DOC) and suspended particulate matter (SPM) transported from watersheds
              are the main geochemical factors controlling metal export.     Our goal is to
              identify and quantify key geochemical and hydrologic processes controlling the
              forms and amounts of trace metals exported from watersheds representing diverse
              geology, hydrology, soil type, and land use/cover. Specific objectives are to
              determine (1) The importance of hydrologic events in controlling metal export
              from watersheds of contrasting geology and land use; (2) Factors controlling
              within-watershed differences between base flow and event periods in metal
              levels, partition, and yields; (3) Relationships controlling metal speciation
              in dissolved and particulate phases and (4) Factors and processes controlling
              delivery of key metal transport phases from watersheds.    A matrix of six
              relatively homogenous watersheds will be compared. (iradients in stream DOC,
              SPM, and ionic strength will be represented. Export will be determined by
              concurrent measurements of discharge and metal concentrations. "Ultra clean"
              sampling and analysis methods will be employed to quantify metals. Speciation
              will include particulate, colloidal, and "labile" fractions, and free and
              DOC-associated "dissolved" forms. We will model geochemical processes
              regulating dissolved metal concentrations and loadings. Speciation techniques
              include ultrafiltration, selective resin partitioning,
              electrochemical/voltammetric measurements, solid -phase partitioning
              experiments, chemical extractions, and oxidation state measurements. The
              properties of a suite of metals (Ag, Al, As, Be, Cd, Cr, Co, Cu, Hg, Mo, Ni,
              Pb, Sb, Tl, U, V, Zn) will be used to probe the watershed characteristics and
              geochemical processes controlling metal export. We expect to provide a basis
              for assessment and prediction of both metal export. Speciation will be
              quantified and modeled as a function of geochemical factors. Predictive
              capability for metal export will be based on watershed characteristics and
              discharge-geochemistry relationships.    This proposal was submitted to the
              Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry solicitation, and the project is
              being jointly supported by the Divisions of Earth Sciences (Geosciences) and
              Chemical and Transport  Systems (Engineering).
