Title       : Peptide and Monoamine Modulation of Olivo-Cerbellar Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9630867

Award Number: 9630867
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonya K. Sobrian                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255615             (Estimated)
Investigator: Georgia A. Bishop   (Principal Investigator current)
              James S. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630867  Bishop    The cerebellum is a part of the brain that controls and 
              coordinates  movement.  Along with the cerebellum, there are several  brainstem
              centers  which receive information regarding the status of a  movement.   The 
              information is initially processed in these centers and then  relayed to the 
              cerebellum where it is used in circuitry that ultimately  fine tunes motor 
              control.  One of these brainstem centers that provides  information to the 
              cerebellum is a nuclear group called the inferior olivary  complex.  Any 
              changes in the message sent out by the olivary complex will  have a direct 
              impact on cerebellar circuits which control movement.  The  intent of this 
              study is to use anatomical and physiological techniques to  better understand 
              how two distinct classes of neuroactive chemicals, namely  neuropeptides and 
              monoamines, modulate the activity of neurons in the inferior  olive.  The 
              anatomical studies will define the distribution of the  peptide calcitonin 
              gene related peptide, and the monoamine serotonin, both of  which are known to 
              be present and active in cerebellar circuits.  In addition,  we will use 
              techniques to determine the brainstem source of these two  neuroactive 
              chemicals. The physiological studies are designed to  determine how this 
              neuropeptide and monoamine change the responsiveness of  neurons in the 
              olivary complex.  In addition, we will analyze how these two  distinct classes 
              of neuroactive chemicals interact with each other  to modify  the way in which 
              olivary neurons respond to inputs derived from other regions  of the brain and 
              spinal cord.  An understanding of how olivary output is  modulated by 
              chemically defined inputs is critical for our understanding  of how the 
              olivocerebellar system functions in coordinating motor  activity.
