Title       : Genetic Regulation of Developmental Fate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1998       
File        : a9630179

Award Number: 9630179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $487091             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin E. Denell rdenell@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan J. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Beeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630179  Denell  Studies of Drosophila melanogaster have shown that embryonic
              developmental commitments along most of the anterior-posterior axis are
              controlled by homeotic genes in two clusters: the Antennapedia complex (ANTC)
              and bithorax complex. The homeotic genes encode transcription factors and share
              a motif, the homeobox which encodes homeodomains important to the
              sequence-specific DNA binding activity of their proteins. Early studies of the
              homeotic genes of the red flour beetle, Tribolium castaneum, showed that it has
              a single homeotic complex (Hox)representing the fly clusters in juxtaposition.
              Comparative molecular studies suggest that such a single Hox complex arose very
              early in animal evolution, and that the genes in such complexes play important
              roles in regulating developmental commitments throughout the kingdom. This
              study is focused on the ANTC-like portion of the Tribolium homeotic complex.
              Differences in mutant phenotypes between Antennapedia orthologs of Drosophila
              and Tribolium suggest that the regulation of thoracic developmental decisions
              is altered as well as those regulating commitments in the larval head. A
              deficiency spanning the region covering the labial, deformed and sex combs
              reduced ortholog will serve as the basis for extensive mutagenesis in this
              region. The molecular organization and sequence of those orthologs will be
              determined as will the molecular nature of a group of interesting
              gain-of-function mutations of the proboscipedia ortholog. The cloned regions
              will also be used as the basis for a walk across this portion of the complex
              and the generation of a physical map. A critical assessment of whether the
              Tribolium complex includes an ortholog of the Drosophila maternal effect gene
              bicoid will also be possible.  %%%  In general, insects share a common body
              plan but its components have evolved incredible morphological diversity. 
              Drosophila melanogaster is a experimental organism about which much is known on
              the moleculap and genetic level. The development o f Tribolium as a second
              insect genetic system has been a major effort but because beetles and flies
              share a common body plan but are diverged from each other to a degree that
              allows reasonable morphological and molecular comparisons, the results of this
              study will significantly add to our understanding of how evolution occurs at
              the molecular level.  ***
