Title       : Role of a Novel EGF-Related Growth Factor in Mouse Gastrulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1998     
File        : a9630903

Award Number: 9630903
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael M. Shen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robert Wood Johnson Med
	      675 Hoes Lane
	      Piscataway, NJ  088545635    732/463-4687

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630903  Shen      To understand the molecular mechanisms that regulate
              embryonic pattern formation and differentiation, it is necessary to identify
              candidate growth factors that may be involved in these processes, and to
              characterize their functional properties.  Previous studies of mouse
              embryogenesis in this laboratory have used a differential display screening
              approach to identify mesoderm-specific genes expressed during the
              differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells in culture.  This strategy has
              resulted in the isolation of a novel gene named Cryptic, which encodes a
              potentially secreted molecule containing a single copy of an epidermal growth
              factor-like (EGF) motif.  Analysis of Cryptic expression indicates that it is
              expressed during gastrulation in two distinct spatial domains, which correspond
              to the axial mesoderm and to the lateral plate mesoderm.  Thus, the novel gene
              Cryptic encodes a potential signaling molecule that has an expression pattern
              consistent with a role in mesoderm patterning and differentiation.  Notably,
              Cryptic appears to be a member of a new family of EGF-related growth factors. 
              The Cryptic gene was originally named on the basis of its significant sequence
              similarities with the Cripto gene, which is also expressed during mesoderm
              formation and has growth stimulating activities in cell culture.  The Cryptic
              gene is also related to a recently described Xenopus gene named FRL-1, which
              has mesoderm - and neural-inducing activities in embryonic assays, and can
              activate fibroblast growth factor IFGF) receptors.  Based on (1) the sequence
              similarities between Cryptic, Cripto, and FRL-1, (2) the growth factor activity
              of Cripto, (3) the mesoderm and neural-inducing activities of FRL-1, (4) the
              activation of FGF receptors by FRL-1, and (5) the spatially and temporally
              restricted pattern of Cryptic expression, it is likely that Cryptic encodes a
              potential signaling molecule that may be involved in cellular interactions
              during embryonic pattern formation and cell fate det ermination.  To address
              this hypothesis, the proposed research will investigate the biological and
              biochemical properties of Cryptic, organized around three specific aims: (1) 
              Characterization of Cryptic mRNA and protein expression patterns, (2) 
              Investigation of the biochemical properties and function of CRYPTIC protein and
              its receptor, and (3) Analysis of biological requirements for Cryptic during
              mouse development.  Taken together, these studies will synergize to provide a
              greater understanding of the biological and biochemical functions of this novel
              growth factor-like molecule, and perhaps those related family members. 
              Furthermore, these investigations may lead to insights concerning the molecular
              mechanisms involved in growth factor signaling during embryonic patterning and
              differentiation in vertebrate development.
