Title       : Analyses of Cell-Cell Interactions Required for Floral Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1998     
File        : a9630716

Award Number: 9630716
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vivian F. Irish vivian.irish@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    9630716  Irish  The dicot flower generally consists of four whorls of
              floral organs, which arise through the coordinated proliferation of cells in
              each of the three cell layers of the floral meristem.  Cell-cell interactions
              are important for the development of this floral pattern.  These intercellular
              signaling events potentially include interwhorl, interorgan, and interlayer
              interactions.  This project will investigate the extent to which each of these
              possible signaling mechanisms participates in establishing the floral pattern. 
              Previous work has shown that expression of the DTA gene in the petal and stamen
              organ primordia results in ablation of petals and stamens.  Grafing
              experiments, in which Nicotiana plants containing the DTA gene construct are
              grafted with wild type plants, will be used to examine the effects of ablating
              only part of the floral organ primordia.  The resulting chimeric plants can be
              used to assess the degree to which remaining tissues can regenerate part or all
              of the missing patern elements.  The results of these experiments will help to
              define the extent to which different signaling processes play in the
              specification of the differentiated floral pattern.  In addition, the role of
              the floral homeotic APETALA3 (AP3) gene in cell-cell interactions in the
              development of the Arabidopsis flower will be defined.  Using the heterologous
              Ac/Ds transposable element system, it will be possible to generate Arabidopsis
              plants that are mosaics of wild type AP3 and mutant ap3 tissues.  These plants
              will be used to assess the role of the AP3 gene product in intercellular
              communication.  Defining the parameters of where intercellular signals act, in
              combination with the analyses of the roles of individual gene products in these
              signaling processes, will lead to a more complete understanding of how
              meristematic cells coordinate their development to form the differentiated
              flower.
