Title       : The Role of Supernumeral Subunit of Bacterial Cytochrome b-c1 Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9630413

Award Number: 9630413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Yu linda@okway.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630413  Yu  The objective of this research is to elucidate the role of subunit
              IV (Mr=14,384) in the cytochrome bc1 complex from a photosynthetic bacterium
              Rhodobacter sphaeroides.  Site-directed mutagenesis, in vitro reconstitution of
              mutant subunit IV with  the three-subunit core complex, and physical, chemical
              characterizations of reconstituted  complex will be employed to identify (1)
              the tryptophan residue(s) of subunit IV essential for interaction with the
              three-subunit core complex; (2) the domains in subunit IV interacting with
              cytochrome b and with iron-sulfur protein; and (3) the amino acid residues
              required for stabilizing the structure of the cytochrome bc1 complex.  The
              success of this project will increase our understanding of the
              structure-function and mechanism of this photosynthetic bacterial bc1 complex
              in particular and energy transduction in the cytochrome bc1 complex in general.
               A better understanding of energy transduction mechanisms in the photosynthetic
              apparatus will lead to increase the efficiency of  photosynthesis and thus
              increases the renewable energy sources.  %%%  Photosynthesis is the process of 
              conversion of light energy into chemical energy for use in biosynthesis.  Some
              bacteria as well as plants have this ability.  One component of the bacterial
              photosynthetic pathway is the cytochrome bc1 complex.  Subunit IV is one
              component of this complex which has no obvious role in oxidation-reduction
              reactions.  The goal of this project is to elucidate the interactions and role
              of this subunit within the three-subunit core complex.  The experiments
              proposed will enhance our understanding of energy transduction mechanisms in
              the photosynthetic apparatus with a long-range goal of increasing the
              efficiency of this process.  ***
