Title       : Crystallographic and other Physical Studies of Flavoenzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9630474

Award Number: 9630474
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Karplus   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kristin M. Fox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630474  Karplus  A question central to flavoenzyme studies is how the binding 
              of FMN or FAD to various protein scaffolds controls the  redox potential and
              chemical reactivity of the flavin,  allowing it to catalyse an astounding
              diversity of  reactions.  High resolution structural information, combined 
              with extensive enzymatic and spectroscopic data is the most  effective way to
              gain insight into the mechanisms  controlling flavin reactivity.  This project
              extends studies  of recombinant forms of the flavoenzymes ferredoxin-NADP+ 
              reductase (FNR), old yellow enzyme (OYE), and Mycobacterium  smegmatis lactate
              monooxygenase (LMO).  Studies on OYE  include high resolution analyses of the
              wild type and mutant  OYE structures and, in particular, determining how NADPH 
              binds to OYE and how much charge transfer interactions  contribute to ligand
              affinity.  Other studies include the  structural analyses of wild type and
              mutant forms of spinach  FNR, pea FNR and corn root FNR, as well as LMO.  %%% 
              Enzymes  which require riboflavin are widely involved in  metabilic processes. 
              A question central to understanding  these enzymes is how the binding of
              riboflavin derivatives  (FMN and FAD) to various protein scaffolds controls the
               redox potential and chemical reactivity of the flavin, and  allows the
              catalysis an astounding diversity of reactions.  High resolution structural
              information, combined with  extensive enzymatic and spectroscopic data is the
              most  effective way to gain insight into the mechanisms  controlling flavin
              reactivity.  This project uses  crystallographic and other biophysical studies
              to further  the understanding of structure-function relations for the  flavin
              dependent enzymes ferredoxin-NADP+ reductase, old  yellow enzyme, and lactate
              monooxygenase.  ***
