Title       : Quantitative Lux-Based Assessment of Interacting Microbial Activity and Vadose
               Hydrology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9630293

Award Number: 9630293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $414741             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Selker selkerj@engr.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry Boersma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Niemet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Bottomley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1584,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9630293  Selker  This proposal was reviewed by the Environmental Geochemistry
              and Biogeochemistry panel (solicitation NSF 96-2) and jointly funded by several
              divisions at the National Science Foundation: Molecular and Cellular
              Biosciences, Earth Science,  Environmental Biology, and Mathematical Sciences. 
                    The dynamic temporal and spatial distribution of microbes in the
              unsaturated media above aquifers is essentially unknown; though it is
              recognized that the distribution can be significantly heterogeneous. Since
              microbial communities in the unsaturated zone degrade the vast majority of
              contaminants applied to the earth's surface, this lack in understanding
              presents profound limitations to our ability to predict or enhance this
              essential contaminant treatment system.  These studies involve the development
              and application of an analytical methodology that allows for direct, continuous
              observation of microbial distribution and activity, as well as the transport of
              contaminants through heterogeneous unsaturated porous media. This is made
              possible through the unification of two new technologies in an
              interdisciplinary effort between groundwater hydrology and environmental
              microbiology, namely: (1) the utilization of bioluminescent microbes to
              quantify microbial activity and contaminant movement; and (2) the use of light
              transmission chambers to quantify pore water content, pressure, and hydraulic
              flow paths.   The system employs a naphthalene-degrading bacterium, Pseudomonas
              flourescens HK44, which has a lux gene cassette inserted into the naphthalene
              degradation pathway such that light is emitted in direct proportion to the rate
              of degradation of naphthalene or its metabolite salicylate. These experiments
              will be carried out in two-dimensional glass-walled flow cells containing
              packed aquifer sands at two scales: 2 x 1.5 m and 60 x 60 cm. The flow cells
              provide for controlled aqueous flux, illumination, and continuous time-lapse
              video and digital CCD imaging of the entire experiment. The effect s of
              geologic heterogeneity will be studied by packing the chambers with fine over
              coarse sand textural interfaces.  Theses studies will: 1) Determine if regions
              of heterogeneous microbial colonization develop in otherwise uniform porous
              media under continuous unsaturated flow conditions. 2) Evaluate the effect of
              geological heterogeneities (textural variation) on localization of microbial
              development. 3) Investigate the combined and possibly interacting effects of
              geological and biological heterogeneities on contaminant fate and transport. 4)
              Assess the predictive capabilities of present microbial and hydrodynamic theory
              with respect to the experimental results of this research through the use of
              numerical models which simulate flow and microbial habitat.   These studies
              will provide a powerful new analytical tool for the scientific and engineering
              communities to gain understanding of subsurface microbial activity and growth
              in natural and contaminated sites. The ability to make quantitative
              non-destructive observations on the rate and position of microbial activity,
              while monitoring water content and pressure, will significantly increase the
              capability to exploit microbial degradation toward environmental
              bioremediation.  ***
