Title       : Nodulation and Lateral Root Formation in the Model Legume Lotus Japonicus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1998     
File        : a9630189

Award Number: 9630189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frans J. deBruijn debruijn@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Krzysztof Szczyglowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                       IBN-9630189   de Bruin and Szczyglowski      The formation of nitrogen
              fixing nodules on legume plants represents an unusual example of externally
              induced organogenesis under the influence of two different organisms, namely
              the plant host and symbiotic bacteria. This symbiotic process results in the
              creation of the appropriate microenvironment necessary to support the fixation
              of nitrogen by the prokaryotic symbiont and the assimilation of nitrogen by the
              plant host.  Although the genetic components involved in nodule induction have
              been relatively well studies in the bacterial symbiont, a lot remains to be
              learned about the plant's contribution to the process.  Preliminary genetic
              data have suggested a distinct connection between nodule morphogenesis and
              other plant developmental processes. The specific aim of this proposal is to
              test the hypothesis that common regulatory elements are involved in both
              lateral root formation and nodule organogenesis in the model legume Lotus
              japonicus, which is particularly amenable to combined genetic, physiological
              and molecular analyses. The L. japonicus har-1 mutant we have isolated,
              displays a drastically altered root morphology, as well as aberrant nodulation
              properties, and serves as the experimental basis of this proposal. By
              characterizing this mutant and the corresponding gene(s), we hope to learn more
              about the genetic determinants responsible for nodulation. In the very long
              run, this information may contribute towards the knowledge base required to
              extend the nodulation process to presently non-nodulated crop plants, such as
              the cereals.
