Title       : Behavioral Interactions and Population Responses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1996      
File        : a9630428

Award Number: 9630428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Godfrey R. Bourne bourne@jinx.umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9138,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Bourne, G.R.                                          ABSTRACT                  
                                 Behavioral Interactions and Population Responses Between
              Male  Tr  eefrogs                   Scinax rubra and Scinax garbei      PI: 
              Godfrey R. Bourne  Proposal Number:  9630428         This  study was prompted
              by my observations that loss of their  closed-canopy, old second growth
              rainforest habitat to lumbering,  has  caused the Neotropical treefrog Scinax
              garbei to  move  into  open-canopy  brushy,  second  growth  habitats  occupied
                by   a  congener, S. rubra at Dubulay Ranch, Guyana. The appearance of S. 
              garbei in these new habitats coincided with declining numbers  of  S.  rubra. 
              Males  of these two species gather on  vegetation  at  temporary  ponds  and 
              large puddles for  advertisement  calling.  Vocal  communication plays an
              important role in establishing  the  structure   and  organization  of  frog 
              groups  or  communities.  Advertisement  calls  of  male frogs  contain 
              information  about  species identity, location, and individual characteristics
              of the  caller.  In addition to attracting females, vocalization mediates 
              spacing   among  males.  In  assemblages  consisting  of  several  species,
              interference from different species' signals transmitted  through  the  same
              communication channel is a potentially  strong  evolutionary  force shaping
              characteristics of call  signals  and  structure  of  communities. 
              Interactions  that  solely   involve  resources  of  communication  are  called
               acoustic  competition.  Acoustic  interference may be reduced by: i) spectral 
              separation  of  calls  by  simultaneously  signalling  species;  ii)  spatial 
              separation of species; or iii) temporal separation of calling  by  species  in 
              the  same  habitat. Spatial separation  may  involve  differences  in
              geographic range, microhabitat or  calling  site.  Shifts  in  species
              composition and the inclusion  of  additional  species into a frog community
              may depend on: i) the existence  of  vaca nt acoustic niches; or ii) the
              ability of a species to modify  its  call  frequency,  timing of calling,  or 
              use  of  space  in  response  to  other  members of the community.  Although 
              several  studies  have  examined mechanisms of acoustic competition  among 
              frog   species,  I  am  not  aware  of  any  studies  that   have 
              experimentally  addressed  their  consequences  for  populations.  Thus, I
              predict that inhibition of calling by one species because  of  calling by
              another, is likely to impact temporal and  spatial  use  of  habitat, and
              population size, of the poorer  competitor.  The  effect  of  S.  garbei on
              contemporary frog  communities  is  largely  unknown,  although  it may 
              compete  with  other  Scinax  species  at various locations. Competitive
              effects are known  for  the Neotropical, island dwelling whistling frog
              Eleutherodactylus  johnstonei  which  impacts native and introduced  species 
              during  range expansion by accidental introduction. Here I outline  a  12 
              month  (1 September 1996-31 August 1997) field project to examine  the  effects
               of invading S. garbei on the calling  behavior  and  population  densities  of
              S. rubra at Dubulay  Ranch,  and  CEIBA  Biological  Center, Guyana. I will
              answer three questions--1)  Do  males  of  the  two  species compete and what
              are  the  resources  competed for? 2) What are the consequences of competition
              to  the  populations?  3)  What are the mechanisms of  competition?  Using 
              four  large  study  plots  with two  replicates  and  four  large  enclosures,
              and using a sophisticated statistical design, I  will  examine the
              relationships of S. garbei and S. rubra behaviors and  population  sizes  to
              different levels of frog species  removals,  and  stocking  densities.  Data on
              the  effects  of  a  naturally  occurring  range  expansion  of  a  congeneric 
              species  on   the  behavioral  and population responses of a resident  member 
              of  a  community  are not available for mainland new world  frogs.  This  study
               is  significant b ecause it is the first to  experimentally  examine the
              effects of a naturally occurring range expansion of a  congeneric  species on
              the behavioral, population and demographic  responses  of  a  resident  member
              of an  anuran  community.  The  immediate  results should be relevant both to
              predicting  effects  of  invading  species on existing groupings, and  to 
              elucidating  factors that allow coexistence of species in natural communities. 
              This  study should be an important contributor to the  fields  of  behavioral  
              ecology,  herpetology,  and  tropical   conservation  biology.      .
