Title       : Maturation of the Anitbody Response to a Protein Antigen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9630412

Award Number: 9630412
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald Jemmerson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9630412  Jemmerson    Following exposure of the immune system of experimental 
              animals such as mice to small chemical compounds, the  antibodies that are
              produced initially by the white cells  bind the compounds weakly, then after
              about one week, the  antibodies that are made begin to bind the compounds more 
              strongly until a maximum binding ability is achieved.  This  increased strength
              in binding, also known as affinity,  results from changes, or mutations, in the
              genes that code  for the antibodies.  Although not yet definitively shown, it 
              is believed that this model also applies to the immune  response to more
              complex molecules including proteins which  are present on microorganisms that
              the immune system  normally eliminates.  In this study, this model will be 
              extended to the immune response to a protein that has been  well-characterized
              both structurally and chemically,  cytochrome c.  In preliminary work it has
              been determined  that several mutations in the genes encoding antibodies 
              specific for cytochrome c do occur after immunizing mice  with the protein and
              that together these mutants result in  higher affinity antibody binding.  Now,
              the effect of each  of the mutations in the antibody genes on the affinity will
               be tested by altering the genes at each of the several sites  independently. 
              In addition, the structure of a complex of  an antibody bound to the protein
              will be determined using  the technique of X-ray crystallography to find out
              whether  the mutations cause changes in the antibodies that directly  contact
              the target molecule (antigen) or whether the effects  are indirect.  The
              cytochrome c to be employed in this study  is a protein expressed in mice. 
              Previously it was found  that the antibody genes used in the immune response to
              this  self antigen are also used in response to a related protein  and that
              during the response the antibodies acquire higher  affinity for this protein
              than for the self antigen.  In  this study, the mutations in the antibody genes
              that allo w  for this conversion will be determined.  It has been  suggested
              for a long time that this may be a general  mechanism for immunological
              recognition of foreign antigens  but an experimental system to study it has
              been available.  In summary, this study will extend our understanding of 
              affinity maturation in the antibody response from what was  previously known in
              studies of model compounds to a more  complex, protein antigen.  It will also
              provide further  insight into how immune recognition of foreign antigens may 
              initiate with the response of antibody-producing white blood  cells that
              possibly evolved to recognize self antigens.  ***
