Title       : The Development and Application of Strategies for the Preparation of Designed
               Supramolecular Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1998     
File        : a9630042

Award Number: 9630042
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Lauher jlauher@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank W. Fowler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This renewal award is made in the Office of Special Projects in support   of the
              collaborative research of Professors Lauher and Fowler. The   research deals
              with the design and synthesis of supramolecular structures   using
              hydrogen-bonded or metal ligated networks to serve as templates for   further
              assembly into layered or tubular structures  or three-dimensional   organic
              zeolites. Specifically, urea-based hosts will be  reacted with   di- or
              triacetylenes bearing complementary carboxylic acid groups to form   binary
              hydrogen bonded networks in which the di- or triacetylenes will be  
              polymerized. Related strategies with macrocyclic polyynes will lead to  
              organic nanotubes. The general area of topochemical polymerization will   be
              explored and extended to vinyl monomers  such as substituted   butadienes. With
              metal-ligated nanostructures, the novel two and three   dimensional
              nanostructures will be screened for unique chemical,   electronic or magnetic
              features.  The development of new strategies for the synthesis of
              hydrogen-bonded   and metal-ligated networks to produce supramolecular layered
              materials,   nanotubes, and large channeled solids offers the promise of
              crystal   enginering new solid materials with controllable lattice spacings.
              These   materials are likely to find applications in size and shape selective  
              catalysis, separations, and optical and electronic systems.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
