Title       : Regulation of Ribosomal Gene Transcription by DNA-dependent Protein Kinase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9630773

Award Number: 9630773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Labhart   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630773  Labhart   A detailed analysis of transcription factor phosphorylation
              resulting from activation of a signaling pathway is essential for a complete
              understanding of signal transduction regulation of cell proliferation and
              differentiation.  DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) is a moderately
              abundant nuclear kinase that is activated by binding to double-stranded DNA
              ends and DNA structures bearing single-to double strand transitions. DNA-PK has
              been shown to have a role in repair of double-stranded DNA breaks, but its
              precise function and its in vivo substrates are not known.  DNA-PK has also
              been shown to phosphorylate many transcription factors that are bound to the
              activating DNA molecule. Yet, the physiological role of DNA-PK in transcription
              is not known.   DNA-PK strongly inhibits transcription by Xenopus RNA
              polymerase I in an in vitro system. RNA polymerase I is the enzyme that
              synthesizes the large ribosomal RNAs that -- after processing of a precursor
              molecule -- are incorporated in the ribosomes. DNA-PK does not affect
              transcription by the other nuclear RNA polymerases, class II and III.. Since
              DNA-PK is a central player in this project, it is also proposed to purify
              Xenopus DNA-PK and to initiate the molecular characterization of this enzyme.  
               The investigator will address the question about the in vivo significance of
              the repression of ribosomal gene transcription by DNA-PK.  He  will examine
              whether there is a correlation between the activity and subcellular
              localization of DNA-PK and the rate of synthesis of ribosomal RNA during
              Xenopus oogenesis and embryogenesis. If DNA-PK negatively regulates ribosomal
              gene transcription in the cell, high DNA-PK activity and nucleolar localization
              would be expected to correlate with a low rate of ribosomal RNA synthesis.
              Furthermore, he will attempt to inhibit the expression and/or activity of the
              endogenous DNA-PK and investigate any effects on ribosomal gene transcription,
              oogenesis and embryogenesis.  The elucidation of the mechan ism by which DNA-PK
              represses ribosomal gene transcription promises to advance the knowledge about
              this nuclear enzyme and will help to eventually identify its in vivo
              significance and its role in transcription.  ***
