Title       : SBIR Phase II: An Inexpensive Educational Scanning Tunneling Microscope and
               Related Courseware
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1999    
File        : a9630558

Award Number: 9630558
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302450             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip H. Lippel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L3 Consulting
	      51 Boston Street
	      Somerville, MA  02143    617/628-3704

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5373,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  9630558  Lippel   The Scanning Tunneling Microscope (STM)  is a
              revolutionary new instrument that is being widely used in studying surfaces at
              the nanometer level (atomic scale).  This Small Business Innovation Research
              Phase II project from L3 Consulting will introduce low cost Scanning Tunneling
              Microscopes (STMs) into the first-year college curriculum in Physics and
              Chemistry.  Phase I SBIR research at L3 Consulting resulted in a design which
              uses advanced electroceramic actuators, audio-quality data converters, and a
              digital signal processor to produce a very inexpensive microscope.  L3
              Consulting also demonstrated how this microscope would enable students to image
              atomic steps at the surface of metals and semiconductors, examine integrated
              circuits or compact discs with resolution below the diffraction limit of
              optical microscopes, and otherwise explore physical phenomena at the nanometer
              scale.  Continuing efforts in Phase II will develop prototypes of the
              instrument and of accompanying laboratory exercises, test these prototypes with
              college students in regular classes, and evaluate the impact of these new tools
              on students' interest in and understanding of the physical sciences.  The
              courseware will emphasize the relationship between microscopic features of
              materials and their macroscopic properties.  It will encourage students to
              inquire how the abstract fundamental concepts stressed in introductory courses
              can be applied to explain the behavior of real-world materials and devices. 
              Students will gain valuable skill's by learning how to operate these
              microscopes, how to interpret the images obtained, and how to extrapolate from
              those images.  College and university faculty can present STMs as examples of
              modern research instruments and can use STM-based labs to expand their coverage
              of contemporary physics and chemistry.   Successful Phase II research will lead
              to a refined design for a microscope/ courseware package suitable for
              commercial production and distribution.  The primary  target market for the
              product is formed by large introductory classes in physics and chemistry which
              are taken by students of engineering, medicine and the allied health
              professions, and architecture, as well as by future scientists.  Derivative
              products might be suitable at other educational levels or for industrial use. 
              ***
