Title       : Dissertation Research: Sex Differences and Social Bonds in Captive Juvenile
               Rhesus Macaques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1996      
File        : a9630069

Award Number: 9630069
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6586               (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Leutenegger leuteneg@macc wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposed study of captive juvenile rhesus macaques will fill in several gaps
              in our  knowledge of primate social development.  One of the most significant
              influences on an  individual's development is its gender.  This research
              project will provide important data which should aid in the construction of
              general  principles regarding the range and robusticity of gender differences
              in primate behavior. Of  particular interest to this study is how a primate's
              gender affects the partner preferences and  quality of social relationships
              juvenile rhesus macaques form.  Although strong gender  differences in social
              bonds and interactions are apparent among adult rhesus macaques, it is  unknown
              whether juveniles exhibit these same differences, or when these behavioral
              patterns  arise. Consequently, a major goal of this study is not only to
              document gender differences in  behavior which occur among juveniles of this
              species, but also to describe when the differences  observed among adults
              originate. Furthermore, the proposed study will test a previously untested 
              assumption that behavioral development represents a continuous, linear process.
              Recent research  suggests, however, that this model of behavioral development
              may not be universal among  primate species, especially where gender
              differences in behavior are concerned.  The proposed  study will provide data
              which will aid in the development of a more accurate model of primate 
              behavioral ontogeny.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
