Title       : Adaptations of Cyanobacteria to High Solar Irradiance: UV Tolerance "Strategies"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1998     
File        : a9630674

Award Number: 9630674
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311834             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Castenholz rcasten@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1318,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9630674  Castenholz    The goals of this project are to evaluate the negative
              effects of  ultra-violet (UV) radiation on photosynthesis, growth, and health 
              of  cyanobacteria  and  to determine the methods  used  by  these 
              microorganisms to survive UV stress.  Cyanobacteria (also  called  blue-green 
              algae)  are  the closest living  relatives  of  those  oxygen-producing   
              microbes   that   built    the    Precambrian  stromatolites   (1  -3  billion 
              yrs  ago)  and  that   accounted  eventually for the high oxygen values in the
              Earth's atmosphere.    The  investigators  are asking the question  of  what 
              biological  "strategies"  these  microorganisms use to  tolerate  current  UV 
              stress  levels  and  the  higher levels  which  would  have  been  prevalent 
              during this strictly microbial period of  the  Earth's  history.  They have
              been working on avoidance responses by motile  cells  and also on the effect of
              UV "sunscreen" pigments, one  of  which (scytonemin), is located in a sheath or
              capsule surrounding  the  cells of many species. The investigators have been 
              able  to  characterize  this  yellow pigment and  experimentally  show  its 
              great effectiveness in allowing cells to tolerate high UV levels.  This 
              pigment enhances survival of cyanobacteria under  the  high  solar  radiation
              of their natural habitats and may have  provided  the  protection  for  their
              growth, colonization,  and  evolution  during  the  Precambrian.   By  leaming 
              how  specific  organisms  protect themselves from this harmful short-wave
              radiation, we may  also   better  understand  the  nature  of  UV  damage  in 
              other  organisms.  Basic research of the type we are doing may  lead  to 
              applications in human health as well.  For example, as  a  result  of  previous
              work by the principal invesigator, scytonemin is now  undergoing  clinical
              tests in another laboratory  as  a  compound  with highly effective
              anti-inflammatory properties.    In   the  continuation  of  this  work  with 
              cyanobacteria   the  investig ators  hope to further understand the role of 
              scytonemin  in  UV protection in both actively growing and dormant cells, and 
              the  role  of various environmental factors in the regulation  of  scytonemin
              synthesis.  In addition, the investigators  intend  to  determine  the extent
              of metabolic repair processes required  for  UV  tolerance  in cyanobacteria
              that do not possess UV  screening  pigments.  In this line of experimentation
              the investigators will  also  assay  the  degree of damage to cells caused  by 
              "reactive  oxygen" (e.g. singlet oxygen) which may also be produced in cells 
              as  a result of UV absorption.  If this secondary effect of UV is  substantial,
               we  will  determine the  role  of  cell  carotenoid  pigments (e.g.
              beta-carotene) in quenching this form of damage.
