Title       : Selective Gene Regulation by Manganese and Iron in Bacillus subtilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1998   
File        : a9630411

Award Number: 9630411
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Helmann jdh9@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Helmann  9630411  Bacillus subtilis provides a genetically well-characterized
              model organism ideal for analyzing the complexities of gene regulation. 
              Previous work has defined two sets of genes regulated by metal ion
              availability:  (i) genes involved in iron uptake which are repressed by a Fur
              homolog and (ii) genes involved in protection against oxidative stress which
              are repressed by a protein designated PerR in the presence of manganese, iron
              or certain other divalent metal ions.  In this project, the B.subtilis Fur 
              protein will be identified and characterized.  The furA and furB genes,
              identified as part of the B. subtilis genome project, encode proteins
              homologous to the Fur family of metal-activated repressor proteins and are
              likely candidates for the fur and perR genes.  A genetic approach will be
              pursued to identify regulatory factors influencing the Fur and PerR regulons. 
              Biochemical characterization of  Fur will reveal the molecular basis of its DNA
              and metal-binding selectivity.  The iron specificity of the Fur regulon
              presumably results from an ability of this metalloregulatory protein to
              discriminate against chemically related transition metals.  This contrasts with
              the relatively broad metal selectivity of DtxR and E.coli Fur.  The broad metal
              selectivity of the peroxide regulon is imparted by PerR, which is hypothesized
              to be a relatively non-specific metal-binding protein which acts as a molecular
              sensor of the simultaneous presence of redox active metal ions and hydrogen
              peroxide.  Metal ions are essential cofactors for many of the chemical
              transformations required for life, including the processes of respiration, DNA
              replication, and transcription.  In particular, iron is of vanishingly low
              solubility in the presence of oxygen and near neutral pH and frequently limits
              the growth of bacteria both in the environment and, in the case of pathogenic
              organisms, in the host.  Bacteria have evolved a highly sophisticated strategy
              to obtain iron from the environment by the synthesis,  excretion, and
              readsorption of iron specific organic chelators known as siderophores.  This
              process is highly regulated, since just as low iron can limit growth, an
              overabundance of intracellular iron can lead to deleterious chemical reactions
              that damage membranes and DNA.  These harmful side reactions frequently involve
              reactive oxygen species.  There is an emerging realization that metal ion
              homeostasis is frequently coordinated with systems designed to handle reactive
              oxygen species.  This research explores the genetic mechanisms which control
              iron homeostasis in Bacillus subtilis, a gram positive soil micoorganism, and
              the relationship between iron homeostasis and cellular defenses against
              oxidative damage.
