Title       : Functional Analysis of a Novel Calmodulin-Binding Protein from Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a9630782

Award Number: 9630782
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318125             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. S. N. Reddy reddy@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630782  Reddy    Calmodulin, a key intracellular calcium receptor, is believed
              to mediate a number of calcium regulated processes by interacting with and
              regulating the activity of a number of key enzymes and structural proteins. 
              However, little is known about the proteins that interact with
              calcium/calmodulin complexes in plants.  The lack of information on the
              calmodulin-binding proteins and their identity has been a major limitation in
              plants in elucidating calmodulin action at the biochemical and molecular level.
              This laboratory recently isolated a full-length (4 kb) cDNA encoding a novel
              calmodulin-binding protein (KCBP, kinesin-like calmodulin-binding protein) from
              Arabidopsis by screening an expression library with biotinylated calmodulin. 
              The deduced protein is 1261 amino acids long, with a carboxyl-terminal region
              domain of about 340 amino acids that has significant sequence similarity with
              the motor domain of kinesin heavy chains and contained putative ATP- and
              microtubule-binding sites typical of kinesins.  By analyzing calmodulin-binding
              activity of truncated proteins expressed in Escherischia coli, the
              calmodulin-binding region mapped to a stretch of about fifty amino acid
              residues near the C-terminus of the protein.  This new member of the kinesin
              superfamily is the first protein shown to be both a calmodulin-binding protein
              and a kinesin heavy chain.  A homologue of KCBP that binds calmodulin has been
              isolated from potato, suggesting that this protein is ubiquitous in plants. 
              The calmodulin-binding domain in these two proteins is highly conserved and not
              present in any of more than forty kinesins or kinesin-like proteins thus far
              characterized from animals.  Very little is known about either
              calmodulin-binding proteins or microtubule motor proteins in plants.  The
              proposed studies are aimed at elucidating the function of this novel protein. 
              KCBP binding to microtubules under various conditions will be analyzed, using
              either full-length or truncated proteins expressed in and p urified from E.
              coli.  In vitro motility assays will be used to analyze the motor activity of
              KCBP and selected domains, including the effect of calcium and calmodulin (in
              collaboration with Dr. Sharyn Endow of Duke University).   KCBP will be
              immunolocalized in various plant  tissues and cultured cells at different
              stages of the cell cycle.  The calmodulin-binding domain will be analyzed by
              fine mapping and determination of the binding affinity.  The expression of KCBP
              will be manipulated, constitutively or in a tissue-specific manner, using sense
              and antisense constructs.  The long term goal is to understand the function of
              KCBP and the regulatory role of calcium and calmodulin in KCBP-driven motor
              activity.  The proposed studies will enhance our understanding of this unique
              protein in intracellular transport and help gain new insights into calmodulin
              function.  ***
