Title       : Structure and Function of the Multienzyme Complex Responsible for Acetate
               Cleavage in Methanosarcina barkeri
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a9630488

Award Number: 9630488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Grahame   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : H M Jackson Fdn Mltry Med
	      1401 Rockville Pike, Suite 600
	      Rockville, MD  20852    301/294-1276

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9630488  Grahame   In methanogens, the central reaction in the pathway
              of acetate degradation is carried out by a unique multienzyme complex 
              (designated ACDS for acetyl-CoA decarbonylase/synthase) that brings about
              cleavage of the C-S and C-C bonds of the acetyl group of acetyl-CoA.  The
              metabolic function of this key enzyme is based on inorganic, metal-based
              chemistry that is highly unusual among most organisms and the enzymes they
              contain.  Despite the global importance of this enzyme complex, the reaction it
              catalyzes is still poorly understood, very little is known about its
              3-dimensional structure, and almost nothing is known about the interactions
              between various subunits and coenzyme components within the complex.  The long
              range goal of this project is to obtain a detailed understanding at the
              molecular level of the enzymatic and regulatory mechanisms that operate in the
              metabolic pathway of acetate cleavage in methanogens.  The objective of this
              research is to provide a solid foundation for understanding the structure and
              function of the M. barkeri ACDS complex -- the centerpiece of this pathway.  In
              order to accomplish this three specific aims will be pursued, as follows:  (1)
              a thorough determination will be made of the physicochemical properties of the
              ACDS subcomponent proteins (2) a detailed study will be carried out on the
              kinetics of acetyltransferase (a critical partial reaction in the overall
              process of acetyl-CoA cleavage), and (3) a three-dimensional model of the
              complex will be obtained showing the location of all subunits and domains
              involved in coenzyme, cofactor, and substrate binding.  At the completion of
              this project the overall structure of the enzyme complex will be at hand.  In
              addition, a determination will be made of the chemical reactivity of the
              critical acetyl-enzyme intermediate -- the actual, but yet uncharacterized
              species that undergoes C-C bond cleavage.  %%%   Species of methane-forming
              archaebacteria, such as Methanosarcinae, are extremely imp ortant, terminal
              components in anaerobic microbial decomposition (major global examples include
              ruminant digestion, decay in virtually all freshwater environments, and various
              human uses such as biomass conversion processes and waste treatment).  In our
              society, methane poses potential problems as a greenhouse gas, but at the same
              time provides an extremely useful clean-burning fuel.  In contrast, nature has
              selected methane (which is inert to further anaerobic reaction) to serve as the
              ultimate repository for metabolically-generated reducing power in anaerobic
              environments.  Although methanogens are able to utilize a variety of one-carbon
              compounds, the major biological pathway for production of methane is via
              cleavage of the two-carbon substrate, acetate, by overall fermentation as
              follows:  CH3COOH(CH4 + CO2.  Nevertheless, only a rather limited number of
              species of methanogens are capable of growth on acetate as a sole source for
              carbon and energy.  This research project will directly contribute to the
              understanding of anaerobic metabolism of acetate in nature.  Furthermore, the
              project will have substantial impact on progress in broadly related areas such
              as the biochemistry of metalloenzymes, the regulatory significance of redox
              states and equilibria of enzyme substrates and cofactors, the chemistry of
              unusual carbon-carbon bond rearrangements and carbonyl insertion reactions in
              biological systems, the structure and regulation of multienzyme complexes in
              general, and the physiology of energy transduction in the methanogenic Archaea
              and other organisms living in extreme or unusual environments.  ***
