Title       : Characterization of the Editing Apparatus in Physarum Mitochondria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1999       
File        : a9630672

Award Number: 9630672
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonatha M. Gott jmg13po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630672  Gott  The slime mold Physarum polycephalum is the only organism known
              to carry out both of the two major forms of RNA editing that have been
              described, substitution of one base for another and insertion of non-encoded
              nucleotides. Editing in Physarum mitochondria involves a wide variety of
              changes, including the addition of each of the four nucleotides (as single or
              dinucleotide  insertions), as well as a number of specific cytidine to uridine
              changes. These unique features,   along with the biochemical and genetic
              tractability of the organism, make Physarum an excellent model system in which
              to study editing. The ultimate goal of this work is a mechanistic understanding
              of this unusual mode of gene expression in Physarum and other organisms.  The
              specific objectives of this research are to characterize the number and types
              of editing mechanisms that function in Physarum mitochondria to localize the
              source of the editing information, and to identify the components of the
              editing machinery.  In preliminary studies, conditions have been found that
              allow only a subset of the insertional editing events normally observed in
              isolated mitochondria. This observation will be pursued  systematically by
              manipulating labeling conditions and characterizing the RNAs synthesized in
              this cell-free system. Thus, it should be possible to determine, for example,
              whether the same apparatus that inserts single nucleotides into RNA is also
              responsible for dinucleotide addition. The ability to synthesize unedited RNA
              will also be utilized in pulse-chase studies designed to determine both the
              extent to which editing and transcription are coupled in Physarum mitochondria,
              and whether specific RNA sequences are required for editing.  Identification of
              the components of the Physarum editing apparatus is the principal goal of the
              genetic experiments. Previously it was determined that RNA editing is both
              accurate and efficient at all stages of the Physarum life cycle, including the
              haploid amoebal stage that will b e used in genetic studies. Both preexisting
              temperature sensitive strains and additional mutants generated in the course of
              this work will be assayed for their ability to edit RNA under non-permissive
              conditions. Physarum strains defective in any type of RNA editing will be
              utilized in further genetic and biochemical studies, including those designed
              to isolate the gene(s) involved in editing and to characterize editing
              intermediates that may accumulate.  ***
