Title       : Field Workshop for Interdisciplinary Earth Science Investigations in Mongolia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1996      
File        : a9630142

Award Number: 9630142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61419              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah J. Fowell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9630142  Fowell      Central Asia represents a sizable gap in Quaternary
              paleoclimate  databases because relatively few sediment cores have been
              collected  from this part of the world.  This is particularly unfortunate due 
              to the growing need for detailed records of terrestrial climate  change and
              ecosystem evolution.  High-resolution climate data are  already available from
              oceans and ice sheets, and comparable  continental records are necessary in
              order to further understanding  of global climate changes.  Located in the
              interior of the Asian  continent, Mongolia is subject to the seasonal interplay
              of the  Siberian and Indian-African monsoons, home to numerous endemic  species
              of fish and insects, and the site of exceptionally well  preserved Mesozoic and
              Cenozoic vertebrate fossils.  Mongolia is  thus a natural field laboratory for
              paleoclimate research, and  climate records from this country have unique
              potential to  elucidate relationships between monsoonal circulation,
              glaciation,  orbital forcing, tectonic uplift, terrestrial climate change, and 
              rates of evolution.    As a prelude to in-depth studies of Mongolian climate
              history, a  planning meeting and field workshop for ten U.S. scientists with 
              research interests in paleoclimate, paleontology, and global change  will be
              held in Mongolia in the fall of 1996.  During a recent NSF-  sponsored workshop
              on Mongolian research held in South Carolina  during October of 1995, all ten
              of these scientists expressed a  keen interest in attending a one-month
              reconnaissance trip to   Mongolia.  Since the October workshop, plans for
              multidisciplinary  field-based research projects have advanced rapidly to the
              point  where an exchange of results and ideas between U.S. and Mongolian 
              scientists has become instrumental to the success of future  projects.  In
              addition to planning meetings and seminars, there  will be visits to potential
              field sites and collection of  preliminary samples in order to eliminate the
              difficulty and risk  of remote site sel ection.         The planning meeting
              will be held in Ulan Bator during August of  1996, during which time U.S.
              scientists will spend five days  meeting with members of the Mongolian Academy
              of Sciences to  exchange information and discuss logistics of potential
              projects.   Meetings will be followed by a two-week expedition to Lake 
              Khubsugul, with stops along the way to survey glacial features,  loess
              deposits, and shallow lakes or bogs suitable for collection  of short cores. 
              Khubsugul has been selected as the destination of  the field trip so that short
              sediment cores for preliminary  palynological, paleomagnetic, and carbon
              isotope analyses may be  collected from the lakeshore and from nearby ponds. 
              Furthermore,  the trip to Khubsugul is intended to ascertain the feasibility of
               a large-scale coring project designed to extract and extended  paleoclimate
              record from this central Asian lake basin.  ***
