Title       : Mathematical Models of Oculomotor Reflexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1998   
File        : a9630733

Award Number: 9630733
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1996  
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217649             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Shelhamer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  The principal investigator and colleagues will address two issues  in
              mathematical modeling and analysis of oculomotor reflexes.  First, the various
              published models have not been fully verified  by comparison with actual data
              and comparison with other models.  Second, a new and powerful class of dynamic
              measures has recently  been developed in the field of nonlinear dynamics
              ("chaos  theory"). These measures provide a way to assess nonlinearity and 
              determinism in a time series, but the measurements are not always  easy to
              interpret and to relate to the underlying physiology.  This research project
              addresses these issues in two ways. First,  the investigators will implement on
              a computer several  mathematical models of reflexive oculomotor control, obtain
               actual data from the species (cat, turtle, human) for which each  model was
              developed, and use the dynamic measures (correlation  dimension, prediction
              error, fractal structure,  and others) to compare the data to simulated data
              generated by  each model. Making allowances for differences between species, 
              the models will be compared with each other in the same manner.  In the course
              of this work the investigators also plan to develop  new models of oculomotor
              control. Second, the models will be  modified systematically (by making small
              parameter changes,  changing the form of probability distributions, etc.), and
              a  record will be kept of the effect of each modification on the  various
              dynamic measures. In this way, the project will give  insight into the
              interpretation of the measurements, what  physiologic processes might be
              responsible for their taking on  particular values and how pathologic
              conditions alter the nominal  values.
