Title       : Biogeographic Adaptation to Temperature, Photoperiod and CO2 in Boreal Conifers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9630241

Award Number: 9630241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jack Hayes                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324174             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Reich   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacek Oleksyn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark G. Tjoelker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9630241  Reich    The coniferous forests of boreal regions may be particularly
              affected by global environmental change.  Temperature, photoperiod and CO2
              levels may interact to profoundly influence the phenology (seasonal timing of
              development), net carbon exchange and growth of tree species. However, for any
              given tree species, populations from different regions may respond differently
              to global change. This possibility has been largely overlooked to date in
              scientific studies of vegetation response to global change.  Thus, we do not
              understand how populations originating from diverse environments have adapted
              to climate, or whether diverse populations will respond similarly to altered
              temperature or CO2 concentrations. We will explore these issues in both
              laboratory and field experiments, using diverse seed sources of major boreal
              conifers: pine and spruce. We will test whether populations that are adapted to
              colder environments respond differently to altered temperature and CO2 levels
              than those from warmer environments.  It is possible that trees originating in
              cold, stressed  environments may be less responsive to global change, which
              could alter our attempts to globally model boreal ecosystems under global
              change.     In controlled-environment studies, tree seedlings will be grown at
              present   ambient (360 ppm) and future elevated (580 ppm) concentrations of CO2
              in combination with a range of temperatures and two boreal photoperiods. 
              Growth, phenology, and plant chemistry and physiology will be assessed.  Field
              studies will involve plantations of older, mature jack pine and black spruce
              populations of broad biogeographic origin at several sites across a broad
              climate gradient in central North America.  Field measures will include
              assessment of growth (from tree rings) and rates of photosynthesis and
              respiration. Development of models of shoot-growth phenology and of respiration
              as a function of tissue nitrogen and temperature will enable comparisons of
              seedling and mature tree responses . This research will examine the generality
              of patterns and mechanisms among boreal trees, improve models of carbon
              exchange, and increase our understanding of the role of biogeographic variation
              in vegetation response to potential global change.
