Title       : Genetics of Particulate Methane Monooxygenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9630645

Award Number: 9630645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Lidstrom lidstrom@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9198,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630645  Lidstrom     Methane-oxidizing bacteria, or methanotrophs, contain an
              unusual membrane-bound copper monooxygenase, the pMMO, that oxidizes methane to
              methanol.  The structural genes encoding this enzyme (pmo genes) are present in
              dual copies in methanotrophs, both of which have been shown to be functional in
              the methanotroph Methylococcus capsulatus Bath.  The specific objective of this
              project is to determine how both sets of pmo genes are expressed and how this
              affects physiological parameters such as methane oxidation capacity, growth
              rate and growth yield under different conditions.  The approach that will be
              followed is to use gene fusions to define the expression of each set of genes
              under different conditions in the wild type, and to carry out transcript
              analysis in strains deleted for each set of pmo genes, to determine the
              transcriptional organization of the genes.  Then, expression of each set of pmo
              genes will be assessed in the strain deleted for the other set, to determine
              how this change in gene dosage affects pMMO activity, growth rate and growth
              yield.  Finally, regulatory mutants will be isolated and characterized, to
              begin to analyze the molecular mechanism involved in copper regulation.  The
              results of this project should provide major new in sights into the pMMO
              system.  Once this information is available, it should be possible to define
              other genes involved in generating active pMMO, and determine the details of
              their expression.  %%%   Methane-oxidizing bacteria, or methanotrophs, contain
              an unusual membrane-bound enzyme, the pMMO, that oxidizes methane to methanol. 
              This enzyme has attracted a great deal of interest for the following reasons. 
              First, it has the ability to oxidize a variety of toxic compounds that are
              common environmental pollutants.  Many of these reactions have potential
              applications for cleaning up contaminated water and soil, as well as carrying
              out environmentally-friendly chemical syntheses in industrial processes.  In
              addition, methanotrophs  are important in the cycling of greenhouse gases in
              the soil, and they play a significant role in the future of global warming. 
              For these reasons, it is important to understand the pMMO and its central role
              in the growth of these bacteria.  This project involves a study of the pMMO by
              analyzing its genes and how they produce the enzyme.  In addition, the project
              will address the factors that influence production of pMMO and how we can
              manipulate those factors for both environmental and industrial applications. 
              ***
