Title       : Catalytic Mechanism of Acetoacetate Decarboxylase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9630430

Award Number: 9630430
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen N. Allen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630430  Allen  The formation of a Schiff base (imine) between a carbonyl group
              and an amine nucleophile, with loss of water, is a prevalent reaction whose
              importance as an intermediate in enzyme catalyzed reactions has become apparent
              in the past five decades. The long-term objective of the proposed research is
              to define the structural and chemical mechanisms utilized by enzymes to promote
              the formation and reactivity of Schiff-base intermediates. A combination of the
              complementary techniques of X-ray crystallography, protein chemistry and
              kinetics will be used as tools. The proposed model system is the enzyme
              acetoacetate decarboxylase (AADase) complexed with its substrates, products and
              covalent intermediates or their stable analogs. The enzyme catalyzes the
              decarboxylation of acetoacetate to acetone and carbon dioxide is a "simple"
              decarboxylase, requiring no cofactors, instead using the  -amino group of
              enzymic Lysl 15 with a pKa_6.0 to form the reactive covalent adduct. The X-ray
              crystallographic structure of the native, uncomplexed AADase enzyme will be
              determined. The structures of several enzyme-ligand complexes will also be
              solved: AADase will be complexed with 1) 2-oxopropane sulfonate, a substrate
              analog, 2~ acetowruvate and acetoacetone, covalent intermediate analogs, and 3)
              acetone, the product. These structures will act as "snap-shots" along the
              catalytic pathway of the enzyme. Kinetic experiments to uncover the rate
              limiting step(s) will be performed. These will consist of the measurement of
              reaction rates with synthetic substrates and acylating agents bearing electron
              donating and withdrawing groups. Intermediate trapping and solvent exchange
              experiments will be performed on mutant K1 16R AADase (20% wild-type activity)
              in which the pKa perturbing Iysine 116 has been mutated to arginine to assess
              whether there has been a change in the rate-limiting step(s) and/or stability
              ofthe Schiffbase. The information afforded by these studies will allow us to
              assess the chemical and struct ural contributions of the enzyme to the
              stability and reactivity of the essential Schiff-base intermediate. This
              approach could ultimately be extended to the analysis of less well-defined
              enzyme systems.  %%%  Underlying the proposed research is the understanding of
              the basic methods used by enzymes to increase the rate of chemical reactions by
              as much as one billion fold. The proposed studies will dissect the chemical
              steps used by one enzyme, acetoacetate decarboxylase (AADase), to achieve such
              rate accelerations. The chemical steps will be examined in two ways 1) by
              comparing the velocity of the reaction of AADase with its substrate (the
              substance with which it normally interacts) and chemically altered substrates
              and 2) by measuring the velocity of reactions promoted by AADases in which the
              pieces of the enzyme which participate in the chemical reactions have been
              altered using molecular biology. These chemical studies will then be correlated
              with studies of the threedimensional structure of the enzyme in atomic detail.
              Using the method of X-ray crystallography, we can visualize the exact position
              of the atoms that make up the protein AADase, thus obtaining a detailed picture
              of the shape of the catalytic machinery. Such pictures will be determined for
              AADase, alone and in the presence of substances called inhibitors, which
              resemble substrate, but which cannot participate in chemical reactions with the
              enzyme. Also, the interaction of AADase with the end-product of the normal
              chemical reaction can be visualized by this technique. These structures will
              act as "snapshots" along the pathway of the enzyme. Understanding of the
              relationship between structure and J~nct~on for the enzyme AADase can
              ultimately be used to understand other enzymatic reactions as well as to design
              enzymes with novel functions.  ***
