Title       : Molecular Genetic Studies of Neurogenesis in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9630161

Award Number: 9630161
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228182             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry Yedvobnick biolby@biology.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1061,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  IBN-9630161   PI:  Yedvobnik    A fundamental question in developmental
              biology is how cells choose to develop into specific types. For example, the
              earliest stages of neural development involve a decision-making process. Groups
              of uncommitted cells must decide whether to enter a neural pathway of
              development, or choose an alternate pathway that ends with epidermal (skin)
              development. Such processes are essential and are shared by a wide range of
              organisms. In Drosophila this decision is regulated by a group of genes called
              the neurogenic loci, that apparently mediate intercellular communication.
              Molecular studies of these loci have demonstrated that they encode membrane,
              cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins, consistent with their role in cell
              communication.The mastermind (mam) gene is a member of the neurogenic loci and
              codes for a protein with a novel structure. Interestingly, it is the only
              member of the neurogenic loci where sequence information has not provided a
              clear model for function. Consequently, additional functional studies of mam
              are necessary. It is expected that a complete characterization of the mam
              protein will provide new insights into neural development in Drosophila and
              probably other organisms.     Although a large body of information is available
              on most of these genes, the role of the neurogenic locus mastermind (mam), has
              remained enigmatic. mam shows genetic interactions with a number of other
              neurogenic loci, suggesting that it plays an integral role in the pathway. mam
              codes for a nuclear protein which has been demonstrated to bind multiple
              chromosome sites. These data suggest a role in gene regulation. Using genetic
              and molecular approaches  the site of mam action within the pathway will be
              defined, and also t several hypotheses of mam function  will be tested. Genetic
              studies will be used to position mam function relative to the linear sequence
              of action of other neurogenic proteins. Analysis of physical associations
              between mam and other neurogenic proteins will be  used to test hypotheses of
              mam function. In combination with other work in progress  these studies will
              provide significant insight into the mode of action of this unusual protein.
