Title       : RUI: Acid Stress Genes in Escherichia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1998      
File        : a9630963

Award Number: 9630963
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan L. Slonczewski slonczewski@kenyon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kenyon College
	      
	      Gambier, OH  43022    614/427-2244

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Slonczewski  9630963  Escherichia coli experiences various kinds of acid
              stress. Its internal pH may be depressed by extreme external acidification (pH
              2.5-3.0) or by membrane-permeant weak acids in moderately acid media (pH 5-7).
              Which genes enable E. coli to survive in extreme acid? Which proteins help E.
              coli maintain internal pH during acid stress? How is the expression of
              acid-stress genes regulated?  Acid-stress genes will be identified by isolating
              several classes of acid-sensitive mutants using TnlO insertion and Tn5-lac
              fusion pools. (1) Acid resistance is the ability to survive at extreme external
              pH. Acid resistance appears to be mediated by several redundant pathways, which
              makes it a challenge to obtain defective mutants. The best characterized locus
              required for acid resistance is rpoS; but rpoS mutants regain acid resistance
              when grown anaerobically in mild acid (pH 5-6). Transposon insertion pools in
              an rpoS host will be screened for extreme-acid sensitivity (xas) in cultures
              grown anaerobically at pH 6. Preliminary screening has revealed one locus,
              xasB, which eliminates the rpoS-independent pathway for acid resistance. (2)
              Membrane-permeant weak acids can depress internal pH to a similar degree as
              extreme acid exposure. Insertion and lac fusion pools will be screened for
              sensitivity to the weak acid benzoate, and for lac fusion expression induced by
              benzoate. Expression will be compared between benzoate in moderate acid (pH 6)
              and in moderate base (pH 8), where internal acidification cannot occur. Mutants
              obtained will be characterized physiologically with respect to lac induction as
              a function of pH, benzoate, the uncoupler dinitrophenol (DNP), and
              anaerobiosis; for internal pH maintenance; and for acid resistance, under both
              aerobic and anaerobic conditions. The transposon insertion points will be
              mapped to the Kohara phage collection using inverse PCR to obtain flanking
              sequence for probes. Newly identified loci will be sequenced. For lac fusion
              loci, regulatory loci will  be sought by isolation of constitutive papillae
              resulting from unlinked secondary mutations.  Induction of acid-stress proteins
              will be observed on 2D-SDS gels, with the assistance of established facilities
              in the laboratories of F. Neidhardt and E. Olson. The global protein response
              to the weak acid benzoate at pH 6.5 has been characterized. Several new
              proteins appeared which did not appear with benzoate at high pH. These are good
              candidates for internal pH dependence. The benzoate-induced proteins will be
              isolated and sequenced by Edman degradation, and reverse genetics will be
              performed to identify the genes. If these proteins are in fact dependent on
              internal pH, then induction may be expected in cultures incubated at the
              borderline of the pH range for growth (pH 4.5). Gels will be run on cultures
              grown at pH 4.5, and the proteins induced will be compared with those induced
              by benzoate. Since many responses to low pH are enhanced by anaerobic growth,
              the benzoate and borderline-pH experiments will be repeated on anaerobic
              cultures, to see if additional proteins appear. Overall, the approaches of this
              project will yield much new information on genes and proteins involved in acid
              stress response this will help explain how bacteria can adapt to, and survive
              in, extreme environments.  ??
