Title       : Development of a Population Genetics Database Prototype
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1998   
File        : a9630311

Award Number: 9630311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148219             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Neigel jneigel@louisiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul L. Leberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana at Lafay
	      104 University Circle
	      Lafayette, LA  705032701    337/482-6203

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1174,9139,9169,EGCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The investigators will develop a prototype database of  published surveys of
              animal mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA).  Surveys of genetic variation in natural
              populations have  been a major component of research in population biology and 
              systematics. The data from these surveys are valuable  resource for further
              research and for applications in  conservation biology.  Animal mtDNA surveys
              are appropriate  targets for standardized methods of representation and 
              analysis. Variation in mtDNA reflects a hierarchy of  maternal lineages, which
              often exhibit considerable temporal  and geographical structure. Although
              surveys of mtDNA  variation may employ any of several methods to detect 
              variation (DNA sequencing, RFLP, DGGE, SSCP), there are  standard statistical
              quantities that can be calculated from  any of these data, as well as standard
              methods for  interpreting these statistics.    The investigators will identify
              authors of animal mtDNA  surveys by literature searches, and contact them with
              a  request for data. When necessary (and feasible), they will  also extract
              data from printed tables in published articles  and reports. The raw data will
              first be assembled as a  hierarchical database in which the data for each
              survey will  consist of records for individual animals that include  genetic
              and other biological data. An object database will  be developed in which each
              survey will be represented as an  object that includes both data and a set of
              methods for  manipulating and representing the data. The methods will  provide
              both statistical and graphical representations of  population genetics surveys
              that can be directly compared.  Database programming will done in C++, a
              standard object  oriented programming language, and will use PARODY, a 
              database management system that supports persistent data  objects.    The
              investigators will test the functionality of the  prototype object database
              with an application that requires  a uniform representation of population
              surveys that conforms  to a single sta tistical model. This application will
              detect  patterns in the geographic distributions of mtDNA variation  that are
              shared among multiple species, and will assess  their statistical significance
              by performing a meta-  analysis. Previous studies utilizing graphical
              comparisons  of the geographic distributions of mtDNA variation for  multiple
              species have revealed similarities that have been  interpreted as evidence for
              the influence of common  historical and environmental forces. However this
              graphical  approach is not based on any statistical model. The object  database
              will enable a new approach to the analysis of  multiple population genetic
              surveys, based on the  statistical principles of meta-analysis.
