Title       : Cell Biology and Genetics of Acetabularia Phenotypes That are Arrested in
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1999    
File        : a9630618

Award Number: 9630618
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dina F. Mandoli mandoli@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630618  Mandoli  Dr. Mandoli's long-term goal is to understand how
              developmental age and/or size of an organism and blue light co-regulate
              initiation of reproductive development.  A genetic dissection of the initiation
              of reproduction in Acetabularia acetabulum will provide unique insights into
              development at the level of the single cell.  Initiation of reproduction in A.
              acetabulum, requires de novo protein systhesis, and is regulated at the
              translational level by a) developmental age/size of the cell b) blue light and
              c) a putative cytosolic, nuclear-encoded inhibitor.  There are 3 specific aims
              in this proposal.  AIM 1: Continue inbreeding morphologically distinct, near
              isogenic cell lines.  She has inbred cell lines which are morphologically
              distinct and are more robust than their progenitors.  She will determine which
              cell lines have the fastest growth rate, the highest numbers of progeny, and
              differ from each other in the greatest number of gross morphological
              phenotypes.  She will continue inbreeding only those cell lines.  AIM 2: Use
              cell grafting to study her developmentally arrested (da) cell lines. 
              Developmentally arreseted cells grow normally at first but later arrest in
              vegatative growth.  Based on morphology and behavior of cells in grafts and
              upon amputation, her 11 da cell lines comprise 4 classes.  She has compensated
              for da defects in 3 ways: a wildtype nucleus can 'piggy-back' some mutants
              through reproduction in a birhizoidal heterokaryon; a wildtype apex, which
              always lacks a nucleus, permits some mutants to reproduce in a mutant::wildtype
              graft; some phenotypes reproduce if the defective apex is simply removed. 
              Here, she will establish  complementation groups and dominance using classical
              genetics for da cells that act like single gene traits and establish cell
              biological relationships between the da cell lines using mutant::mutant grafts
              between apices and rhizoids.  AIM 3: Make transformants made via microparticle
              bombardment.  In this funding period, she will optimize  transformation
              frequency, examine the nature of the inserts, and determine inheritance,
              segregation, and stability of intruduced traits.
