Title       : Responses of Terrestrial Invertebrates to Variation in Thermal and Hydric
               Environment: Molecular, Organismal, and Evolutionary Approaches (Albuquerque,
               NM, Dec. 27-30, 1996)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9630236

Award Number: 9630236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5985               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon F. Harrison   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc for Intgr and Comp Bio
	      1313 Dolley Madison Blvd
	      McLean, VA  221013926    703/790-1745

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9630236  Harrison    Throughout  terrestrial habitats, variations in 
              temperature  and water  availability are the dominant environmental parameters
              which  determine  species distributions.  The physiological effects of thermal 
              and water  variability  are  interactive, because temperature  strongly 
              affects  water  loss, and evaporative water loss is often a  critical 
              mechanism  for   preventing  overheating.   Terrestrial   invertebrates 
              provide  particularly valuable models for the study of the biological  effects 
              of  thermal  and hydric variability, due to their ecological  importance, 
              species  diversity,  ease of rearing, and  short  generation  times.  However,
              use of terrestrial invertebrates as model organisms  for  evolutionary and
              environmental studies ultimately depends on  a solid  understanding  of their
              molecular, cellular  and  organismal  physiology.  Traditionally  our 
              understanding of  many  aspects  of  the  cellular and  organismal  physiology 
              of  invertebrates  has  lagged  well  behind our  knowledge  of  vertebrates, 
              partly  due  to  the  focus  of  research on  biomedicine, and partly due to
              technical limitations imposed  by small  body sizes.  Recent advances in
              molecular biology, computer,  and  micro-analytical technologies have overcome 
              many  of  these  technical  limitations  to  the  study of invertebrates.   We 
              are  now  entering an era  where  rapid advances in our understanding of the 
              genetics,  cell  biology,  and  physiology of terrestrial  invertebrates  are 
              occurring.  These advances are providing information of basic importance  to 
              agriculture, ecology, and evolutionary biology.    This  symposium will be held
              at the Society for  Integrative  and  Comparative  Biology  1996  meeting, 
              December   27-30,   in  Albuquerque, New Mexico.  This symposium will bring
              together  16 scientists from a  diversity     of     fields    ranging    from 
                 molecular  biology/biochemistry,  organismal  physiology, and evolutionary 
              genetics  who  are  addressing   issues  related  to the temperature and water 
              relations  of  terrestrial  invertebrates.   This  symposium will promote 
              communication  and  collaboration  among these disciplines,  with  the  goal 
              of  providing a  more integrated understanding of this fundamental area of 
              environmental physiology.  Proceedings will be published  in  American 
              Zoologist.
