Title       : A Plant Protein Kinase and A Phosphatidylinositol 3-Kinase Involved in Vacuolar
               Protein Transport and Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  1998  
File        : a9630108

Award Number: 9630108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daryll B. DeWald dewald@biology.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              96-30108  DeWald    The plant cell vacuole is functionally similar to fungi 
              vacuoles and to lysosome of mammalian cells. In addition,  plant cell vacuoles
              have other functions; they function in  regulating cytosolic pH, osmotic shock,
              and in the storage  of proteins. Plant vacuole can occupy up to 90% of the
              total  cellular volume. The maintenance of vacuoles requires the  specific
              sorting of proteins and lipids from their sites of  synthesis to the vacuoles.
              The process of recognition,  sorting, and transport of proteins to the vacuole
              is  complex. More than 30 genes have been implicated in vacuolar  protein
              sorting. The goal of the proposed research is to  determine the role of a
              phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI 3-  kinase) and that of a serine/threonine
              protein kinase in  protein sorting to plant cell vacuole. The specific 
              objectives are to study 1) the role of Vps 34p PI 3-kinase  activity in protein
              sorting to plant vacuoles in Arabidopsis  thaliana; 2) the role of Vsp 15p, a
              protein kinase, in  protein sorting to plant vacuole in A. thaliana. The gene 
              for Vps 15p will be cloned and sequence. Cloning of the gene  will be done by
              functional complementation of a Vps 15p  yeast mutant by transforming with an
              A. thaliana cDNA  library, or by PCR-based amplification of gene fragments 
              that will be used to probe the cDNA library to identify the  gene. The role of
              Vps 15p and of Vps 34p will be assessed in  A. thaliana by examining tissue and
              temporal gene expression  patterns in wild type plants, and by documenting the
              effects  of overexpressing the gene in transgenic plants. It is  expected that
              this data will provide new insights into how  protein transport is regulated in
              plants.  %%%  The plant cell vacuole is functionally similar to fungi  vacuoles
              and to lysosome of mammalian cells. In addition,  plant cell vacuoles have
              other functions; they function in  regulating cytosolic pH, osmotic shock, and
              in the storage  of proteins. Plant vacuole can occupy up to 90% of the total 
              cellular vo lume. The maintenance of vacuoles requires the  specific sorting of
              proteins and lipids from their sites of  synthesis to the vacuoles. The process
              of recognition,  sorting, and transport of proteins to the vacuole is  complex.
              More than 30 genes have been implicated in vacuolar  protein sorting. The goal
              of the proposed research is to  determine the role of a phosphatidylinositol
              3-kinase (PI 3-  kinase) and that of a serine/threonine protein kinase in 
              protein sorting to plant cell vacuole. The specific  objectives are to study 1)
              the role of Vps 34p PI 3-kinase  activity in protein sorting to plant vacuoles
              in Arabidopsis  thaliana; 2) the role of Vsp 15p, a protein kinase, in  protein
              sorting to plant vacuole in A. thaliana. The gene  for Vps 15p will be cloned
              and sequence. Cloning of the gene  will be done by functional complementation
              of a Vps 15p  yeast mutant by transforming with an A. thaliana cDNA  library,
              or by PCR-based amplification of gene fragments  that will be used to probe the
              cDNA library to identify the  gene. The role of Vps 15p and of Vps 34p will be
              assessed in  A. thaliana by examining tissue and temporal gene expression 
              patterns in wild type plants, and by documenting the effects  of overexpressing
              the gene in transgenic    plants. It is expected that this data will provide
              new  insights into how protein transport is regulated in plants.  ***
