Title       : Transciptional Activation by Rhizobium meliloti DCTD
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9630454

Award Number: 9630454
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy R. Hoover TRHOOVER@ARCHES.UGA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              HOOVER  96-30454  The long term goal of this project is to understand be
              mechanisms involved in transcriptional activation with (54 RNA polymerase
              holoenzyme (E(54) ~n bacteria Although much is known at a phenomenological
              level, many details concerning the mechanisms involved in this process need to
              be elucidated. E(54 binds to the promoter to form a closed complex that is
              unable to initiate transcription. The activator, which binds upstream of the
              promoter, must make productive contact with E(54 through DNA looping and
              hydrolyze ATP in order to activate transcription. Interactions between the
              activator and E(54 are transient, and nothing is known about specific contact
              sites between E(54 and any c~ dependent activator. Identifying these contact
              sites is crucial for dissecting the mechanisms of transcriptional activation
              with E(54, and the goal of this project is to identify these contact sites. The
              (54 -dependent activator DctD) (C4 dicarboxylic acid transport protein D) from
              Rhizobium meliloti will be used for these studies. DctD can be crosslinked to
              (54 and the ,B subunits of RNA polymerase, suggesting that DctD may engage
              these subunits of E(54 to activate transcription. A collection of DctD) mutants
              that fail to activate transcription bas been generated, and some of these
              mutants are likely to be defective in interactions with E(54. A search will be
              made for alleles of ntrA (encodes (54) and rpoB (encodes the B subunit of RNA
              polymerase) that suppress dctD mutants. Gene products of these suppressors u
              ill be purified and examined for their ability to function with the DctD
              mutants in an In vitro transcription assay, as well as their ability to
              interact with DctD mutants in the crosslinking assay. A second research goal is
              to isolate (54 mutants that are defective in protein-protein interactions with
              DctD:). Such (54 mutants are expected to allow E(54 to bind to the promoter to
              form a closed complex, but will not allow the isomerization of these closed
              complexes ~ open complexes that are tr anscriptionally productive. A genetic
              screen based on the ability of E(54 to repress transcription from the phage P22
              ant gene has been developed, and will be used to isolate (54 mutants with these
              properties. The (54 mutants isolated from this screen will be examined for
              their ability to recognize promoter sequences, bind core RNA polymerase, and
              interact with DctD in the crosslinking assay The results of these experiments
              will help define the contact sites between DctD and E(54.  Examination of how
              (54 -dependent activators function is crucial, as it will contribute to our
              understanding of how many important metabolic processes are controlled in
              bacteria. The occurrence of (54 -dependent genes in bacteria is widespread, and
              the products of these genes are involved in such diverse processes as nitrogen
              fixation and metabolism, degradation of environmental pollutants, and
              regulation of virulence factors in plant and human pathogens. Understanding how
              bacteria control such metabolic processes is essential for the control and
              exploitation of these organisms in agriculture, environmental protection, and
              medicine.
