Title       : Links Between Soil Nutrient Dynamics and Surface Water Biogeochemistry Following
               Deforestation for Pasture Agriculture in Amazonia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1996    
File        : a9630278

Award Number: 9630278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda A. Deegan ldeegan@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Neill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1584      ENVIRO GEOCHEM AND BIOGEOCHEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1043,1584,5913,9189,9263,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9630278  Deegan      This project will examine how the conversion of moist
              tropical forest to cattle pasture in the Amazon Basin alters the patterns and
              rates of element cycles in soils and how these changes are linked to changes in
              the chemistry and ecology of small streams. The Amazon is a region with one of
              the world's highest rates of conversion of natural ecosystems to human
              dominated use. Cattle pasture is the dominant use of deforested lands.
              Conversion of native forest to pasture causes large changes in the patterns and
              rates of nutrient cycling and the potential for nutrient losses from soils.
              Small streams function as key hydrologic and biochemical links between upland
              soils and downstream aquatic ecosystems.      This project will examine soils
              and streams in small drainage basins in Rondonia, rapidly developing state in
              the southwest Brazilian Amazon. Four pairs of  drainage basins will be
              compared. One basin in each pair will drain intact forest, the other will drain
              land that has been cleared and planted to cattle pasture. The availability of
              nitrogen, phosphorus and major ions will be examined in drainage basin soils.
              Measurements of streamwater concentrations and forms of nitrogen, phosphorus,
              major cations and anions, trace elements and suspended sediments in the paired
              catchments will link changes in soil chemistry with stream biogeochemistry. To
              determine how long the influence of one land use is maintained as streams pass
              through one land use to another, the rates at which nutrients are taken up will
              be determined by measuring solute concentrations upstream and downstream of
              land use boundaries and by experimental injections of nitrate and phosphate and
              a non-reactive tracer in forest and pasture streams to determine how
              biogeochemical inputs from soils in the drainage basin affect stream organic
              matter production.      This work will provide important new information that
              will help to predict the effect of agricultural development and deforestation.
              Examination of stream pro ductivity will provide new information on how land
              use change affects biological functions that maintain water quality and support
              fisheries that are important to human well-being. On a longer time frame, this
              project will provide a foundation for future modeling efforts to link land use
              changes in small watersheds with biogeochemical changes in the larger rivers of
              the Amazon using models of water routing and within stream biogeochemical
              processing.    This proposal was submitted to the Environmental Geochemistry
              and Biogeochemistry solicitation, and the project is being jointly supported by
              the Divisions of Earth Sciences (Geosciences),  Environmental Biology
              (Biological Sciences), Mathematical Sciences (Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences) and International Programs -Brazil (Social, Behavioral & Economic
              Sciences).
