Title       : Protein Folding Triggered by Electron Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1998     
File        : a9630465

Award Number: 9630465
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $412500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay R. Winkler winklerj@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry B. Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630465  Winkler  The basic requirement for experimental investigations of 
              protein-folding kinetics is some means of triggering the  folding (or
              unfolding) process.  In this research program, a  new triggering method that
              permits measurements in the  nanosecond-to-millisecond time range will be
              employed.  Electron-transfer (ET) chemistry can trigger folding  reactions in
              many proteins, and there are many well  established techniques for rapidly
              injecting electrons into  proteins on timescales as short as a few nanoseconds.
               Specifically, laser-initiated ET will be used to trigger the  folding of three
              high-potential heme proteins; cytochrome c,  cytochrome b562 and cytochrome f. 
              The complex process of  protein folding involves dynamics that span more than
              twelve  orders of magnitude in time (picoseconds to minutes).  The  power of
              ET-initiated protein folding is that it lays open  this entire time regime for
              direct examination; when coupled  with the techniques of protein engineering,
              it will permit  evaluation of the importance of individual amino acids in  each
              step of the folding process.  %%%  Proteins are heteropolymers (polypeptides)
              built from the  twenty naturally occurring amino acids, often in combination 
              with one or more cofactors.  The three-dimensional structure  - the fold - of a
              protein that defines its biological  activity is determined by the sequence of
              amino acids in the  polypeptide chain.  The ultimate objective in
              proteinfolding  research then, is the ability to predict the three  dimensional
              structure of a protein solely on the basis of  its amino-acid sequence.  An
              essential key to the problem is  understanding the series of chemical events
              that transforms  a randomly configured polypeptide into a fully folded 
              protein.  There are many methods available for studying  protein-folding
              kinetics but, for the most part, they are  limited to measurement timescales
              longer than one  millisecond.  There is compelling evidence, however, that in 
              many proteins a substantial degre e of secondary and tertiary  protein
              structure can develop on faster timescales.  Therefore, new experimental
              methods are required to observe  the earliest events in protein folding.  ***
