Title       : Fiber Diffraction from Macromolecular Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1998     
File        : a9630787

Award Number: 9630787
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Taylor taylor@bio.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee Makowski  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630787  Makowski  The long term goal of this project is to develop reliable
              methods for extracting structural information from fiber diffraction data and
              to use these methods to characterized the structure and activity of
              maromolecular assemblies. The ratio of data-to-model parameters for fiber
              diffraction is substantially lower than for x-ray crystallography, and  even
              when a number of isomorphous derivatives are available, it may not be possible
              to obtain a unique structural solution from fiber diffraction data. 
              Consequently, after a number of years, there continues to be substantial
              controversy in the literature about the structure of the filamentous
              bacteriophages M13 and Pf1.  Differences among the molecular models for the
              viruses have substantial implications for our understanding of their
              membrane-mediated assembly, and for their use in phage display technology. 
              Recent developments provide substantial hope that these controversies can be
              resolved in the near future:  (i) It is now possible to obtain fiber
              diffraction data from structural variants of filamentous bacteriophages that
              can provide rigorous tests of competing structural models. (ii) A number of
              computational tests have recently been developed to assess the accuracy with
              which a molecular model of a crystalline protein has been constructed.  These
              tests have been demonstrated for globular proteins and can now be utilized for
              analysis of structures of macromolecular assemblies. The principle goal of this
              project is to utilize these strategies to resolve the controversies about the
              structure of filamentous bacteriophages and to establish the use of these
              techniques for other systems to be studies by fiber diffraction.  %%%   The
              macromolecular assemblies that constitute a large part of any living system are
              far less amenable to structural characterization than soluble macromolecules,
              but information about their three-dimensional structure is central to
              understanding many biological processes at the molecular level.  Few membran e
              proteins, filamentous proteins or large macromolecular assemblies have been
              solved to atomic resolution.  Acquisition of structural information is the rate
              limiting step in our efforts to answer many fundamental questions about living
              systems:  How are living structures assembled and how do the constituent
              molecules move in carrying out their vital functions?  Answers to these
              questions require a detailed characterization of the role of macromolecule
              assemblies in the organization and activities of cellular systems.  There are,
              as of yet, no routine procedures for determining the three-dimensional
              structures of these systems.  The human imagination is such that a
              three-dimensional picture is really essential for an understanding of the
              function of a complex molecular machine.  Fiber diffraction is one of the few
              techniques that can provide atomic or near-atomic resolution information about
              the structure of these systems.  There are currently very few scientists using
              fiber diffraction in this country, and much of the future progress is likely to
              come from Europe and Japan.  This program seeks to maintain state-of-the-art
              research in fiber diffraction in this country, and to improve the techniques in
              order to facilitate in the characterization of these system.  ***
