Title       : Models of Conduction Through Ion Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2000 
File        : a9630475

Award Number: 9630475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark  Franklin Schumaker schumaker@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630475  Schumaker  The objective of this research is to develop a class of
              theories (called "synchronous diffusions") of ion permeation through membrane
              channels.  The idea of a synchronous diffusion is that, due to packing or other
              constraints, several molecules together may undergo a coordinated diffusive
              motion with only one important degree of freedom.  Like discrete state (rate
              theory) models, synchronous diffusions are constructed to incorporate
              constraints on ion occupation needed for theories of multi-ion permeation.  In
              contrast to discrete state models, however, they provide a truly diffusive
              description of transport.  A synchronous diffusion describing single-ion
              conductance has already been developed, and this project now considers four
              more complicated cases:  (1) permeation of a single ion species through a
              two-site single-vacancy channel, (2) permeation through a two-site
              single-vacancy channel under bi-ionic conditions, (3) permeation of a single
              ion species through a three- barrier-two-site double-occupancy channel, and (4)
              permeation through a single-ion channel with waters explicitly represented. 
              %%%  The goal is to develop theories of  the motion of biomolecular systems
              that can serve as a bridge between the results of computer simulations and
              experiment.  In particular, these theories will be developed to describe how
              ions can pass through certain protein molecules, known as "membrane channels",
              which are found in cell membranes.  The need for bridging theories arises from
              two important developments in molecular biophysics.  The first of these is that
              information about the detailed 3D structure of molecules makes it possible to
              simulate molecular motions on a computer.  The second development is that
              experimental techniques are able to explore how things move on the molecular
              level.  However, due to limited computer power, the simulated times are much
              shorter than those required to make direct comparisons with experiment.  The
              bridging theories descried in this proposal wi ll be able to use the results of
              the computer simulations to compute quantities which can be compared with
              experiment.  ***
