Title       : Molecular Mechanism of Protein Transport into Chloroplasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1998        
File        : a9630459

Award Number: 9630459
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth G. Keegstra Keegstra@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630459  Keegstra    A significant unsolved problem in cell biology is the
              question of how cytoplasmically synthesized proteins are targeted to the
              various compartments of eukaryotic cells.  In plant cells, chloroplasts offer
              an excellent system for studying this problem.  Most chloroplastic proteins are
              encoded in the nucleus, synthesized in the cytoplasm as higher molecular weight
              precursors, and imported posttranslationally across the two envelope membranes.
               The long term goal of this research is to provide a detailed molecular
              understanding of how this import process occurs.  Significant process has been
              made in recent years in identifying and characterizing the targeting signals
              contained within precursor proteins, and in identifying and characterizing the
              molecular components of the transport apparatus.  The goal of this project is
              to understand how precursor proteins interact with the components of the
              transport apparatus to achieve proper targeting and translocation.  To this
              end, three specific objectives will be pursued.  The first is to investigate
              the supramolecular structure of transport components present in the outer
              membrane of the chloroplast envelope and determine how their arrangement is
              altered by precursors.  The second is to investigate the formation of
              translocation contact sites that bring together transport components present in
              the outer envelope membrane, the inner envelope membrane and in the
              chloroplastic stromal space.  Both of these objectives will be pursued using
              chemical cross-linking strategies to stabilize translocation complexes,
              followed by sensitive immunological and biochemical techniques to determine the
              composition of each complex.  The third objective will be to investigate the
              topology of two components of the transport apparatus present in the outer
              envelope membrane.   These two proteins were chosen for detailed study because
              they are thought to be important in the transport apparatus and because they
              appear to have unusual properties for membrane p roteins.  Understanding how
              these proteins are situated in the envelope membrane should eventually lead to
              new insights into how they mediate the transport of precursor proteins across
              the envelope membranes.   %%%  Understanding protein import into chloroplasts
              is important for at least two reasons.  First, it adds to our understanding of
              a basic cellular process, i.e., intracellular protein trafficking.  Second,
              many economically important functions within plants occur in the chloroplasts,
              and therefore an increased understanding of protein transport into chloroplasts
              will have practical significance for efforts to employ genetic engineering to
              alter the metabolic processes inside chloroplasts.   ***
