Title       : Freeze-Thaw Cycles and Summer Drought: Constraints on WaterFlow in Related
               Rhododendron Taxa across two LTER sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9630791

Award Number: 9630791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168585             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik T. Nilsen enilsen@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. Jones  (Principal Investigator former)
              Cynthia C. Lipp  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9630791  Nilsen    The  water  conducting  ability  of  plant  stems  must   be 
              sufficient to supply  water   to   leaves  for  growth  and  other  
              physiological  processes.  However, thewater conducting ability of the stem 
              can  be  reduced when air bubbles formwithin the cells  that  normally conduct
              water.  These bubbles can occur  during  drought when the tension, which pulls
              water  through  the plant from  the  soil  to  the leaves, becomes too great
              and  the  water  column breaks.  Also,  during the winter, freezing of the
              water inside these  cells causes  air  dissolved in the water to form bubbles
              which can expand  and  block  water flow during periods of thaw.  We  will  be 
              studying the impact of the  frequency and duration of drought and winter
              freeze-thaws on  the water  conducting ability of stems of related Rhododendron
              species.  We will be  utilizing   the  natural  variation  in  winter 
              freeze-thaw  frequency and  intensity  of  summer  drought provided  by  two 
              Long  Term  Ecological Research (LTER) sites to evaluate these following 
              objectives:  1) determine the physical factors which control  the maximum
              potential water flow through these plants, 2) to  examine  possible limits to
              water transport in  relation  to  plant  response to climatic patterns of water
               availability,  and 3) to determine the structural/physiological adaptations 
              of  these  species which may prevent or lessen the potential  for   the 
              development  of  air  blockages  in  their  water  conducting  cells.   This
              study will  provide  a  cross-LTER  comparison  of the ecological physiology of
              closely  related  taxa,  provide  information of the controls  of  water  flow 
              through plants, and provide information about the water  use  of understory
              plants to be used in models of ecosystem water  use budgeting.
