Title       : Fatty Acid Regulation in a Deep-Sea Bacterium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a9630546

Award Number: 9630546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228249             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas H. Bartlett dbartlett@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630546  Bartlett    The objective of this investigation is to identify and
              characterize genes involved in pressure sensing  and high pressure adaptation
              in the deep-sea bacterium Photobacterum species strain SS9. Genetic  studies in
              this organism indicate that a link exists between the abundance of the
              polyunsaturated  fatty acid species all-cis-5, 8, 11, 14, 17-eicosapentaenoic
              acid (EPA), high pressure adaptation,  and the pressure regulation of outer
              membrane protein (OMP) gene expression. This research  seeks to establish
              whether EPA is required for high pressure adaptation in SS9 and to distinguish 
              between 2 regulatory possibilities; first that EPA, most likely through effects
              on the physical state  of the membrane, influences pressure-sensing and omp
              gene regulation, or second, that a common  global regulatory factor controls
              the expression of genes encoding pressure-regulatable OMPs and  those which
              influence EPA abundance. The mutation responsible for decreased omp gene 
              expression, EPA abundance, and high pressure growth ability will be
              characterized in the existing  SS9 mutant strain EC1002, and the genetic basis
              for high pressure adaption in pseudorevertants of  strain EC1002 will also be
              elucidated. Additional mutants deficient in the synthesis of unsaturated  fatty
              acids (UFAs) will be obtained and characterized. The role of UFAs in high
              pressure growth  and pressure-regulated gene expression will be clarified.
              Possible UFA gene regulation by high  pressure or cold temperature will be
              investigated. Finally, the membrane fluidity of lipid  dispersions prepared
              form all SS9 UFA mutants and high pressure resistant derivatives of strain 
              EC1002 will be measured.  %%%  Mechanoreception is a common sensory modality in
              all organisms. These experiments will provide insight into the possible role
              played by fatty acids in signalling a cellular response to a mechanical
              stimulus. They will also provide information into genetic and biochemical
              adaptations which make life possible in deep-sea e nvironments. Finally, the
              project will result in the isolation of genes involved in EPA biosynthesis
              which could later provide the means for using recombinant DNA technologies to
              overproduce EPA for biotechnology. The short term need for EPA is as a food
              supplement in aquaculture and poultry farming. In the longer term EPA is needed
              as a dietary supplement for humans in which case it has been shown to be of
              major importance in human nutrition.  ***
