Title       : Plant Proteins Involved in Desiccation Tolerance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9630407

Award Number: 9630407
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon S. Dure   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630407  Dure  The Lea Proteins are late-embryogenesis abundant.  Although first
              recognized in cotton seeds, homologs of many of the cotton Leas have been found
              in embryos of other species, both monocot and dicot.  Thus, their occurrence in
              higher plant seeds is probably universal.  Subsequently, it was observed that
              the Lea proteins accumulate in all tissues of the maturing embryo, indicating
              that the induction of their genes is not tissue or organ specific, but a
              whole-plant response.      More recently, several lea genes homologous to
              cotton lea families have been shown to be induced into high levels of
              expression in non-seed tissue by subjecting the plant or organ to a water
              stress or exposing it to exogeneous ABA.  Even more recently, some of these
              genes have been shown to be induced into high expression by salt stress or cold
              stress, both of which force a water-loss stress.  Finally, proteins homologous
              to two Lea families have been found to increase in leaves of the desiccating
              "resurrection plants."  The common aspect of late embryogenesis and these
              stresses is the loss of waters from plant cells.    Several of the Lea proteins
              have regions of amino acid sequence that strongly suggest secondary and
              tertiary structures.  These structures in turn suggest functions in handling
              the molecular problems encountered when cells lose 50-90% of their total water.
               Our present goal is 1) to determine the 3D structure and other biophysical
              properties of these Lea proteins under various intracellular conditions with
              the hope of implicating their cellular function in so doing.  2) Concomitantly,
              we wish to test the protective effect of several of these purified proteins on
              cellular entities (organelles, membranes, enzymes) subjected to drought stress.
               In short, the PIs intend to describe the phenomenon of desiccation
              tolerance/water stress survival in terms of the properties of the proteins
              evoked by the stress.  Implicit in this research is the fact that understanding
              the function of these drought-in duced proteins would seem to be a requisite
              for manipulating drought tolerance in crop plants in a sophisticated manner.
