Title       : Epigenetic Mechanisms of Genome Modification in Mice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1998     
File        : a9630370

Award Number: 9630370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215504             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Latham klatham@unix.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Latham  It is now recognized that the genetic material that is transmitted from
              gamete to zygote and from cell to cell contains the necessary information for
              progeny development not only in the base sequence of the DNA but also in, as
              yet, undefined coded messages termed epigenetic. Perhaps the most striking form
              of epigenetic inheritance in mammals is parental genomic imprinting, which
              renders maternal and paternal chromosomes functionally non-equivalent. It has
              been shown by this laboratory that genomic imprinting can involve
              post-fertilization modifications of the genome as well as gametic
              modifications. A combination of genetic and embryological methods will be used
              to characterize one class of modifiers that operates immediately after
              fertilization and mediates epigenetic modifications of the paternal genome
              function as revealed by the developmental capacity of androgenetic embryos
              (embryos with exclusively two paternal sets of chromosomes). The egg modifiers
              will be characterized genetically and functionally. Preliminary evidence
              suggests a two-locus model. That observation will be genetically verified and
              the loci mapped onto chromosomes at some level. Function will be investigated
              by egg cytoplasm transfer experiments to determine if the factors are acting in
              a positive or negative way.   %%%  It has become clear that knowing the base
              sequence of a genome is only a first step in understanding the generation of an
              organism. An understanding of the other parameters is essential for a basic
              understanding of life processes and also for more applied goals.  ***
