Title       : Collaborative Research: Distribution of Photosynthetic Capacity in Conifer
               Canopies: The Role of Shoot Geometry, Leaf Morphology, & Nitrogen Concentration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9630866

Award Number: 9630866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114733             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas G. Sprugel sprugel@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Hinckley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9630866  Sprugel    Nitrogen  is  one of the most important elements controlling
               plant  growth  in both natural and agricultural  ecosystems.  Ecophysiology 
              theory  suggests  that  the  distribution  of  nitrogen within a plant canopy
              should match the distribution  of  intercepted light; that is, there should  be
               much  more  nitrogen near the top of the canopy (where light levels  are 
              highest)   than in the more shaded areas near the bottom  of  the canopy. 
              However, when theoretical predictions have been  compared  with actual plant
              canopies, the results have  been  mixed  at best. Nitrogen distribution in most
              canopies  does  show   the same general pattern as that predicted by theory. 
              However,  the  mechanism by which nitrogen  content  changes  differs  between 
              species, and the  difference  in  nitrogen  levels from the top to the bottom
              of the canopy is rarely as  large as the theory predicts that it should be.   
              The  investigators have developed a hypothesis that explains  this  variation
              in mechanisms and also suggests some reasons  why  the  variation in nitrogen
              does not  always  match  the  pattern  of light distribution, especially in
              older  leaves.  They  propose  to  test this hypothesis in  three  different 
              western    conifer   species:    Douglas-fir    (Pseudotsuga  menziesii), the
              most important timber species in the Pacific  Northwest; Pacific silver fir
              (Abies amabilis) an  important  tree  of  high altitude forests; and ponderosa 
              pine  (Pinus  ponderosa), the dominant tree in dry forests throughout  the 
              western United States.  If the hypothesis proves correct, it  will  provide  a 
              better  understanding  of  the  organizing  principles  for shoot structure and
              function within  complex  canopies,  and  will assist in efforts  to  "scale 
              up"  gas  fluxes  from  leaves  to canopies--a critical  component  of 
              attempts  to model and predict the consequences  of  climate  change in western
              conifer forests.
