Title       : Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of Beta-Glucosidases and Alpha-Hydroxynitrile
               Lyases Involved in Cyanogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9630935

Award Number: 9630935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan E. Poulton jonathan-poulton@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9630935  Poulton  Rosaceous stone fruits (Prunus spp.) are among many
              commercially important crops that cause cyanide poisoning in humans and
              livestock through release of hydrogen cyanide from cyanogenic glycosides by
              endogenous beta-glucosidases and alpha-hydroxynitrile lyases.  Black cherry (P.
              serotina) seeds are highly cyanogenic because they are a rich source of the
              cyanogenic diglucoside (R)-amydalin and its catabolic enzymes amygdalin
              hydrolase (AH), prunasin hydrolase (PH) and (R)-mandelonitrile lyase (MDL).  In
              undamaged seeds, large-scale amygdalin hydrolysis is precluded by tissue level
              compartmentation, since the two beta-glucosidases are located exclusively in
              the procambium, whereas amygdalin occurs with MDL within the cotyledonary
              parenchyma cells.  Rapid cyanogenesis ensues when tissue disruption breaches
              critical permeability barriers, allowing amygdalin access to its catabolic
              enzymes.    The objective of this proposal is to gain a better understanidng of
              the biochemistry and molecular biology of AH, PH and MDL.  The Prunus
              cyanogenic system is complex in that all three enzymes exist as multiple forms,
              the exact nature and physiological significance of which require clarification.
               Whether individual isoforms of each catabolic enzyme carry out defferent
              functions or exhibit differential expression, either temporally or spatially,
              remains largely unclear.      The proposed studies are designed to lead to an
              improved understanding of the spatial and temporal regulation of cyanogenesis
              in plants, thereby contributing toward the long-term goal of reducing the
              toxicity of cyanogenic plants to animals including man.  Furthermore, this
              research will generate important information about the functioning of
              beta-glucosidases and FAD-containing alpha-hydroxynitrile lyases, thus
              facilitating future efforts to engineer the substrate specificities of these
              enzymes for biotechnological purposes.
