Title       : Biochemistry and Endocrine Regulation of Insect Pheromone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1999     
File        : a9630916

Award Number: 9630916
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Blomquist blomquis@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9630916  Blomquist      The goal of the proposed work is to gain a detailed
              understanding of the biochemical processes by which ovarian-produced
              ecdysteroids regulate sex pheromone production in the housefly, Musca domestica
              L.   NSF-funded work on this project has elucidated the site of pheromone
              synthesis, the metabolic pathways used in pheromone production, the mechanism
              of Z9-23:Hy formation and the role of 20hydroxyecdysone in pheromone
              production. Three distinct types of hormones regulate pheromone production in
              insects: a neurosecretory peptide (PBAN) in many Lepidoptera (moths and
              butterflies), juvenile hormones in Dictyoptera (cockroaches) and Coleoptera
              (beetles), and ecdysteroids in the Diptera (including the housefly). In none of
              these systems is there a clear understanding of the specific enzyme activities
              that are hormonally altered to result in pheromone production. In the housefly,
              strong evidence has been obtained that ecdysteroids affect fatty acylCoA
              elongation activity, and not the chain length specificity of the steps that
              convert the fatty acyl-CoA to fatty aldehyde and then to hydrocarbon. Studies
              are proposed to examine how ecdysteroids induce the synthesis of the major sex
              pheromone components. This work will provide the basis of an in-depth
              understanding of the biochemistry and endocrine regulation of dipteran sex
              pheromones and provide a model for the regulation of hydrocarbon synthesis in
              the Insecta. A detailed understanding of the biochemistry and regulation of sex
              pheromone production in insects is required to take full advantage of
              pheromones in insect control.
