Title       : Biochemistry of Bacterial Acetone Metabolism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9630081

Award Number: 9630081
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303522             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Ensign ensigns@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630081  Ensign  The objective of this project is to investigate the metabolic
              pathway(s) of acetone metabolism by microorganisms and the biochemical
              properties of the enzyme(s) which initiate acetone degradation.  Acetone is a
              toxic molecule which is a product of microbial fermentation and mammalian
              starvation.  Acetone is also a proposed intermediate metabolite in the aerobic
              oxidation of propane and isopropanol by some bacteria; it is an important
              industrial commodity synthesized in large quantities by the chemical industry.
              Studies of aerobic and anaerobic acetone-degrading bacteria have provided
              evidence for the existence of two distinct routes for acetone degradation: an
              initial hydroxylation reaction producing acetol (hydroxyacetone), or an initial
              carboxylation reaction producing acetoacetate.  However, no acetone-degrading
              enzyme has been purified or studied in vitro, and consequently, little is known
              about the properties of these enzymes or the mechanisms they employ for acetone
              conversions.  Our studies are focused primarily on Xanthobacter strain Py2, an
              aerobic bacterium capable of utilizing acetone and other ketones as carbon and
              energy sources.  Preliminary studies performed in our laboratory have
              demonstrated that acetone metabolism in Xanthobacter Py2 proceeds by a
              carboxylation reaction producing acetoacetate as the product.  We have recently
              succeeded in reconstituting this carboxylation reaction in vitro.  This
              represents the first demonstration of in vitro acetone carboxylation in a
              bacterial system.  The specific objectives for this project period are to (1)
              purify to homogeneity and biochemically characterize the acetone carboxylase of
              Xanthobacter Py2; (2) kinetically and mechanistically characterize acetone
              carboxylase; (3) initiate the isolation, cloning, and characterization of
              gene(s) encoding acetone carboxylase; and (4) perform comparative studies of
              acetone metabolism in the propane-oxidizing bacterium Mycobacteriurn vaccae
              strain JOB5.  Although the pathways and b iochemistry of microbial acetone
              formation have been studied in detail, there is a lack of information on the
              pathways and biochemistry of acetone degradation.  The research to be conducted
              is intended to fill this gap in our understanding of biological acetone cycling
              and provide important fundamental insights into biochemical mechanisms of
              microbial acetone catabolism.  %%%   The objective of this project is to
              investigate metabolic pathways of acetone degradation by microorganisms and the
              biochemical properties of the enzymes which are required for acetone
              degradation.  Acetone is an important industrial solvent, and is one of many
              organic compounds of environmental concern due to its toxicity.  In addition to
              its production in industry, acetone is also formed by some microorganisms as a
              product of fermentation.  Acetone is also formed by mammals, including humans,
              during starvation. In diabetics, acetone is formed as a product of incomplete
              carbohydrate breakdown, and accumulates to high levels in the blood and urine. 
              The metabolism (breakdown) of acetone has been observed in both mammals and
              microorganisms, although the details and significance of these processes are
              not fully understood.  This project is an investigation of  the metabolism of
              acetone by bacteria that are able to grow at the expense of acetone as a source
              of carbon and energy.  Our goals are to determine the sequence of reactions
              involved in acetone degradation and to determine how acetone is degraded at the
              molecular level.  These studies will provide important new information on
              biological strategies for the degradation of toxic organic compounds.  ***
