Title       : Neuronal Mechanisms of Behavioral Hierarchy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1998      
File        : a9630805

Award Number: 9630805
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonya K. Sobrian                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249327             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tigran Norekian Tigran.Norekian@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630805  Norekian    All animals are engaged in a wide variety of behaviors.
              Many  behaviors are mutually exclusive since they follow different  goals and 
              might involve opposite movements of the same body parts.  Given a choice 
              between two or more behaviors at the same time, one behavior  usually takes 
              precedence over the others. This behavior is considered to  be dominant  over
              the other behaviors. Unrelated and competing behaviors  are organized  in a
              priority sequence in each animal, termed a behavioral  hierarchy. 
              Understanding of how a behavioral choice is made, why  switching between 
              different behaviors occurs and what are the neural  mechanisms which 
              reorganize the behavioral repertoire of all animals in a  hierarchical  manner
              represents a central issue in behavioral  neurobiology.    Most advantageous
              for investigation of this issue are  preparations  in which behaviors are
              relatively simple and well defined  and the  underlying neural circuits are
              identified and characterized.  Invertebrate  preparations were found to be
              particularly useful for these  neuroethological investigations. The pteropod
              mollusc Clione  limacina  appears to be an excellent model system for such 
              neuroethological studies  since it has a few basic, very well-defined, mutually
               exclusive behaviors,  such as feeding, withdrawal, escape swimming, egg laying
              and  mating, as  well as relatively simple, well-studied neural circuits 
              producing them.  The simplicity of the preparation, including its behaviors 
              and underlying  neural circuits, makes it possible to draw direct  connections
              between the  activities of individual neurons and behavioral outputs.  This
              task is much  more difficult, if at all possible, in complex organisms  such as
               vertebrates.    A focused investigation of one simple animal by the present 
              project  will enable an integrated understanding of neural  interactions and 
              modulatory changes in the central nervous system which  underlie the 
              behavioral choice and dominance of one behavior over  others.  Knowledge of 
              neural circuits producing specific behaviors in Clione  allows the timely 
              description of interconnections between neural networks,  that determine  the
              reorganization of the behavioral repertoire in a  priority sequence 
              (behavioral hierarchy). The main principals of this  reorganization and the 
              underlying neural mechanisms appear to be similar not only  among 
              invertebrates including Clione, but also in vertebrate  animals. Therefore, 
              knowledge obtained in the Clione preparation would have  broad theoretical 
              value.
