Title       : Scaling Forest Ecosystem Dynamics from Trees to Landscapes (Collaborative
               Research)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1999   
File        : a9630606

Award Number: 9630606
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110896             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean L. Urban deanu@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                We propose to address a fundamental scaling dilemma that plagues  ecologists
              and resource  managers. Many current issues are concerned with processes 
              operating on scales of landscapes or regions. But our  conventional knowledge
              base is comparatively fine-scale. For  example, anthropogenic climatic change
              broaches issues of  regional (biome) or even larger-scale importance, but our
              best  empirical understanding of the mechanisms of ecological response  is at
              the level of the individual plant. Resource managers face a  similar dilemma:
              multiple-use or ecosystem management implies  scales of watersheds or
              landscapes, yet our knowledge base for  forest management is founded at the
              level of individual trees or  homogeneous stands. In general, scaling involves
              a trade-off  between resolution (grain, or level of detail) and extent (the 
              area or scope of the study). Large extent comes at the expense of  fine-grained
              resolution of detail, and so, studies that focus on  details do so over a small
              spatial domain, while large-scale  studies typically sacrifice detail to
              embrace coarser-resolution  patterns.    This scaling trade-off can enforce an
              incompatibility across  scales. Large-scale studies typically are based on
              different  conceptual models and different data, as compared to fine-scale 
              studies. While it might be assumed optimistically that models  derived from
              different empirical bases at disparate scales might  nonetheless converge at a
              common scale, in practice such models  cannot be compared rigorously because
              they have too little in  common. We propose to develop a suite of simulation
              models which  address questions at different scales while still maintaining a 
              consistent conceptual and empirical basis. By preserving this  commonality
              among models, we can change scale rigorously as  needed, and when using
              alternative models we can be confident  that discrepancies in the predictions
              of these various models are  due to explicit assumptions or formulations rather
              than to  unknowable incompati bilities in the underlying data.    We will begin
              with forest gap model, which simulates the  establishment, growth, and
              mortality of individual trees on a  small (<0.1 ha) model plot, at an annual
              timestep. Gap models  typically are used to extrapolate tree-level demographics
              to  stand-level (~10 ha) dynamics over successional time periods. We  will then
              use this model to generate and parameterize three  derived models (metamodels)
              that reproduce selected  coarse-resolution aspects of the gap model's behavior,
              but do so  with much greater computational efficiency. We propose to 
              demonstrate this approach with a nonlinear stage-structured  model, a
              semi-markovian patch transition model, and a cellular  automaton. Each
              metamodel emphasizes a different aspect of forest  dynamics, and so each is
              amenable to particular kinds of  applications.    We have selected the forests
              of the Pacific Northwest (PNW) as a  testbed for the development of this
              methodology, but the  resulting methods will be applicable to a diverse range
              of forest  ecosystems. In particular, our gap model is already in use in the 
              northwest, southwest, northeast, and the southeastern United  States. The
              approach should also be applicable to other types of  models. We will make our
              models and documentation available to  other users.
