Title       : The Quest for a Zero Overhead Parallel Machine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9630145

Award Number: 9630145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235442             (Estimated)
Investigator: Umakishore Ramachandran rama@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this project is to demonstrate the viability of cost- 
              effective parallel computing techniques for two application domains that make 
              computing ubiquitous.  The first one is parallel databases embodying a 
              clients/server paradigm used in data mining/data warehousing applications.  The
               second one is the physical simulation of virtual multimedia environments that
              has  potential use in several everyday situations.  The challenge in this
              domain is  to perform realistic physical simulation in real time of multiple
              actors (some  real and some synthetic), each with several degrees of freedom. 
              This research  will investigate the system architecture issues in the design of
              parallel  (cluster) servers engineered with commodity processing and network
              components for  supporting such applications.  A shared address space across
              the cluster is an  attractive abstraction from the perspective of programming
              such applications.   However, accessing and caching data from this shared
              address space can be  expensive in terms of observed latencies in a cluster. 
              Therefore, clever  techniques that hide the communication overheads for
              accessing the shared address  space are imperative to achieving good
              performance.  The ultimate goals is to  make the cluster server appear as
              though the applications incur zero overhead for  communication.  Specific
              research issues to be addressed in this research include  (a) mechanisms for
              realizing shared address space across the cluster, (b)  mechanisms for
              supporting variable granularity, caching, explicit communication,  and
              synchronization (within the framework of shared space) tailored to the needs 
              of these applications, (c) hardware assists necessary to make clusters
              appealing  as cost-effective parallel machines, and (d) detailed performance
              evaluations of  cluster servers under such multimedia and database workloads.
