Title       : The Role of a Nuclear-Encoded Plastid RNA Polymerase in Plastid Function and
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1998       
File        : a9630763

Award Number: 9630763
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pal Maliga maliga@waksman.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630763  Maliga  The plastid genome of higher plants encodes subunits which are
              homologous to certain bacterial DNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RNAP) subunits. 
              The promoters utilized by this plastid RNAP are similar to E. coli (70
              promoters.  Promoter selection by the plastid-encoded RNAP is dependent on
              nuclear-encoded (-like factors.  In addition, transcription activity from some
              promoters is modulated by nuclear-encoded transcription factors interacting
              with elements upstream of the core promoter.  Several reports have suggested
              the existence of an additional plastid-localized, nuclear-encoded RNAP.  To
              confirm the existence of a second plastid transcription machinery, the rpoB
              gene for the essential ( subunit of the E. coli-like enzyme was deleted from
              the tobacco plastid genome.  Transcripts in plastids lacking the ( subunit
              ((rpoB plants) accumulate to relatively high levels for genes which encode
              components of the gene expression apparatus.  Therefore, the second RNA
              polymerase is referred to as the genetic system (GS) RNAP.  In the (rpoB
              plastids transcription was detected from promoter regions with no similarity to
              (70 consensus elements.  The research objective is to identify the role of the
              two RNA polymerases in plastid function and development.  The proposal is
              focused on the role of the GS enzyme.  The specific objectives of the research
              are: 1) Identification of promoters for the GS polymerase in tobacco plastids. 
              Genes for which mRNAs are abundant in tobacco plastids lacking the rpoA, rpoB
              and rpoCl and rpoC2 genes will be identified by RNA gel blot analysis.  The
              transcription initiation sites will be mapped for these mRNAs, and a consensus
              sequence will be derived based on sequence comparison.  2) In vivo definition
              of GS promoter architecture.  Functionally important elements of GS promoters
              will be identified by testing expression of reporter genes from the mutant
              promoters in vivo in tobacco plastids. 3) Determination of tissue and cell-type
              specific transcription from GS pr omoters.  This will be accomplished by
              testing tissue-specific accumulation of mRNAs and immunolocalization of
              reporter gene products.  4) Testing the role of GS and E. coli-like RNAPs  in
              the expression of the plastid rRNA operon.  The rRNA operon has both GS and E.
              coli-like (70 promoters. Expression of the operon from only one promoter will
              test role of each of these promoters in plastid function and development.  6)
              Developing an in vitro system for the analysis of the GS transcription
              machinery.  An in vitro assay will be established using tobacco extracts in
              which GS RNAP transcriptional properties and GS promoter functional elements
              will be identified. Purification of the GS RNAP will facilitate the
              identification of subunit composition, the prerequisite of cloning GS subunit
              genes.  %%%  Plants contain specialized organelles called chloroplasts which
              convert light energy to carbohydrates.  These chloroplasts have an unusual gene
              expression apparatus which compares with certain bacterial systems.  When this
              apparatus is blocked another gene expression system is seen that is unlike the
              bacterial system.  This system will be studied to determine what contribution
              it makes to  plant gene expression in leaf and root tissues.  ***
