Title       : Plant Genes Involved in Agrobacterium-Mediated Transformation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1998     
File        : a9630779

Award Number: 9630779
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanton B. Gelvin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    9630779  Gelvin  Agrobacterium tumefaciens causes the disease Crown Gall
              on many species of plants.  The molecular mechanism of Crown Gall tumorigenesis
              involves the binding of bacterial cells to the plant cell wall, and the
              processing of a region of the Ti-(tumor inducing) plasmid and transfer of this
              T-(transfer) DNA to plant cells.  Ti plasmid has been modified to be used as a
              vector for genetic engineering in plants.  As a result of two decades of
              research, we know much about the contribution of bacterial genes and proteins
              to T-DNA transfer and tumorigenesis.  However, we know little about the role
              plant genes and proteins play in these processes.  In an attempt to identify
              host-encoded factors necessary for Agrobacterium binding, T-DNA transfer and
              integration, and phytohormone signal transduction, Dr. Gelvin has recently
              screened different Arabidopsis thaliana ecotypes and T-DNA insertion mutants
              for susceptibility to crown gall tumorigenesis, as well as the ability to
              express other T-DNA-encoded functions both transiently and stably.     In this
              research project, Dr. Gelvin's proposes experiments to identify specifically
              the steps of crown gall tumorigenesis that are blocked in Arabidopsis T-DNA
              insertion mutants that have already been identified.  The characterization of
              these host genes will not only increase our understanding of crown gall
              tumorigenesis, but will also contribute to our knowledge of basic plant cell
              biology.  Finally, an understanding and the isolation of the host genes
              involved in these processes may allow us to manipulate these species so that
              they become more amenable to T-DNA-mediated genetic transformation.
