Title       : Avian Ovarian Follicular Growth: Role of the Germinal Disc Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9630957

Award Number: 9630957
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice M. Bahr j-bahr@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630957  Bahr    Production of healthy eggs or oocytes is a crucial process for
              the regeneration of the species. The oocyte and its surrounding ovarian cells
              in the ovary constitute the reproductive unit called the follicle. Female
              organisms invest enormous energy to maintain the growth and development of the
              follicles. It is logical to assume that a follicle without an oocyte will be
              eliminated by the body since the follicle loses the potential to provide a
              healthy oocyte which will develop into an individual after fertilization.
              However, there is no scientific evidence to support this assumption. Dr. Bahr
              have proposed a series of experiments to investigate the role of the oocyte on
              the growth and development of follicle using the chicken as the animal model.
              In the chicken, the oocyte and cells associated with it is called the germinal
              disc region (GDR). The first question asked is: will the chicken follicle keep
              growing or will it die after the GDR is destroyed? If the follicle dies, what
              is the mechanism underlying it. The second question is: if the chicken follicle
              dies after GDR destruction, is the replacement of the GDR able to rescue the
              follicle? Because of the limitations of living animal experiments, Dr. Bahr
              will conduct this experiment in a tissue culture system mimicking the
              physiological condition. The last question is: what does the GDR produce that
              can maintain the growth of the follicle? She will characterize the factor(s)
              produced by the GDR. The proposed experiments will provide valuable information
              regarding the role of the oocyte in follicular development and therefore the
              reproductive success of individual. Because of the similarities in function
              between the avian germinal disc and the oocyte of other species, it is
              anticipated that these studies will extend understanding of the control of
              follicular development in variety of species.
