Title       : Biosynthesis of Iron Sulfur Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1998     
File        : a9630127

Award Number: 9630127
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis R. Dean deandr@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Limin Zheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630127  Dean  Iron sulfur (Fe-S) clusters are found in numerous proteins that
              have important redox, catalytic or regulatory properties.  Such clusters are
              known to act as electron carriers and environmental sensors, or to be involved
              in substrate binding and catalysis, yet very little is known about how they are
              formed biologically.  Because free intracellular Fe and S are extremely toxic
              and are unlikely to exist in the cell in appreciable quantities to permit
              spontaneous Fe-S cluster formation, it is likely that biological Fe-S cluster
              formation occurs through a controlled process catalyzed by a specific set of
              enzymes.  Three enzymes associated with nitrogen fixation (NifS, NifU and ORF6)
              are likely to have functions related to the mobilization and activation of Fe
              and S for Fe-S cluster formation.  Recent sequence comparisons have shown that
              these enzymes are among the most conserved throughout nature.  This project
              will analyze the function of these enzymes by determining how they work
              together to form biologically active Fe-S clusters.  This goal will be
              accomplished by determining the interaction among these proteins and by
              optimizing conditions which leads to their ability to catalyze Fe-S clusters in
              vitro.  %%%  Iron(Fe) and sulfur(S) are essential elements for all free-living
              organisms.  In some cases, Fe and S are brought together to form structures
              called Iron-Sulfur clusters.  These clusters are important biological entities
              because they are involved, for example, as electron carriers in important life
              sustaining processes such as photosynthesis, nitrogen fixation, and
              respiration.  Because iron and sulfur are extremely toxic, the cell must be
              able to form Fe-S clusters through a controlled enzymatic process.  Three
              enzymes have been identified that are likely involved in the biological
              formation of Iron-Sulfur clusters.  In this project, purified samples of these
              enzymes will be used to determine how they work together to form such clusters.
               ***      Project Summary    Iron-Sulf ur clusters (Fe-S clusters) are found in
              numerous proteins that have important redox, catalytic or regulatory
              properties. Fe-S clusters are known to act as electron carriers, environmental
              sensors, or to be involved in substrate binding and catalysis. However, very
              little is known about how they are formed biologically. Because free Fe and S
              are toxic and are unlikely to exist in the cell in appreciable quantities, it
              is likely that biological Fe-S cluster formation occurs through a controlled
              process catalyzed by a specific set of enzymes. Previous work using the
              nitrogenase system has indicated that three nif-specific gene products from the
              nitrogen-fixing organism Azotobacter vinelandii are good candidates to
              participate in the formation of the Fe-S cores required for nitrogenase
              activation. These genes are nif~, nifU, and a gene designated orf~. NifS has
              been shown to be a cysteine desulfurase which is able to catalyze Fe-S cluster
              formation in vitro, whereas the specific functions of NifU and Orf6 have not
              yet been established. However, the phenotype of nifU mutants and the
              organization of conserved cysteine residues contained within NifU and Orf6
              indicate they could have roles in the activation of Fe for Fe-S cluster
              assembly, act as intermediate Fe/S carriers, or provide a scaffolding site for
              Fe-S cluster formation. The goals of the present project are to determine how
              gi~o~ge~ F~S clusters are formed biologically and to find out whether or not
              the'~'mo'lecular mechanism for nit'rogenase~Fe-S cluster fo~madon represents a
              global mechanism for formation of Fe-S clusters found in other proteins. The
              reason for suspecting that NifS, NifU and Orf6 activities might represent
              general mec~anisms for Fe-S cluster formation is that homologs to all three
              proteins have been identified in other prokaryotic and eucaryotic organisms
              that do not fix pitrogen.  The potential Ioles of NW, NifS and Orf6 in
              nitrogenase specific Fe-S cluster formation will be explored by the following
              experiments. First, co nditions for p~rotein-protein interactions between and
              among NifU, NifS, Orf6, and an apo-form of the mtrogenase Fe protein will be
              examined. This will be accomplished primarily by chemical~DI~      eLues and
              affinity chromatography using the purified proteins. Second, the potential
              interaction among NifU, NifS, Orf6, and the apo-Fe protein with other proteins
              whose identity is not yet known will be determined. This will be done using
              affinity chromatography and nitrogenase-derepressed crude extracts. Third,
              conditions for the optimum in vitro catalytic formation of Fe-S clusters will
              be determined using various combinations of purified NifU, NifS, orf6 and an
              apo-form of the nitrogenase Fe protein. Fe-S cluster assembly will be monitored
              by activation of nitrogenase Fe protein activity and by various spectroscopic
              techniques including Electron Paramagnetic Resonance, Resonance Raman, Magnetic
              Circular Dichroism, and ~s'sb'auer spectroscopies. Fourth, crude extracts will
              be used to determine if proteins other than NifU, NifS, and Orf6 might
              participate in nitrogenase Fe-S cluster formation. Fifth, the possible
              formation of Fe-S cluster intermediates, both in the presence and absence of
              the apo-form of the nitrogenase Fe protein, will be monitored by a series of
              time-course freeze-quench experiments where assembly is monitored by various
              spectroscopic techniques.  The second major goal of the project is to determine
              if homologs to NifU, NifS, and Orf6 are contained within the A. vinelandii
              genome and, if so, do they encode housekeeping functions for general Fe-S
              cluster assembly. A nifS homolog has already been identified. In the present
              project the chromosomal region encoding the NifS-like protein, which is
              suspected to also include nipJ-like and orl~like genes, will be cloned and
              characterized. The functions of these genes will be tested using gene directed
              mutagenesis techniques. If, as is expected, one or more of these genes is
              essential for viability, genetic constructions will be perfo~med  to permit
              their conditional expression.    3
