Title       : Structure-Function Relationships in E. coli Response Regulators NarL and NarP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9630809

Award Number: 9630809
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Dickerson red@mbi.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Gunsalus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630809  Dickerson  The goal of this project is to understand the molecular 
              mechanism of two-component regulatory systems of genetic  expression, using the
              NarQ/NarX/NarL/ NarP system that  controls nitrate respiration in bacteria.  In
              this system,  NarQ and NarX proteins sense the presence of nitrate or  nitrite
              in the surrounding environment, and activate  response regulator molecules NarL
              or NarP by  phosphorylating a particular aspartic acid. The activated  response
              regulators then bind to specific sites on DNA,  turning genes on and off as
              appropriate.  The project has  begun with a successful crystal structure
              analysis of NarL.  Further projects planned are: (1) Completion of the NarL 
              structure in a different crystal environment, to examine  crystal environment
              effect; (2) X-ray structure analysis of  the similar but independently-acting
              NarP; (3) Structure  analysis of the DNA-binding C-terminal domain of NarL in a
               complex with its recognition sequence of DNA; (4)  Examination of constitutive
              mutants of NarL and NarP that  resist dephosphorylation and bind strongly to
              DNA; and (5)  X-ray analysis of full NarL/DNA and NarP/DNA complexes.  ***  The
              significance of this study is that it will be the first  systematic
              investigation at the molecular level of a two  component sensor/response
              system, with results applicable  to the broad evolutionary range of bacterial
              two-component  control systems.  It will also shed light on multi-  component
              genetic control systems in higher organisms, that  also act by phosphorylating
              key effector proteins.  Taken  together the NarQ/NarX/NarL/NarP family
              comprises a complex  but flexible control system that can adjust the relative 
              expression of several genes in response to the relative  concentrations of
              nitrate and nitrite.  The full logic  behind this four-component example of  a
              molecular response  network is not yet understood.  An increased understanding 
              of how it works and why it  must be so complex is the major  goal of this
              project.  %%%
