Title       : Spectral Hole Burning in Hyperquenched Glassy Films and Biomolecular Gels:
               Science and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  1998   
File        : a9630781

Award Number: 9630781
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310193             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald J. Small gsmall@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    9630781          Small           The proposed studies are inspired
              mainly by the development of a versatile thermospray  based-hyperquenching
              apparatus for reproducible vitrification of liquids and its successful 
              application, with nonphotochemical hole burning and other spectroscopies, to 
              Al-phthalocyanine tetrasulphonate (APT) in hyperquenched glassy films of water
              (HGW).  The ability to study films at a given temperature with different
              histories of preparation  (deposition temperature, annealing procedure) opens
              the way for further detailed studies of  thermodynamic continuity / kinetic
              accessibility between different states of a glass,  disorder-induced and other
              mechanisms for optical dephasing, electron-phonon coupling and  mechanistic
              aspects of nonphotochemical hole burning. To this end, sulphonated 
              Al-phthalocyanines and resorufin in hyperquenched films of ethanol and methanol
              and the  cyanine dye HITCI in ethylene glycol glasses will be used. The data
              will be used with theory  to test the suggestion that the marriage of hole
              burning and photon echo techniques is a  promising approach to understanding
              optical coherence loss in liquids. Construction of a  novel hyperquenching
              apparatus compatible with pressure dependent (< 5 MPa) hole burning  is
              proposed. It would be used to determine, for example, the relative
              compressibilities (5 K)  of unannealed and annealed HGW films (APT as the
              chromophore). This is important  because the density of intrinsic two level
              systems (TLSint), responsible for dephasing at low  temperatures, is a factor
              of 5x higher in unannealed than in annealed films. Thus, it will be  possible
              to test the hypothesis that TLSint are intimately associated with the excess
              free  volume of glasses. Work completed under the current NSF grant has also
              shown that the hole  burning properties of APT in HGW at low and high
              temperatures (- 77 K) are significantly  superior to those of other molecular
              amorphous systems. The Principal Investigator proposes   to study  APT in high
              water content protein gels (e.g. "Jello") whose ease of preparation and  high
              optical quality make them attractive for time domain optical memory/processing 
              applications. The goal is to achieve a frequency storage density of 600 at 77
              K, a factor of  four higher than that for APT in buffered HGW. Additional
              studies of APT in HGW are  proposed, the objectives being to understand the
              hydrogen-bond switching associated with the  exceptionally efficient hole
              burning at both low and high temperatures and to test predictions  of a notable
              resilience of APT/HGW (deuterated)'s optical memory against destructive 
              readout due to hole burning and light-induced hole filling. Finally, infra-red
              hole burning  experiments with annealed and unannealed HGW films will be
              performed in order to  determine the contributions from inhomogeneous
              broadening and vibrational excitonic  coupling to the underlying structure of
              the OH stretching band. The understanding of this  structure is a fascinating
              problem of longstanding interest, one whose solution bears on the  structure
              and intermolecular forces of liquid water.   %%%  Disorder and its effects on
              configurational relaxation, energy and charge transport, the  dynamics of
              spectroscopic transitions and other properties in complex solids, such as
              glasses,  polymers and proteins, are subjects of intense interest in the
              physics, biophysics and  chemistry communities. This is understandable since to
              understand physical and biological  phenomena which are strongly influenced by
              structural disorder is both important and very  challenging. Furthermore, such
              research has and will continue to reveal new physics and  chemistry. This
              project is concerned with configurational relaxation and dynamics in  molecular
              glasses and the development of a new class of efficient, high temperature 
              persistent spectral hole burning materials for optical memory/processing and
              other  applications. These and other projects are designed to provide insights
              on the relationship  between  optical coherence loss in liquid and glasses, and
              destructive readout of optical  memory at high temperature.
