Title       : Relationship of Glyoxylate Shunt & Acetyl - CoA Synthetase Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2000    
File        : a9630647

Award Number: 9630647
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Wolfe awolfe@luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9630647  Wolfe    To grow and divide, a cell must use the compounds that it
              consumes both to construct cellular components and to generate the energy
              required for that construction.  Often a cell will use the same compound for
              both purposes, funneling some of it into a biosynthetic pathway and some into
              an energy-producing pathway.  To survive, the cell must efficiently balance its
              biosynthetic and energetic needs.  To characterize the mechanisms used by cells
              to perform this physiological balancing act, the flow of carbon through the
              tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) and the glyoxylate shunt (GS) has been studied. 
              Cells balance their interrelated biosynthetic and energetic needs by using
              exquisitely sensitive genetic and biochemical switches to control the metabolic
              fate of isocitrate.  When they need energy, cells funnel isocitrate through the
              TCA cycle; if they require biosynthetic components, they channel it through the
              GS.  Although the genetic switch has been investigated for years and some of
              its components are known, the underlying mechanism(s) of control remains a
              mystery.  We have evidence that, in the bacterium Escherichia coli, control of
              this switch coordinates with the synthesis of the enzyme acetyl-CoA synthetase
              (AcsA).  This project is designed to test the hypothesis that, under certain
              conditions, AcsA can switch on or induce the GS; once induced, the GS feeds
              back to turn off AcsA synthesis.  To determine how AcsA and the GS regulate the
              synthesis of each other, the following specific aims will be addressed:  (i)
              identify and characterize the mechanism(s) by which the GS controls the
              synthesis and/or activity of AcsA and (ii) identify and characterize the
              mechanism(s) by which AcsA controls the synthesis and/or activity of the GS. 
              %%%  To grow and divide, all cells must use the compounds that they consume
              both to construct cellular components and to generate the energy required for
              that construction.  Often cells will use the same compound for both purposes,
              funneling some of i t into a construction or biosynthetic pathway and some into
              an energy-producing pathway.  To survive, cells must efficiently balance their
              biosynthetic and energetic needs.  To identify and characterize the mechanisms
              used by cells to perform this fundamental physiological balancing act, the flow
              of carbon through two central metabolic pathways;  the tricarboxylic acid cycle
              (TCA) and the glyoxylate shunt (GS), has been studied.  Cells balance their
              conflicting biosynthetic and energetic needs by using exquisitely sensitive
              genetic and biochemical switches.  Although the genetic switch has been studied
              for years and many of its components are known, the underlying mechanism(s) of
              control remains a mystery.  We now have evidence that, at least in the
              bacterium Escherichia coli, control of this switch coordinates with the
              synthesis of an enzyme, called acetyl-CoA synthetase (AcsA), that generates the
              starting material for both the TCA cycle and the GS.  This project will
              investigate the relationship between this genetic switch and the synthesis of
              AcsA.  ***
