Title       : A Microbial Biodegradation Database on the World Wide Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1996    
File        : a9630427

Award Number: 9630427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196373             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynda Ellis lynda@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence P. Wackett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9139,9169,9184,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The University of Minnesota Biocatalysis/Biodegradation Database  (UM-BBD) first
              appeared on the World Wide Web  (http://dragon.labmed.umn.edu/
              ~lynda/index.html) less than one  year ago to meet the information needs of
              microbial  biotechnology. It was designed to provide information on 
              specialized, non-intermediary metabolic pathways for the  microbial
              biodegradation of primarily xenobiotic, organic  chemical compounds. While
              microbial catabolism of these types of  compounds in nature is more difficult
              to study than intermediary  metabolism, it is important for understanding the
              cycles of  nature, bioremediation of industrial chemicals, and biocatalysis 
              for synthesizing commodity chemicals. The UM-BBD provides  locally, or through
              external links, information on the compounds,  the enzymes that metabolize
              them, the genes that produce the  enzymes, and the organisms that contain them.
              In less than one  year of operation, usage has grown to over 20,000 accesses a 
              month from six continents, and over 200 national and  international users have
              joined the UM-BBD e-mail users list. It  is well accepted by its peers: Five
              world-renowned content  experts have agreed to join the UM-BBD Scientific
              Advisory Board.  It is or will soon be linked to by six prominent biological 
              databases including Entrez Medline, PIR and GenBank, PUMA,  Genobase and Kyoto
              Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes. And it has  been or will be used
              instructionally at the University of  Minnesota, the University of Connecticut
              and the Hebrew  University in Jerusalem. The UM-BBD's use, users and 
              peer-acceptance within its first year of operation emphasizes a  great demand
              for the information it contains, a design that is  attractive to its users, and
              a desire in ~e scientific community  for an accelerated pace of development.
              The next phase of growth  includes increases in depth, breadth, quality and
              representations  of its information; and improved tools to manipulate it; all 
              developed in close consultation with the user community.  The  number of
              degradation pathways will be expanded from 8 to 100,  the amount of information
              contained will increase from the  present 30 to 300-500 Mbytes; and searching
              will be allowed not  only by compound and enzyme names but by EC codes, CAS
              numbers,  and possibly other ways including compound structure and 
              substructure. The pathways chosen for the expansion will be  chosen to
              represent compounds with the broadest possible set of  organic functional
              groups and biochemical reactions. The UM-BBD  will then contain direct
              information on the most  environmentally-relevant organic molecules and a
              become a  knowledge base that can be used to predict the metabolic and 
              environmental fate of the majority of the 8 million known organic  compounds,
              whose microbial metabolism has not yet been studied.  The UM-BBD is
              well-positioned to become a community database,  used and useful to scientists
              at every level and with a wide  range of interests.                            
                                                               A-l
