Title       : Linked Plant Responses to Mechanical Perturbation and Pests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2000  
File        : a9630798

Award Number: 9630798
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jack Hayes                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack C. Schultz ujq@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9630798  Schultz         Because   they   cannot   move,   plants   often   must
                respond  simultaneously  to  many different environmental  stresses.   The 
              investigator suggests that responses to one stimulus  are  likely  to 
              condition  responses  to others.  Wind  provides  a  stimulus  experienced to a
              greater or lesser degree by all plants. Evidence  suggests  that plant
              responses to wind or touch involve  many  of  the same or similar mechanisms
              seen in plant responses to insects  and diseases.  Naturalists frequently
              report that plant pests are  scarce  on  windy, exposed sites, and 'natural'
              gardeners  sweep,  brush,  or  shake  plants to enhance hardiness.   The 
              mechanisms  behind these observations have not been determined.    The 
              proposed research will link plant responses to such physical  stimuli with
              resistance to insects and disease.  Bean plants  and  oak seedlings exposed to
              wind (fans) and shaking will be examined  for  biochemical changes related to
              tolerating such stresses  and  resisting pests.  Preliminary evidence indicates
              that biochemical  changes will indeed occur that can enhance pest resistance. 
              This  link will be confirmed by exposing treated and control plants  to  pests 
              in  the  laboratory  and in the field,  to  determine  the  significance  of 
              wind as a "protective" stimulus  under  natural  conditions.    This work
              provides the first real evidence of enhanced resistance  to  pests  by physical
              stimuli, and tests fundamental  hypotheses  about the generality of plant
              responses to environmental cues and  the  organization of such responses.  We
              foresee  many  potential  applications  of  this work, from enhancing  pest 
              resistance  in  cultivated   plants,  to  identifying  constraints  and  
              optimal  strategies in bioengineering or breeding superior cultivars.
