Title       : HICLAS: An Effective Tool for Interoperability Among Taxonomic Database Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1996    
File        : a9630846

Award Number: 9630846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah A. Joseph                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sakti Pramanik pramanik@cse.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas O. Duncan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9139,9184,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                HICLAS is biological classification data management system  designed to store
              and retrieve taxonomic data about the  relationships between species and other
              taxonomic levels.  Classifications provide the bases for recording and tracking
               information of the tree of life; they are modified, tuned,  improved and
              replaced as new information about the identity  of species on the planet
              becomes available.  A prototype WWW  interface and home page for the database
              is available at:  http:/aims.cps.msu.edu/hiclas.    The focus of this project
              is to develop a software interface  between the HICLAS system and other
              existing taxonomic  databases. A set of interactive database interface tools 
              will be built for data transfer, search and display. In  order to establish
              interoperablity among various taxonomic  database systems the databases that
              are currently available  are classified into two categories. The first category
              of  databases manages nomenclatural data with taxonomic  hierarchy and
              associated taxon data including taxonomic  history. The second category of
              databases manages  dendrograms, especially phylogenetic trees, and related 
              character-taxon data sets for cladistic and phenetic  analyses. A generalized
              tree-comparison method and a user  query system will be applied to compare
              classification trees  with dendrograms gathered from different existing systems
               such as UC Berkeley's SMASCH  (http://ucjeps.berkeley.edu/smasch)and Harvard
              University's  TreeBASE (http://www.herbaria.harvard.edu/treebase).
