Title       : The Most Severe Glaciations in Earth History: Presaged by Greenhouse Conditions?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1997  
File        : a9630928

Award Number: 9630928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99835              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Hoffman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan J. Kaufman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9630928  Hoffman      The most extreme glaciations in Earth history occurred
              near the end of the Proterozoic eon, when ice margins extended at sea level to
              within 10 o  of the equator.  Glaciogenic sediments in many regions are
              sandwiched between typical warm-water carbonates, implying very abrupt climatic
              oscillations.  Carbonates preceding the glacial deposits are extraordinarily
              enriched in 13C  13C-4% PDB).  The highly positive 13C values coupled with low
              seawater  87 Sr/ 86 Sr suggests that a drawdown of atmospheric CO2 (plausibly
              related to high organic productivity and enhanced storage of carbon on a deep
              anoxic ocean) was the cause of glaciation.  In contrast to the state of
              continental emergence (and hence high weathering rates) that presaged Cenozoic
              and late Paleozoic glacial epochs, stratigraphic and radiogenic isotopic
              evidence suggest that Neoproterozoic glaciations occurred in response to
              continental inundation.  Accordingly, the Neoproterozoic glaciations may have
              had more in common with the short-lived Ashgill (late Ordovician) glacial
              event.  These ancient occurrences illustrate the importance of considering the
              entire geological record, which reveals events and processes not predicted by
              current models, nor expressed in the 1.4% of Earth history represented by the
              Cenozoic.    Renewed funding is requested to continue integrated stratigraphic
              investigations.  Highly successful results from the first year of funding
              showed that secular variations in 13C values of carbonates in the pre-Vendian
              Otavi Group of Namibia are regionally consistent, and are not influenced by
              meteoric diagenesis, nor do they correlate with changes in primary lithofacies.
               Large isotopic shifts are noted across the two major sequence boundaries, but
              across other minor boundaries 13C values show no apparent change.  The Otavi
              Group was initially selected because of the close association of thick
              carbonates and a glacial diamictite.  A second pre-Vendian glacial event--newly
              recognized in the Otavi Group- -was first indicated by preliminary carbon
              isotope data.  And, subsequent field work confirmed the existence of two
              stratigraphically distinct glacial deposits, which required wholesale revision
              of the regional stratigraphy.  These observations were subsequently
              corroborated by U-Pb zircon dating of an ash layer within the Otavi carbonates.
               These early results demonstrate the efficacy ofthe three-pronged approach
              involving physical sequence stratigraphy, isotope chemostratigraphy, and U-Pb
              chronostratigraphy.    Carbon and strontium isotopic studies will continue to
              be undertaken by Alan J. Kauf  man at Harvard University, while single-grain
              U-Pb zircon analyses will be continued at the Massachusetts Institute of
              Technology under the direction of Samuel A. Bowring.  Additional funding is
              requested to support the C- and Sr-isotopic zircon analyses, as well as a
              part-time salary for Kaufman and a laboratory technician.  The cost of most
              field operations for Hoffman in Namibia will be borne elsewhere.    ??
