Title       : In vitro Reconstruction of Fungal Chromosomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2000 
File        : a9630910

Award Number: 9630910
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $504724             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Arnold arnold@arches.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary E. Case  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah F. Covert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew S. Sachs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Arnold  9630910  Physical maps of whole chromosomes have played an essential
              role in a number of fundamental breakthroughs in genetics.  Completion of a
              high resolution physical map of the model genetic system.  Neurospora crassa,
              is likely to open up new avenues of research on the molecular and evolutionary
              genetics of fungi.  In completing a preliminary 29 kilobase (kb) resolution
              physical map of the 31 megabase Aspergillus nidulans genome, a striking
              observation was made.  There is an alternating banding pattern in the
              distribution of repeated sequences along each chromosome.  This observation has
              implications for development, functional organization of genomes, chromosome
              structure and function, recombination, and genome evolution.  In this project
              the biological question is whether or not this banding pattern in repeated
              sequences is found in another filamentous fungus, N.crassa genome will be
              completed using an NSF-funded robotics workstation.  The distribution of cDNAs
              will be correlated with the distribution of repeated sequences in collaboration
              with an NSF-funded cDNA sequencing project.  A number of important discoveries
              about the structure and function of DNA have been made in the filamentous
              fungi, Aspergillus nidulans and Neurospora crassa.  Their fungal relatives are
              a daily part of our lives as causes of plant and animal disease, food spoilage,
              and the manufacture of industrial enzymes and chemicals.  Relatives of these
              fungi are involved in everything from the making of soy sauce, cheeses, and
              other dairy products to the manufacturing of penicillin and various textiles. 
              In this project new genome technologies will be introduced into the fungal
              genetics community to transform how genetics is done.  The new genome
              technologies will chart the entire genetic blueprint of these organisms, and
              allow this genetic blueprint to be understood and manipulated.  The
              applications of this project are likely to have an impact on genetics in
              general as well as applications in agriculture, and  industry.
