Title       : Markets and Institutions: A Matching Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1997   
File        : a9630270

Award Number: 9630270
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139751             (Estimated)
Investigator: Garey Ramey gramey@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel Watson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ramey  9630270    Economists have long been concerned with the tradeoffs between
              market and nonmarket institutions with respect to carrying out transactions. 
              The proposed research breaks new ground by explicitly analyzing the impact of
              market interaction on the determination and performance of agent-specific
              trading institutions, based on three key hypotheses: (1) forming productive
              relationships requires that agents meet with other agents in a matching process
              that reflects market interaction; (2) newly-matched agents make investments
              that are specific to their relationship and that cannot be contracted upon
              explicitly; and (3) productive relationships continue through time and require
              ongoing effort that is also not contractible.  The key insight is that market
              forces shape trading relationships through their effect on the agents'
              incentives to provide ongoing effort.    The research develops a mathematical
              general-equilibrium framework consisting of (1) models of bilateral investment
              and trading under a variety of organizational forms; (2) a matching model
              reflecting possibilities for asymmetries, search effort and inflow of new
              agents; and (3) a model of the capital market in which agents obtain resources
              needed for specific investment as well as creation of new productive assets. 
              This develops a preliminary version of the framework, and reports a range of
              new analytical results illustrating the power of the approach.  First, market
              forces can counteract the underinvestment incentive deriving from incomplete
              contractibility of investment, and first-best efficiency can emerge at a
              positive level of market friction.  second, reducing market friction can have
              adverse short-run welfare effects by destabilizing existing trading
              relationships, and such reductions can also minimize long-run welfare.  Third,
              market forces affect agents choice of integrated versus nonintegrated
              organizational forms.  The project studies organizational form, matching,
              renegotiation and welfare in settings characteri zed by uncertainty and/or
              incomplete information regarding the quality of productive relationships, as
              well as applications to issues in macroeconomics, including economic growth,
              policy propagation and nominal rigidity.
