Title       : Reconnecting the Academic and Industrial Analytical Communities: Summer
               Workshops on Identifying Common Ground
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1997      
File        : a9630118

Award Number: 9630118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89984              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Blanchard blanchard@photon.cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1022,1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry  (GOALI) project,
              supported in the Analytical and Surface  Chemistry Program, will enable two
              workshops designed to bring  together industrial and academic analytical
              scientists for the  purpose of increased interaction and intellectual exchange.
                Under the aegis of this three-year standard grant, Professor Gary  Blanchard
              of Michigan State University, Dr. Bruce Chase of the  DuPont Company, and Dr.
              David Rothman of the Dow Chemical Company  will organize these workshops that
              will be held in off-years  relative to the Gordon Research Conference on
              Analytical  Chemistry.  These activities will bring together young analytical 
              scientists from academe and industry with the objective of  enhancing
              understanding and communication between these two  groups so that training of
              analytical scientists and their  subsequent contributions to the field will be
              strengthened.   There is a clear need for better communication between `those 
              that teach and those that do` analytical science in academic and  industrial
              settings.  Two workshops will be held that are  designed to provide
              opportunities for young analytical scientists  from academe and industry to
              interact and explore areas of mutual  and complementary interests in research
              and education.  These  workshops are expected to give rise to a network of
              analytical  scientists across these two communities that facilitates the 
              mutually beneficial exchange of ideas and information as the  science and
              technology of analytical chemistry evolves.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
