Title       : Instrumentation and Laboratory Improvement for Computer Science Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1992    
File        : a9251258

Award Number: 9251258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Francisco A. Tomei   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Int Amer U PR San Juan
	      Central Office Systems
	      San Juan, PR  009363255    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The Bayamon University College of Inter American University of                 
              Puerto Rico has adopted a new mission.  Degrees in the fields                  
              of electrical, industrial, mechanical and computer engineering,                
              electronics and computer technologies, health-related                          
              professions, and telecommunications are being created and                      
              implemented.  Highlights of the engineering curricula will                     
              include up-to-date laboratory facilities, robotics courses,                    
              sub-specialties within each degree, cross-disciplinary                         
              subjects, a major in manufacturing processes within each field,                
              and a pre-engineering curriculum common to all disciplines.  A                 
              new campus will soon be constructed to house these programs.                   
              This ILI project will provide funds to upgrade the computer                    
              sciences program, which will play a central role in all of the                 
              high technology curricula.  These funds will be utilized to                    
              purchase 32 microcomputers and associated peripherals to                       
              replace current outmoded and inadequate equipment with some of                 
              the latest computer hardware and software.  Funds are also                     
              provided to place all existing computers in a network, allowing                
              a student to access all computer resources within campus from                  
              any terminal.  This upgrade in equipment is being accompanied                  
              by a revision in the curriculum in which emphasis is shifted                   
              from business to scientific applications.  Several hundred                     
              students will use the facilities each year.  Almost 100% of the                
              students who will benefit from the project will be Puerto                      
              Rican.
