Title       : Computer Graphics and Visualization Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1992     
File        : a9251482

Award Number: 9251482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86247              (Estimated)
Investigator: Youlu Zheng zheng@emei.cs.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alden H. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond F. Ford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Computer Science will establish a Computer                   
              Graphics and Visualization Laboratory to address the increasing                
              interest and demand for instruction in data visualization                      
              techniques, for both majors and non-majors.  The project will                  
              allow the creation of the laboratory featuring a cluster of                    
              powerful UNIX workstations configured with hardware,                           
              peripherals, and software specifically to support high-                        
              performance computer graphics.  The laboratory will enable the                 
              department to enhance and extend two existing major courses,                   
              Computer Graphics and Advanced Graphics and Visualization, and                 
              to offer for the first time service courses focusing                           
              specifically on advanced visualization techniques.  The                        
              development plan calls for the immediate introduction of a                     
              course targeted at science majors, Data Visualization and                      
              Display Techniques, with the possibility of other service                      
              courses being added later to address the needs of other                        
              potential user groups.  The laboratory's graphical environment                 
              will support both these regular courses and special projects,                  
              and will extend the level of training beyond what is possible                  
              with the currently available PC-instructional clusters.  With                  
              the new laboratory, the students can gain hands-on experience                  
              with state-of-the-art graphics and visualization technologies                  
              and better prepare themselves for careers in research, public                  
              service, or industry.
