Title       : Development of a Microcomputer Based Laboratory for Introductory Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1992      
File        : a9251874

Award Number: 9251874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21938              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan A. Cross   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : King College
	      King College Road
	      Bristol, TN  37620    615/968-1187

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              A microcomputer-based laboratory for the introductory physics                  
              classes has been established.  In addition to computers,                       
              appropriate interfaces and software lab apparatus that can be                  
              used for a variety of computer-based experiments in the first                  
              semester of the courses have been purchased.  The project has                  
              been designed around a network of Macintosh computers.  The                    
              universal lab interface developed by the Workshop Physics                      
              project and the Tools for Scientific Thinking project are being                
              used with appropriate transducers to input data from air track                 
              and rotational mechanics apparatus.  This project serves to                    
              introduce the students in these courses to what has become the                 
              main method for data acquisition and analysis in scientific                    
              work today.  In addition several experiments that previously                   
              were not in our program have been introduced.  Upperclass                      
              physics majors have been instrumental in evaluating equipment                  
              and experiment possibilities for these labs.  We plan to                       
              continue to involve them in the lab development.  Eventually                   
              the project will evolve to the point that computers will be                    
              used in some capacity in almost every lab.  Interactive                        
              simulation software is being made available for the students to                
              model experiments and study effects, such as air resistance,                   
              normally not accounted for.  This equipment is being used                      
              mainly by students in the introductory labs, but when not being                
              used in that capacity, the computers are available for the                     
              upperclass majors to use.
