Title       : Advanced Laboratory for Operating Systems and Assembly Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1994   
File        : a9251627

Award Number: 9251627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58113              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfredo Perez-Davila perezd@cl.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rodney L. Bown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kwok-Bun Yue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sadegh Davari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore F. Leibfried  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston Clear Lake
	      2700 Bay Area Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  770581098    281/283-3015

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project will create a new computer laboratory with modern                 
              equipment.  The goal is to enhance the quality of instruction                  
              in two of the required Computer Science core courses, namely                   
              the Operating Systems course and the Assembly Language course.                 
              The laboratory will consist of 40 486-33 MHz computers.  These                 
              PCs will be networked together with two as file servers.  In                   
              addition, 20 of these PCs will be equipped with removable hard                 
              disk drives.  These machines will enable students of the                       
              Operating Systems classes to experiment with modifications and                 
              enhancements of the kernel of a real operating system without                  
              adverse effect on other users.  Students will be exposed to                    
              both operating system code development and testing procedures.                 
              The removable hard disk will allow the same laboratory to be                   
              used with different software configurations without time                       
              consuming and complicated reformatting and reloading of systems                
              software.  This flexibility will provide an increase of several                
              orders of magnitude in the usability of the laboratory.  The                   
              use of the same platform for both the operating system course                  
              and the assembly language course will reinforce the knowledge                  
              obtained in both courses.  The laboratory will also benefit                    
              other courses, including the Ada Programming Language course                   
              (which is also a required course for CS/CIS students), as well                 
              as the general instructional quality of other computer science                 
              courses including Software Engineering, Computer Graphics and                  
              Independent Study/Project courses.
