Title       : A Research Oriented Curriculum for Improved Technology Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1992     
File        : a9251388

Award Number: 9251388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack V. Briner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to improve technology transfer from academics                
              to industry by better preparing students to understand the                     
              research process and to assess the capabilities and limitations                
              of emerging technologies.  In many cases, current undergraduate                
              computer science curriculums do not prepare the student to                     
              analyze research in the field.  By immersing students in a                     
              research environment at school, it is believed that they will                  
              be able to extrapolate future trends encountered in the                        
              workplace.  The ability to make informed decisions is necessary                
              to rapidly move research to production.  Graduates with this                   
              experience are expected to be able to provide thoughtful                       
              analysis for or against new technologies, giving their                         
              employers the confidence to push new technologies to the                       
              forefront.The funds provided by the ILI project will enable the                
              institution to launch a research oriented curriculum. The                      
              machines, terminals and CASE software provided will provide                    
              students with the same facilities used by faculty researchers.                 
              Students will be guided through a curriculum designed to teach                 
              them to perform research support for faculty members and/or to                 
              perform independent research.  First, students will be                         
              introduced to large scale coding and documentation techniques                  
              in a software engineering course.  This will be followed by an                 
              introduction to one or more research areas providing some in-                  
              depth knowledge.  The experience will be completed with a                      
              senior research seminar course in which the student is allowed                 
              to do independent research or become involved in a faculty                     
              member's research by implementing theoretical results.
