Title       : Microprocessors and Computers in Machine Tool Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1992      
File        : a9251876

Award Number: 9251876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42192              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce C. Whipple zpwhipplebr@trident.tec.sc.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Rehg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry E. Bell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald J. McAleece  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trident Technical College
	      P O Box 10367
	      Charleston, SC  29411    803/572-6111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              A state-of-the-art machinery laboratory capable of replicating                 
              industrial machining processes and integrating microprocessor                  
              technology in a computerized numerical control (CNC) production                
              environment is supplementing the theoretical education in                      
              Engineering and Industrial Technology laboratories at Trident                  
              Technical College.  The laboratory introduces CNC principles                   
              and practices to machine tool students, automated manufacturing                
              students, mechanical engineering students and computer graphics                
              students.  These students experiment with the manual and                       
              computer-aided programming theory and setup techniques learned                 
              in the classroom.  The selected machinery, computers, and                      
              tooling replicate machining processes commonly found and                       
              performed in industry.  To make this laboratory more realistic,                
              manufacturing groups are formed to design and manufacture a                    
              given product as a project.  Students participating in the                     
              manufacturing project come from four separate disciplinary                     
              areas: Computer-Aided Design, Automated Manufacturing,                         
              Mechanical Engineering, and Machine Tool.  This approach of                    
              teaching manufacturing from the ground up allows students to                   
              see first hand, problems commonly encountered in the first                     
              article design, material selection, tooling design, and                        
              production planning.
