Title       : Educational Enhancement of Physics Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1992     
File        : a9251083

Award Number: 9251083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98772              (Estimated)
Investigator: Willard L. Fadner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Courtney W. Willis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Northern Colorado
	      Carter Hall 4000
	      Greeley, CO  80639    303/351-2881

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9255,
Abstract    :
              Educationally enhanced computer packages are being developed to                
              greatly improve the learning experience of students taking                     
              first-year college physics laboratories.  Many of the packages                 
              can also be useable in high schools.  While current                            
              computerized laboratories provide excellent accuracy (and                      
              thereby support theory), they typically do not allow for or                    
              encourage extensive student participation, as did many earlier                 
              and simpler (but less accurate) lab methods.  The interactive                  
              software packages being developed in this research program are                 
              making use of animation, still and moving photographs and                      
              tutorials to help the student understand the laboratory                        
              procedures, methods of analysis and related theoretical                        
              concepts.  They also allow the student to retain control of the                
              experimental procedure and data processing.  Pre-lab                           
              instructional units, often using complex and dynamic images,                   
              help the teacher to illustrate and explain some of the                         
              laboratory concepts that are difficult to present at the                       
              chalkboard.  The computer learning packages are being made                     
              compatible with as many of the existing commercial laboratory                  
              interfaces as possible.  Such packages will also be useful for                 
              many laboratory experiments in which the computer is not used                  
              to collect data.  The results of the investigation will be                     
              reported at national meetings and at a regional compatible                     
              conference.  The software developed will be made widely                        
              available at low cost.
