Title       : Curriculum Improvements in Undergraduate Physiology Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1992      
File        : a9251764

Award Number: 9251764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27221              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dee U. Silverthorn silverth@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The equipment augments a course which has two goals: to                        
              introduce students early in their career to the nature of the                  
              scientific process, and to decrease reliance on vertebrates in                 
              physiology laboratories.  The unique invertebrate experiments                  
              demonstrate essential basic principles and in some cases allow                 
              students to see phenomena which cannot be easily demonstrated                  
              in vertebrates.  The exercises are designed to enhance critical                
              thinking and quantitative skills, introduce the use of micro-                  
              computers in the laboratory, and teach scientific methodology.                 
              Students design many of the experimental protocols within                      
              guidelines provided by the lab manual.  Students write their                   
              reports as "scientific papers" to acquaint them with the                       
              standard format of the scientific literature and to enhance                    
              their written communication skills.  An innovative approach has                
              been designed for distribution of the new physiology laboratory                
              exercises; instead of a traditional student lab manual, the                    
              material will be disseminated via a combination of published                   
              papers, posters at national meetings, and computer programs.                   
              Instructors can then modify the exercises for their laboratory                 
              situations and create personalized student manuals suited to                   
              their student populations and available resources.  The                        
              equipment includes a sea-water and environmental chamber,                      
              spectrophotometers, microscopes, osmometer, centrifuge, oxygen                 
              monitors, recorders, myographs, pre-amplifiers, and computers                  
              with printers and software.
