Title       : Equipment for Laboratory for Modern Optics Using the Comprehensive Unified
               Physics Learning Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9251862

Award Number: 9251862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Fork   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph W. Haus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter D. Persans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jack M. Wilson  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              We are combining current technology obtained from the field of                 
              optical communications with a comprehensive computer-based                     
              learning environment as a means of bringing information age                    
              optical technology into the undergraduate laboratory at                        
              moderate cost.  Recent advances in monolithic modelocked                       
              semiconductor lasers and rare earth doped optical fiber                        
              amplifiers are providing an easily maintained and relatively                   
              low cost means of introducing subpicosecond optical pulses                     
              produced at high repetition rate into the undergraduate                        
              laboratory.  The short duration of the pulses and the high peak                
              intensities make a large number of experiments that have not                   
              been previously available except to a small number of research                 
              workers and advanced graduate students, accessible to                          
              undergraduate students.  This technology combined with the                     
              computerized learning environment provides a means for much of                 
              the science and technology underlying high data rate optical                   
              communications to be taught to undergraduates in a graphic and                 
              easily understood manner.  The consistent user interface of the                
              CUPLE (Comprehensive Unified Physics Learning Environment)                     
              employed across different media, such as, laboratory                           
              instruments, data arrays, graphical displays, and video                        
              recordings provides a powerful, but easily accessed teaching                   
              tool for conveying both the drama and the relatively simple                    
              concepts that characterize this rapidly developing area.  The                  
              rapid evolution of technology in this field suggests that                      
              further increases in reliability and ease of operation and                     
              reduction in costs will make this learning environment                         
              available to a large number of users at reasonable cost.
