Title       : Hands On Data Acquisition and Signal Analysis Equipment for the Undergraduate
               Mechanical Engineering Thermoscience Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1992      
File        : a9251146

Award Number: 9251146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph C. Klewicki klewicki@eng.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project creates and enhances experiments which provide the                
              students with hands-on experience associated with modern data                  
              acquisition and signal analysis techniques.  A comprehensive                   
              plan is being implemented that provides a framework for the                    
              long-term development and enhancement of these labs. Also                      
              included in this plan are curriculum and administrative                        
              improvements which effect a greater coordination between the                   
              lecture and laboratory courses. The current strategy is to                     
              attain the goals of significantly increasing individualized                    
              hands-on student involvement in experimental procedures, data                  
              acquisition and signal analysis without resorting to the                       
              construction of multiple facility replications.  The project                   
              employs hand-held Fluke Scopemeters and Portable NeXT computers                
              to achieve, inexpensive, and novel means to accomplish these                   
              goals by putting each two person lab group in complete control                 
              of the data acquisition and signal analysis aspects of a number                
              of existing experiments, as well as a few new experiments                      
              currently being built.  Furthermore, the equipment provides a                  
              foundation for long term laboratory development, expansion, and                
              enhancement. The equipment utilization described herein                        
              represents an economical and educationally valuable  means of                  
              extracting maximum use out of a limited number of experimental                 
              facilities.
