Title       : Modern Physics Experiments for Undergraduates with Cooled Charge-Coupled Device
               Array Detectors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1992       
File        : a9251313

Award Number: 9251313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38087              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Austin rha@suiling.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lyman A. Page  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The Junior Advanced Laboratory at Princeton University is the                  
              core experimental course for physics majors.  A major overhaul                 
              currently underway, seeks to replace some old experiments with                 
              new ones, and to upgrade the instrumentation in the rest.  A                   
              significant fraction of the new experiments relate to                          
              techniques of modern optics or the detection of photons.  They                 
              have acquired two charge coupled device (CCD) cameras that are                 
              greatly facilitating the implementation of these experiments.                  
              (Some of these would not be possible without the CCD.)  In                     
              three of these experiments, the CCD is being used with a                       
              spectrometer and a home-built pulsed nitrogen laser which pumps                
              a dye laser.  An introduction to the important technique of                    
              hole-burning transient spectroscopy is being offered in                        
              Experiment 1.  In Experiment 2, students are being introduced                  
              to modern non-linear optics by performing four-wave phase                      
              conjugation in sodium vapor.  The CCD detector greatly                         
              facilitates tuning of the pump lasers to the sodium transition                 
              lines.  The third optics experiment demonstrates the phenomenon                
              of Raman scattering in water.  The capability of simultaneously                
              capturing the full Raman spectrum in a CCD array makes this                    
              experiment feasible in an undergraduate lab.  Resonance-                       
              enhanced Raman scattering will also be used to study dilute                    
              concentrations of hemoglobin in solution.  Experiment 4 uses a                 
              CCD camera to record the orbits of the moons of Jupiter, and to                
              measure their periods and orbit radii.  The last experiment                    
              demonstrates the interference of a single photon with itself in                
              generating the classic Young interference pattern.  Although                   
              photographic film is competitive with the CCD detector, the                    
              latter is much more versatile and better suited for an                         
              instructional laboratory setting.
