Title       : Modern Optics Teaching Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1992      
File        : a9251578

Award Number: 9251578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene Hecht   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gottipaty N. Rao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Adelphi University
	      South Avenue
	      Garden City, NY  11530    516/294-8700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              In the last 30 years optics has undergone a revivification,                    
              driven to a large extent by the application of lasers and                      
              computers.  The manifestations of what has been a real                         
              revolution are evident everywhere from credit-card holograms to                
              high-resolution television.  With few exceptions, this                         
              technological whirlwind is predicated on advances that are not                 
              well understood outside the immediate confines of the                          
              discipline.  Accordingly, we have begun to create a Modern                     
              Optics Teaching Environment (MOTE) where all undergraduates can                
              learn about, and indeed experience, at least the basics of                     
              these developments and where physics majors can get a state-of-                
              the-art introduction to contemporary optics.                                   
                                                                                             
              Spectroscopy is the window into the machinery of the atom and                  
              is central to the pedagogical development of modern physics and                
              optics.  Accordingly, one of the most highly used pieces of                    
              equipment in the MOTE is a 1.0 m research-grade monochromator.                 
              Studies of sources are conducted using Fabry-Perot and                         
              Michelson interferometers.  The MOTE focuses on the laser                      
              inasmuch as it is one of the premiere and most ubiquitous                      
              instruments in the exploration of contemporary physics.                        
              Students build gas and dye lasers and study their operating                    
              characteristics.  Once the fundamentals of radiant energy are                  
              familiar, and the laser as a versatile source is mastered,                     
              applications to nonlinear optics, holography, spectroscopy, and                
              fiber optics are explored with confidence.  Seniors also                       
              perform thesis research in laser spectroscopy using a pulsed                   
              nitrogen laser and a pumped dye laser.
