Title       : Improving Manufacturing with Artificial Intelligence Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1992        
File        : a9251110

Award Number: 9251110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33225              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christian C. Wagner wagner@argo.acs.oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Van Til  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald J. Srodawa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sankar Sengupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    313/377-2100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              TechniquesOakland University is expanding existing student                     
              facilities for robotics and manufacturing to create a                          
              laboratory for Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Manufacturing.                  
              Specific hardware acquisitions include a computer workstation                  
              with two terminals to support AI development, and two PC-based                 
              stations with appropriate data acquisition and control hardware                
              to support AI delivery.  Software acquisitions include AI tools                
              for knowledge representation and expert systems (largely                       
              contributed by The Carnegie Group, Inc.), object-oriented                      
              modeling software for a wide range of manufacturing problems,                  
              and necessary support software.  These additions permit                        
              students to examine the intelligent use and integration of                     
              current equipment including a CNC mill, a CNC lathe, a vision                  
              system, a robotic manipulator and a CAD/CAM system.This                        
              laboratory primarily supports a new course entitled Improving                  
              Manufacturing with Artificial Intelligence Techniques but the                  
              improvements also benefit existing courses including Artificial                
              Intelligence and Intelligent Robotics.  Students will learn:                   
              1) to use expert system shells to build diagnostic expert                      
              systems for maintaining the lab's devices;  2) to implement                    
              neural network algorithms to control machines;  3) to extract                  
              features that control a manufacturing device or cell using                     
              various learning algorithms;  4) to build hypertext procedure                  
              descriptions for the use of manufacturing systems;  and 5) to                  
              use object-oriented models of manufactured goods, and to apply                 
              other AI techniques to the problems of manufacturing.  The lab                 
              will be one of the first designed to train students in the use                 
              of AI techniques to improve existing manufacturing technologies                
              and help generate new ones.
