Title       : Collaborative Research: ITR/AP Reconstructing Complex Evolutionary Histories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0121680

Award Number: 0121680
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1707460            (Estimated)
Investigator: Tandy J. Warnow tandy@cs.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Hillis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert K. Jansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Randal Linder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Bull  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1655,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0121680
Warnow, Tandy J
University of Texas at Austin

Collaborative
              Research: ITR/AP: Reconstructing Complex Evolutionary


Reconstruction of
              the evolutionary history of a group of organisms has changed the face of
              biology and is being used increasingly in drug discovery, epidemiology, and
              genetic engineering. Unfortunately, such reconstructions typically involve
              solving difficult optimization problems, so that even moderately large datasets
              can require months to years of computation.  In addition, almost all
              evolutionary reconstructions presently assume that the historical pattern is
              one of strict divergence that can be represented by a binary tree.  This
              assumption is frequently violated, especially by plants which often hybridize
              readily and thus produce networks of relationships.

This project brings
              together computer scientists and biologists from two institutions to develop
              new models and algorithms to address these two problems.  Successful completion
              of this project will have an enormous impact by providing tools for
              reconstructing phylogenies of large datasets, and the first tools for inferring
              network models of evolution appropriate to hybridizing speciation.  Such
              network models will alter how biologists think about speciation, while the
              development of methods for large-scale analyses will strongly benefit medical
              and pharmaceutical practice.  
Information technology will be advanced in
              fundamental ways as well, as the project will demonstrate how algorithm design
              and high-performance algorithm engineering can jointly solve very difficult
              discrete optimization problems.


