Title       : Consruction of Multi Purpose Housing at Mount Desert Island Biological
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0121647

Award Number: 0121647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241187             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Claiborne   (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Towle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Desert Island Biol Lab
	      
	      Salsbury Cove, ME  04672    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for the construction of a multi-use housing facility
              that will diminish overcrowding in the housing provided to students
              participating in summer laboratory research, and enhance the ability of the
              laboratory  to accommodate students, teachers and investigators attending
              courses, conferences, and symposia year round. The Laboratory provides access
              for visiting students and scientists who study the unique marine ecosystems of
              coastal Maine and use cold water marine species for the purpose of
              investigating basic biological mechanisms such as osmoregulation, cell
              division, reproduction and the function of vertebrate organs.  The laboratory
              also offers educational programs for students at various levels from high
              school to postdoctoral. The ability of MDIBL to accommodate participants in its
              various activities is currently limited by the quality and quantity of
              available housing, in particular the housing for undergraduate students during
              the peak summer season, student/faculty groups taking marine related short
              courses during the academic year, and investigators seeking short stays for
              research during the winter months. These funds will be used to help construct
              the second of two housing units whose design was chosen to maximize flexibility
              of current and future use, economy of construction and harmony with the
              surrounding land and community. This unit will be insulated and heated to
              provide much needed accommodations in the colder months. 
