Title       : ITR/AP+IM: Procedural Representation and Visualization Enabling Personalized
               Computational Fluid Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0121288

Award Number: 0121288
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3419155            (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Ebert   (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Hart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Marcum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kelly P. Gaither  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Penny Rheingans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1687,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Computer power has increased dramatically over the past decade and has allowed
              computational fluid dynamics (CFD) researchers to more accurately simulate many
              types of complex flow. These simulations have enabled great leaps forward in
              the design and safety of ships, airplanes, automobiles, and other vehicles.
              However, this new power has also yielded terabytes of data, and CFD researchers
              now face a very difficult task in trying to find, extract, and analyze
              important flow features (e.g., time varying vortices, shock waves) buried
              within these monstrous datasets. Unlike the explosive growth in computer power,
              visualization tools for very large datasets have evolved modestly and cannot
              yet help with these tasks significantly. In particular, since detailed
              visualization of such large datasets is impractical, CFD researchers must work
              at a very cumbersome, low level to dice their datasets into workable
              pieces.

CFD researchers desperately need new techniques that simplify and
              automate the iterative process of finding the appropriate portion of their data
              set. They need a system that will allow the user to articulate appropriate
              types of features of interest, provide a compact representation of those
              features, and effectively visualize the feature information locally. The system
              will have to overcome the challenges of loading a sufficient portion of the
              data set over a network connection into a desktop machine, mapping the entire
              data set to a visual representation, and rendering the results at interactive
              rates.

This project will attack these CFD visualization problems by
              developing techniques for creating and using a procedural abstraction for a
              dataset. The major research objectives are to:
1. Detect features (e.g.
              shocks) in complex flows using topological operators.
2. Characterize the data
              relative to these features using a procedural representation consisting of
              implicit models and free-form deformations.
3. Adapt the procedural
              representation to the appropriate level of detail using multi-resolution
              techniques.
4. Encapsulate domain-specific knowledge as metadata to explore
              these extremely large datasets.
5. Visualize the data directly from the
              procedural representation.
6. Verify the accuracy of the procedural
              representation by tracking approximation error.
7. Apply these techniques to
              the large-scale computational flow simulation problems currently studied at
              Stanford and Mississippi State University. 
The resulting system will allow
              CFD researchers to work more effectively by interactively exploring their data
              to pinpoint the features of interest. Moreover, the results of this project
              will provide solutions not only for CFD researchers, but also for a wide
              variety of other visualization challenges and applications. The project's  main
              goal is to develop techniques that allow visualization exploration, feature
              detection, extraction, and analysis at a higher, more effective level through
              the use of procedural data abstraction and representation.

