Title       : Extinct West Indian Vertebrates on the World Wide Web: a Digital Museum for
               Geoscience Conservation, Education and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0121300

Award Number: 0121300
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23357              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. McFarlane dmcfarla@jsd.claremont.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Scripps College
	      10th and Columbia
	      Claremont, CA  91711    714/621-8000

NSF Program : 1733      GEOSCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Extinct West Indian Vertebrates on the World Wide Web: A Digital
              Museum for Geoscience Conservation, Education and Research

This is a pilot
              project, focusing on the extinct vertebrates of Puerto Rico. The project
              assembles and disseminates interactive, digital library of late Quaternary
              extinct vertebrates from the West Indies, an expansion of a decade-long
              research and education program. The late Quaternary history of West Indian
              vertebrates, especially mammals, is of special interest because it is dominated
              by a wave of extinctions unprecedented elsewhere. West Indian Quaternary
              vertebrate fossils are preserved almost exclusively in caves. High human
              population densities in the Caribbean are significantly impacting caves, with
              the irreplaceable loss of both paleontological and paleoclimatic evidence.  The
              survival and elucidation of the paleoecological and paleoclimatic archive in
              West Indian caves depends on a collaboration of local scientists, amateur
              natural historians, cavers and informed members of the general public. 
              Participation by these diverse interest groups is severely limited by a lack of
              access to comparative materials, which for practical and historic reasons have
              generally been accessioned into the collections of the major museums in the
              United States. This project makes these materials widely available in digital
              form, via both the World-Wide-Web and distribution on CD-ROM Methods. 

