Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Human Orbital Prefrontal Cortex and Social
               Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0121970

Award Number: 0121970
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12323              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Knight rtknight@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Ms. Beer and her advisor Dr. Knight
              will conduct a year-long investigation of brain areas that may be involved in
              successful social interaction.  Human social interaction occurs in specific
              contexts in which there are norms dictating which behaviors are appropriate. 
              Previous research suggests that the orbital prefrontal cortex may be involved
              when individuals restrain their social behavior.  This area is thought to be
              active when individuals inhibit their emotional behavior or use emotional
              information to make social judgments.  In two studies, Beer and Knight will
              examine whether orbital prefrontal cortex mediates emotional regulation (i.e.,
              the ability to control the expression of emotion), whether the regulatory
              processes of orbital prefrontal cortex extend to self-disclosure (i.e.,  any
              information about oneself that is personally communicated to another
              individual), and whether the orbital prefrontal cortex is important for
              utilizing emotional information when making social judgments?  Beer and Knight
              will compare individuals with orbital prefrontal cortex damage to individuals
              with intact orbital prefrontal cortex.   Both groups will be asked a series of
              personal questions by a stranger and subsequently watch a videotape of this
              interaction.  If the orbital prefrontal cortex is involved in restraining
              social behavior in accordance with social norms, the group with orbital
              prefrontal cortex damage will inappropriately express emotion and disclose more
              personal information than the healthy group. Similarly, if the orbital
              prefrontal cortex is involved in applying emotion information to social
              judgments, the group with orbital prefrontal cortex damage will inaccurately
              judge their behavior after watching the videotape of their social interaction.
              

This research is likely to increase knowledge about the brain basis of
              emotional regulation, self-disclosure, and the application of emotional
              information to behavioral judgments.  These behavioral and brain functions have
              significant roles in personal and social life.

