Title       : ECS/EPSCoR, NSF Grantees Conference on Electronics, Photonics and Device
               Technologies, July 9-10, 2001, Univ. of Arkansas, Fayetteville, Ark.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0121072

Award Number: 0121072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72417              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ajay P. Malshe apm2@engr.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is to request funds to organize ECS-EPSCoR,
              NSF
Grantees Conference on Electronics, Photonics and Device Technologies.
              The
conference will be conducted during summer of 2001 at the University of
              Arkansas,
Fayetteville, Arkansas. Arkansas is an EPSCoR state where
              significant progress has been
demonstrated in the conference related topics
              through major NSF sponsored programs.

Another important objective is to
              establish an interactive platform of leading researchers
from the states with
              leading as well as evolving research programs in the areas related to
the
              conference. The meeting will invite grantees from EPSCoR states (over 60% out
              of
the total number) and from non-EPSCoR states. This will be a singular
              opportunity to
generate and discuss new academic concepts, research and
              education directions by
establishing teams of leading researchers. The
              conference will provide a basis for
discussing recent research findings as
              well as sharing first-hand-teaching experiences in
interdisciplinary education
              across cultural, age and gender boundaries.

The choices of conference venue
              is conducive for the subjects as well as inter and intra
state teaming due to
              presence of outstanding research and education programs in the
related areas
              on this campus. For example, this campus houses various leading NSF
funded
              laboratories, centers, programs and projects including the Arkansas Center
              for
Electronic-Photonic Materials Innovation (ACEMI), Materials Research
              Science and
Engineering Center (MRSEC), Distributed seed Program at AR-NB-OK
              for Science and
Engineering Research Center (SERC) for Durable Nano and Micro
              System, femtosecond
laser microvias drilling at Materials and Manufacturing
              Research Laboratories (MRL),
Integrative Graduate Education and Research
              Training (IGERT) in Microelectronics and
Photonics, and MEMS packaging at High
              Density Electronics Center (HiDEC).

The conference will result in promoting
              interaction among scientists and engineers
leading to germination of new ideas
              and themes, team formation, new proposal
submissions, student involvement and
              exchange, proceedings of extended abstracts, and
generation of more fiscal and
              intellectual resources at EPSCoR states, K-12 and school
teacher outreach,
              more technology transfer. The outcome of the conference will be
disseminated
              through proceedings and related material on internet, recordable media, and
at
              various related technical conferences.
