Title       : ITR/IM+AP: Quality-Scalable Information Flow Systems for Environmental
               Observation and Forecasting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 1,  2001    
File        : a0121475

Award Number: 0121475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3925000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonio M. Baptista baptista@ccalmr.ogi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Todd K. Leen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Maier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wu-chi Feng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan Walpole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1687,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Real-time Environmental Observation and Forecasting Systems (EOFS) will
              revolutionize the way scientists share information about the environment and
              represent an opportunity to break traditional information barriers separating
              scientists from society at large. EOFS are already in use, but they tend to be
              small-scale, application- and domain- specific, stand-alone systems. There is a
              need for evolution towards multi-purpose shared systems designed to adapt
              flexibly to evolving needs of information consumers.  What is required are
              large-scale, shared, heterogeneous distributed systems that make extensive use
              of diverse sensor-based inputs, sophisticated numerical simulations, mobile and
              embedded real-time system components, wireless and wired communications,
              high-performance computers, and high capacity storage systems.  

This ITR
              medium project has assembled an inter-disciplinary team, including computer
              science and environmental science researchers in addition to a heterogeneous
              base of pilot users.  This group will collaborate to develop software
              technology which will enable EOFS to evolve efficiently, and to deliver
              quantifiably reliable information about the environment at the right time and
              in the right form to the right users. The project focus is on EOFS for
              estuarine and coastal regions. These regions are selected because they are
              highly variable natural systems subject to intense human activity and with
              great social, environmental, economic and cultural value.

The research will
              include:

i. Developing missing integration concepts and technologies for
              EOFS, with emphasis on quality-scalable information processing, storage and
              access (the computer science research).
ii. Closing the loop between
              environmental models and sensors, and implementing a next generation EOFS based
              on an existing prototype for an estuary with multiple and often conflicting
              uses (the environmental observation and forecasting systems research);
iii.
              Using, evaluating and refining the EOFS prototype for scientific discovery,
              natural resources stewardship and emergency response, thus incorporating sound
              science in operational and management decisions of critical regional importance
              and national significance (the environmental science and management
              applications);
iv. Developing pilot multi-level, inter-disciplinary
              educational programs that cross-train young people, computer scientists,
              environmental scientists and practitioners in the conceptualization,
              development and use of environmental information technology (the education
              impact). 

