Title       : An OAI-Compliant Federated Physics Digital Library
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a0121656

Award Number: 0121656
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $479997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt J. Maly maly@cs.odu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammad Zubair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is building an Open Archives Initiative (OAI) compliant federated
              digital library with an emphasis on physics for the National Science,
              Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology Education Digital Library (NSDL). 
              This physics digital library will federate holdings from the physics e-print
              server arXiv (http://arXiv.org), Physical Review D from the American Physical
              Society (http://prd.aps.org), and the collected holdings from the Technical
              Report Interchange (TRI) project (http://egbert.cs.odu.edu/tri/html/).  TRI
              includes reports from the NASA Langley Research Center, Los Alamos National
              Laboratory, and the Air Force Research Laboratory.  Other holdings are being
              imported from the Arc project (http://arc.cs.odu.edu).

To federate
              collections with varying degrees of richness of metadata elements poses a
              number of challenging questions, which the investigators are addressing, in the
              areas of resource discovery, creation and maintenance of harvested metadata,
              and economic sustainability.  Regarding resource discovery:

(1) How do we
              enable users to search across diverse collections within one common interface
              without losing the ability of searching with richer metadata elements for
              collections that support them?
(2) How do we address the lack of a uniform
              controlled vocabulary?
(3) How do we map the user's view of the domain into
              the metadata models of the participating archives?

Regarding creation and
              maintenance:

(1) What is the most effective way of keeping the metadata
              between data providers and the federation service consistent almost all the
              time?  Are the current OAI protocols sufficiently developed and robust enough
              to support the consistency?
(2) How do we address the dynamic nature of the
              collections?

The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in NSF's Directorate
              for Mathematical and Physical Sciences is providing significant co-funding for
              this project in recognition of its emphasis on developing collections and
              services in the area of physics.

