Title       : ITR/SY: Situationally Appropriate Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0121560

Award Number: 0121560
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1050000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott E. Hudson hudson@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jie Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jodi Forlizzi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yoky Matsuoka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1654,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              We are poised at the threshold of an information rich world with devices and
              services able to deliver that information to nearly anyone, at any place, and
              at any time.   Humans have evolved social mechanisms for smoothly and flexibly
              managing interpersonal communications;  however, current computational and
              communications devices are, almost without exception, utterly unaware of the
              social and attentional state of the user.   They know little or nothing of the
              personal, social, and task situations in which they are used, and they do
              little or nothing to account for, and minimize, the human costs they induce. 
              In this project, the PI and his team will explore situationally appropriate
              interfaces that retrieve, generate, and deliver information in a manner that is
              sensitive to the situation of the user.   These interfaces will allow for
              communication and information systems that maneuver, rather than blunder,
              through the social world.   To accomplish this ambitious goal, the team will
              pursue a three-part research plan.   First, they will use behavioral theory and
              research to model social mechanisms for managing interpersonal communications. 
              The comparatively unexploited research we will draw on examines the affordances
              of situations and consistent patterns of human nonverbal social behavior within
              situations.  Second, they will extract key situational and user behavior data
              from these models via input from new sensing technologies, using noninvasive
              (e.g., vision-based) sensing technology to provide information about situations
              and users.  Third, leveraging knowledge from sensory, perceptual, and cognitive
              psychology, as well as from the fields of visual and interaction design, the
              team will create displays and interaction designs that are far more
              situationally appropriate than today's interfaces.  To address the substantial
              challenges that this breadth of work presents, the PI has assembled a strong
              multidisciplinary team that brings expertise from computer science, social,
              sensory, perceptual, and cognitive psychology, and the field of design.

