Title       : U.S.-Hungary Workshop on Natural Attenuation of Metals along the Tisza River's
               Floodplain-Wetlands Continuum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0121402

Award Number: 0121402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Domy Adriano adriano@srel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0313040   Water Pollution                         
Program Ref : 5916,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This U.S.-Hungary workshop will bring together expert scientists and engineers
              as well as postdoctoral associates and students to examine the environmental
              issues associated with metal contamination of the Hungarian Tisza River
              throughout its floodplain and wetlands.  The organizers are Prof. Domy Adriano
              of the University of Georgia and Prof. Nemeth Tamas, of the Hungarian Research
              Institute for Soil Science and Agricultural Chemistry.  Their objective is to
              determine the key scientific issues and to help define research priorities that
              are longer-term and cross-disciplinary.  To accomplish this, workshop
              discussions will feature pollutant cycling and the effects on local aquatic and
              terrestrial environments.

Specifically, the U.S. and Hungarian organizers
              intend to use this forum to: 1) formulate hypotheses regarding the rates and
              mechanisms of natural attenuation, from the landscape to molecular levels; 2)
              determine bio-availability and the natural attenuation of metals in the Tisza's
              chronically contaminated landscape; 3) relate the kinetics of metal attenuation
              to biological responses and chemical indices; and 4) develop novel monitoring
              protocols and enhanced predictive models for managing ecological habitats, in
              the context of land use and water management policies.  Overall the
              participants are motivated by the goal of defining suitable environmental
              management and mitigation strategies.  If successful, this workshop should lead
              to the delineation of collaborative and linked US-Hungarian subprojects on
              ecological and engineering topics that will yield results applicable to the
              metal pollution problems found in big rivers around the world. 

This
              workshop in environmental engineering fulfills the program objective of
              advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and
              Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share research resources in
              areas of strong mutual interest and competence.
