Title       : ITR/SI: Real-Time Long-Distance Terascale Computation for Full Bandwidth
               Tele-Immersion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0121293

Award Number: 0121293
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2651500            (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry Fuchs fuchs@cs.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1654,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Tele-immersion, an ability to share presence with distant individuals,
              situations, and environments, may provide vast new possibilities for human
              experience and interaction in the near future.   In order to make these dreams
              a reality, a host of technical difficulties must be solved: acquisition,
              communication, display, and interaction.   This project focuses on answering
              two of the major questions:   1) Is tele-immersion as good as its promise or is
              there some inherent weakness?    By using overwhelming computation power, the
              PI hopes to accelerate development so a real system can be tried within three
              years.   2) Is there a show-stopper with tele-immersion over long distances?   
              The PI will try it for real, not just simulated distance via artificial delays.
                Specifically, the PI will build a 60-camera system at the University of
              Pennsylvania, compute depth on the 3000-processor Terascale Computing System at
              the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center, and display at the University of North
              Carolina.    The PI will have a more modest acquisition system at UNC (15
              cameras) and a more modest display system at UPenn to enable local development
              and two-way collaboration.   The testbed application will be remote medical
              consultation by a trauma surgeon, chosen because of its inherent demand for
              real-time response and its great potential benefit to societal.  The PI expects
              to be able to provide demonstrable progress within the three year period of the
              project.  Team members who are leading trauma surgeons will guide the design;
              evaluation will be by other trauma surgeons.  The three years of effort will
              lead to a testable prototype with sufficient power and scope to be evaluated by
              application experts not on the research team.   The results will indicate the
              likely success of other tele-immersion applications, as well as providing
              experience in building real-time applications on a remote terascale facility
              over fast wide-area networks.

