Title       : ITR/SI+AP: Active Sensor Networks with Applications in Marine Microorganism
               Monitoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0121141

Award Number: 0121141
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1567861            (Estimated)
Investigator: Aristides A. G. Requicha requicha@lipari.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Caron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maja J. Mataric  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah L. Estrin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gaurav Sukhatme  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1655,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0121141
Requicha, Aristides
University of Southern
              California

ITR/SI+AP: Active Sensor Networks with Applications in Marine
              Microorganism Monitoring





The proposed research combines networking,
              distributed robotics, nanorobotics, and microbiology in an effort to develop
              and apply technology for the in-situ, real-time monitoring of microbial
              populations in aquatic environments, such as the ocean or water supply systems.
              The application context provides feedback from experiments with realistic
              systems, and this feedback is essential to the progress of the Information
              Technology (IT) research proposed here. This project addresses two key
              challenges for IT during this decade: moving from virtual to physical
              applications, and moving from macro to micro and nano.

The IT focus is on
              the study of Physically-Coupled Scalable Information Infrastructures (PCSIIs),
              which effectively "embed the internet". The sensors and actuators in the
              proposed PCSII must have small physical dimensions, comparable to those of the
              microorganisms to be monitored. They must be deployed in very large numbers to
              achieve the unprecedented spatial and temporal resolution necessary to
              investigate the causal relationships between environmental conditions and
              microorganisms. Control and coordination of a multitude of such devices of
              limited and heterogeneous capabilities raise major challenges for networking,
              distributed coordination and distributed algorithms. Sensing for detection and
              identification of microorganisms is another challenge, which will be tackled by
              using nanorobotic Scanning Probe Microscope technology.

