Title       : Singular Vector and Predictability Diagnosis of Pacific Large-Scale Cyclogenesis
               Events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0121186

Award Number: 0121186
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368234             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Morgan morgan@meteor.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David D. Houghton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A pronounced feature in atmospheric weather patterns is the onset and subsequent
              development of wintertime large-scale cyclogenesis (LSC) over the Northern
              Pacific Ocean, extending to North America.  The project will use singular
              vector (SV) diagnostic techniques, a fairly new approach, to identify and
              understand the precursors for the establishment of cyclogenesis events through
              an examination of the spatial patterns of errors in weather prediction models
              for periods before, during, and after occurrences of the enhanced jet flow
              within the cyclogenesis lifecycles.  The research will be conducted through the
              analysis of global observational data sets, simulations with numerical models,
              and ensemble forecasts from operational models.  An analysis of the
              characteristic evolution of differences between members of ensemble forecasts
              will be used to understand the sensitivity of LSC forecasts to initial
              condition uncertainties.  Other problems the PIs will investigate include: the
              role of dynamical instability on the transient growth in LSCs and possible
              degradation in predictability during LSC events. 

Understanding the dynamics
              and predictability during LSC events will contribute to the improvement in the
              medium range weather prediction.  The research will contribute to educating a
              new generation in a fairly new scientific area, namely, singular vectors and
              adjoint systems associated with numerical models.  The principal investigators
              will organize two workshops that will be tailored for weather forecasters to
              share information on predictability and to educate the weather forecasting
              community on how to use SV analysis in daily forecasts.  Presently, SV analysis
              remains a formidable topic to many.  This project may provide an opportunity to
              transform a complicated mathematical formulation into practical applications. 
              

