Title       : ITR/SY+AP: Acquisition, Representation, and Remote Visualization of Digital
               Artifacts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0121438

Award Number: 0121438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Seales   (Principal Investigator current)
              James N. Griffioen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Calvert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher O. Jaynes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1687,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to research and develop high-quality, scalable, and
              reconfigurable acquisition
and display systems for digital library collections
              accessed via the Internet. We will acquire new digital
collections at the
              Museo de Arte de Puerto Rico and provide access to them through end-user
              displays
that are scalable and reconfigurable. These displays will cooperate
              with a remote model server to
provide the highest possible display fidelity
              under the current network conditions. In order to allow
the widespread
              acquisition and dissemination of digital collections, revolutionary advances in
              3D model
acquistion, content delivery, and display are required. To thisend,we
              will focus on the following research
challenges:
   Acquisition: we
              willprovide new acquisition strategies designed to produce high-quality
              layered,
image-based representations, 3-D shape descriptions, and multi-layerd
              data. These new strategies
will enable efficient access and high-resolution
              end-user display. hybrid representation of texture,
shape, and metadata.
  
              Representation: we will encode the acquired collection in a way that moves
              toward the features
provided in the MPEG-4 multimedia standard. This encoding
              will preserve the richness and
fidelity of the data while achieving
              standardization for access, manipulation, and evolution of
collections over
              time.
   Remote Access: we will develop new techniques supporting distributed
              access to digital col-
lections in a heterogeneous networked environment.
              These techniques will be designed to satisfy
access requirements across a
              spectrum that varies from very high quality local display and low-
latency
              interactive manipulation, to remote access over wide-area, potentially low
              bitrate links.
   Display: we will develop new techniques for deploying
              scalable tiled projection displays for
institutions and users who do not have
              access to sophisticated and dedicated technical support and
high-cost
              hardware. These scalable display systems can be assembled from commodity
              hardware
and provide automatic, continuous calibration, and rapid
              reconfigurability.
The motivation for this work stems from the need for
              high-quality preservation, access, and display
techniques for digitized
              collections. Libraries, museums, and research scholars who want to
              acquire,
manipulate, and provide remote access to (and high-definition display
              of)digitized artifacts need cost
effective, non-intrusive, easily configurable
              methods for creating and viewing high-quality collections.
New techniques will
              be evaluated on real-world library collections with particular focus on the
              preser-
vation and dissemination of artifacts at our partner institution for
              this work, the Museo de Arte de
Puerto Rico . With the aid of expert
              consultants who will contribute significant effort towards this
project at our
              partner institution (see attached letter), we willdevelop and deploy a
              prototype system
for acqusition and display using the techniques developed as
              part of this project. The resulting digital
archive will be made accessible to
              patrons of the museum as well as a much larger audience around the
world via
              the Internet.
We believe that this research will have significant immediate,
              medium-term and long-term impact.
The immediate impact of the project will be
              the development of new acquisition, access, and display
methods that will be
              deployed and tested at the Museo de Arte de Puerto Rico, making parts of
              their
collections available in forms not previously possible. In the medium
              term, our new technical approaches
will be valuable not only to the digital
              library community, but also to other research, instructional, and
commercial
              areas where configurable large-scale display systems are needed (e.g.,
              classroom, research
visualization centers, conference venues, etc). In the
              long term, we believe this proposed work has
the potential to substantially
              impact the way people view and interact with data, whether the data is
a
              collection of historical artifacts, a visual representation of a complex
              simulation, data/illustrations
presenting in the classroom, etc. Moreover, the
              cost effectiveness of our approach means that it will be
affordable to a wide
              range of users.
