Title       : US-South Africa Collaborative Research on Supported Gold Complexes and
               Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Characterization, and Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0121619

Award Number: 0121619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $810000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold H. Kung hkung@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce C. Gates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Proposal Title: US-South Africa Collaborative Research on
              Supported Gold Complexes and Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Characterization, and
              Catalysis
Proposal Number:	CTS-0121619
Principal Investigator: Harold
              Kung
Institution: Northwestern University


The objective of this proposal
              is to develop a collaborative effort with investigators from South Africa to
              study several model reactions on gold nanoparticles.  This research area was
              identified as a prime candidate for the joint investigation at the US-South
              Africa Workshop on Heterogeneous Catalysis held in Pretoria in June, 2000.  The
              focus of the work is to elucidate the nature of the active sites and the
              effects of modifiers on these sites.  A combination of organogold complexes and
              gold salts will be used to prepare catalysts containing clusters of controlled
              distributions of metallic gold atoms and gold ions.  The performance of these
              catalysts in CO oxidation, propene oxidation, and acetylene hydrogenation will
              be tested and compared with results derived from a model.  In-situ methods used
              to probe active sites include atomic-resolution microscopy, Mossbauer
              spectroscopy, and synchrotron radiation techniques.  To foster collaboration
              among the seven investigators, the US faculty will invite several South African
              graduate students to spend one to two years in their laboratories, and US
              students will visit South Africa to perform research.  The results of the
              research are expected to advance an understanding of the mechanisms of gold
              catalysis and to further opportunities for new applications of gold in
              industrial catalysis.


