Title       : Quantifying Sources of Atmospheric Methyl Halides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  2002   
File        : a0121153

Award Number: 0121153
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $391962             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph J. Cicerone rjcicero@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The P.I. will investigate the potential impacts of agriculture on methyl halide
              emissions to the atmosphere by quantifying biochemically related sources of
              methyl bromide, methyl iodide, and methyl chloride.  Controlled experiments
              will take place on a variety of rice cultivars and other crops in a greenhouse
              to evaluate the factors that influence methyl halide emission rates, such as
              temperature, light level, and plant-development state.  A hypothesized
              enzyme-driven process of production of methyl halides will be investigated by
              assaying enzyme activity in leaf-disk samples as emissions are measured, along
              with enzyme-inhibition experiments using caffeic acid.  Experiments will cover
              the growing season of rice to determine if emissions are concentrated during
              any plant-development stage and if emissions correlate with those of methane. 
              Similar experiments will study other crop plants (wheat, barley, broccoli,
              rapeseed).
	
Ectomycorrhizal fungi (EF) are also newly identified sources of
              methyl bromide and iodide; related fungi have been known as significant
              emitters of methyl chloride.  The environmental occurrence of these fungi is
              great enough to indicate potential significance for the global atmosphere. 
              This project will survey emissions from EF species in lab studies and will
              study environmental controls on these emissions.  The project will also measure
              emissions from salt marshes and mangroves, building on new observations of
              methyl halide emissions from these habitats.  Researchers from Stanford
              University and the University of Pennsylvania will collaborate in the project. 
              The results of the project will be useful as input to atmospheric
              photochemical/transport models to assess impact on regional tropospheric ozone
              amounts.  The emissions data should lead to significant improvement in our
              understanding of the relative roles of natural and anthropogenic sources of
              methyl chloride and methyl bromide, and also to new views of terrestrial
              sources of methyl iodide.

