Title       : Brain Mechanisms Underlying Sensorimotor Adaptation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0121916

Award Number: 0121916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45028              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Van Donkelaar paulvd@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to gain a better understanding of the brain
              mechanisms underlying sensory-motor adaptation. Humans display a remarkable
              ability to adapt to a new situation, especially when available sensory
              information conflicts. Behaviorally, this adaptive ability has been well
              described. One way researchers have investigated this adaptation is by having
              subjects attempt to manually point at a visual target while wearing prism
              goggles. Initial reaching attempts are inaccurate because the prism
              systematically bends the light before it enters the eyes such that the target
              appears to shift left or right of its actual location. However, with repeated
              trials, the subject is able to adapt to the altered visual input and generate
              accurate responses. When the goggles are removed there is an aftereffect in
              which the reaching responses are inaccurate in the opposite direction to that
              observed during the prism exposure period. Based on these behavioral
              characteristics of prism adaptation, recent neurophysiological, clinical and
              human brain imaging studies have begun to identify the network of brain sites
              that contribute to this simple form of learning, but a more complete
              understanding of the potentially different contributions of the network's
              components is required. This goal will be accomplished by examining the degree
              to which adaptation is disrupted in normal, healthy human subjects when
              transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is applied over the cerebellum,
              posterior parietal cortex, or premotor cortex during the training period. It is
              predicted that TMS delivered over each of these sites will have different
              effects on the degree of adaptation that occurs depending upon when the
              stimulation is given and the availability of visual feedback from the hand. In
              addition to expanding our basic understanding of the nature of sensorimotor
              adaptation and its underlying mechanisms, the proposed research may also be
              useful in contributing to the design of motor rehabilitation therapies.

