Title       : ITR/PE: A Learning Environment for Information Technology Concepts Using
               Intensive, Unobtrusive Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0121345

Award Number: 0121345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1001249            (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Tanimoto tanimoto@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Earl B. Hunt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Winn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia J. Atman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1657,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0121345	
Tanimoto, Steven
University of Washington

ITR/PE: A Learning
              Environment for Information Technology Concepts Using Intensive, Unobtrusive
              Assessment





Although many learning environments have been developed
              that effectively engage students in assembling computational objects,
              simulations, or mathematical constructions, for the most part these systems
              fail to take pedagogical advantage of the wealth of assessment-related data
              that results from the fact that the students are working on computers.  This is
              due less to the newness of these environments than to the challenges of
              effectively utilizing the event logs, student writing, and student
              constructions as evidence of cognitive state, learning preferences, and skills.
               We propose to integrate and extend two software systems for online education
              in order to perform a series of experiments that assess the impact of using
              intensive, unobtrusive assessment tightly integrated with a constructive
              learning environment upon learning outcomes and efficiencies.  The integrated
              learning environment will be tested primarily with University of Washington
              freshmen but also with Mercer Island High School seniors, in problem solving
              and construction activities involving digital image representation and
              processing, web-based communication, and computer programming.  The students'
              writing, online constructions, online sketches and computer-generated activity
              logs will be analyzed using a combination of computer-assisted and automated
              mark-up.  The results of mark-up will trigger pedagogical recommendations to
              instructors, and in some cases, directly to the students. Such interventions
              may take a variety of forms; for example, a group of students stuck at the
              point of frustration in solving some problem may benefit by having a key step,
              performed well by a student in another group, called to their attention.  Our
              objective will be to determine effective methods both for extracting
              pedagogically useful information from the products and byproducts of online
              learning and for designing the instruction to enable and benefit from the use
              of this information.



