Title       : ITR/IM+PE+SY: Summer Workshops on Human Language Technology: Integrating
               Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a0121285

Award Number: 0121285
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Griffin                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2349460            (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick Jelinek jelinek@clsp.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jason M. Eisner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Byrne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Yarowsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sanjeev P. Khudanpur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1655,9216,9251,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              We propose to organize yearly, intensive six-week research workshops
at Johns
              Hopkins University, focusing on Language Engineering,
including the mutually
              related areas of automatic speech recognition
and synthesis, natural language
              processing, machine translation,
information extraction and summarization.
              Applications of language
engineering techniques to other domains such as
              language instruction
or bioinformatics will also be appropriate workshop
              topics. These
workshops will bring together teams of leading professionals
              and
graduate and undergraduate students in a cooperative effort to
advance
              the state of the art. The first goal of the proposed workshop
series is to
              establish new research directions in Language Engineering.
The second goal is
              to attract students to the field and to offer
them an intensive hands-on
              mentored research education. The third
is to engender extensive
              cross-fertilization between researchers
distributed across industrial,
              academic and government institutions,
forging intensive links in the 6-week
              summer period and offering
a shared research environment for follow-on
              collaborative work.
To ensure that the projects address current problems in
              the state
of the art, each year an open call for workshop project
              proposals
will be issued to researchers in the worldwide language
              engineering
community. The proposals received will be evaluated
              competitively
at planning meetings held each year. The meetings will draw
              together
project proponents, government representatives, and experts
              from
related fields to assess the viability and promise of the proposals
and
              to identify three candidate projects for the summer workshop.
Throughout this
              process of soliciting proposals and recruiting
the personnel to carry them
              out, we will make a diligent attempt
to include researchers from
              underrepresented institutions and
communities.
