Title       : Collaborative Project: StandardConnection--Mapping NSDL Educational Objects to
               Content Standards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0121543

Award Number: 0121543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238550             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth D. Liddy liddy@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a collaborative project with Award No. 0121717 (University of
              Washington; Stuart A. Sutton, Principal Investigator).  Researchers at the
              University of Washington's Information School and Syracuse University's Center
              for Natural Language Processing are leading this effort, with assistance from
              Mid-continent Research for Education and Learning (McREL) and Achieve,
              Inc.

The investigators are developing a natural language processing tool
              ("StandardConnection") for the automatic assignment of content standards and
              benchmarks to educational resources in the collections of the National Science,
              Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology Education Digital Library (NSDL) and
              to other educational resources on the Web.  The standards and benchmarks come
              from the Compendium of Standards and Benchmarks developed by McREL, and the
              Achieve Standards Database.  Supplementing general descriptive metadata, the
              content standards metadata generated by the StandardConnection tool will make
              it possible for a teacher in any state to use the NSDL to locate appropriate
              teaching resources for helping students achieve a particular competency set by
              the state.

The project entails acquiring a "training" and "testing"
              collection of educational resources for analysis; cultivating a sophisticated
              level of understanding of the human cognitive processes involved in manually
              assigning content standard metadata tags to resources; designing and developing
              the technology based on this understanding; running the StandardConnection tool
              on an unseen set of data; analyzing the results and adjusting the tool, through
              iterations, until a highly reliable tagging is produced; and employing a group
              of teacher-experts to analyze the quality of the tool's mappings of resources
              to standards and benchmarks.

This project constitutes a logical extension of
              work conducted under Award Nos. 0085837 and 0085838, "Breaking the Metadata
              Generation Bottleneck," in which the investigators are processing the text of
              educational resources to automatically assign Gateway to Educational Materials
              (GEM) metatags for the descriptive and subject aspects of educational
              resources.

