Title       : ITR/SY: Verification Tools for Autonomous and Embedded Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0121547

Award Number: 0121547
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund M. Clarke emc@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randal E. Bryant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeannette M. Wing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1667,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project is developing a new generation of formal verification
              tools that can be integrated into design environments for the complex,
              high-assurance embedded and autonomous systems of today and of the future. Such
              systems are increasingly distributed, complex, and dynamic; they must operate
              with a high degree of autonomy and survivability in diverse and unpredictable
              environments. This project will focus on the development of new verification
              methods and tools to provide a rigorous means for checking the integrity and
              correctness of designs for these systems before they are deployed. The project
              has two broad research thrusts:  

1. Verifying System Integrity. System
              integrity refers to correctness with respect to the interactions among the
              distributed software and hardware components. Systems must satisfy
              synchronization, resource, and real-time constraints imposed by the
              implementation architecture and application requirements. This project will
              extend automated verification methods that have been successful in hardware and
              protocol applications to their use with embedded and autonomous systems.  
2. 
              Modeling the Environment. Embedded and autonomous systems must interact in
              complex ways with physical systems and adverse environments. It is thus
              essential to capture correctly and effectively the continuous dynamics,
              feedback loops, and unpredictable features of the environment in the models
              used for formal verification. This project will draw on recent developments in
              hybrid system verification to integrate continuous state dynamics with
              discrete-state models used in formal verification.  

