Title       : A Digital Library of Ceramic Microstructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0121540

Award Number: 0121540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $649589             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Wills roger.wills@udri.udayton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mattison K. Ferber  (Principal Investigator former)
              Robert E. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Naresh N. Thadhani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jagannathan Sankar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Dayton
	      300 College Park
	      Dayton, OH  454690104    937/229-2919

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is creating a digital library of microstructures for functional
              ceramics with emphasis on materials used for structural, electronic, and
              thermal applications. This library will be used in ceramic education to (1)
              illustrate the role of microstructure in dictating the macroscopic properties,
              (2) highlight changes in the microstructure resulting from degradation
              processes associated with the intended function, and (3) conduct virtual
              measurements of selected properties. Digital images of these materials are
              being collected and compiled into a master database. For each material,
              representative property data (e.g., strength and fracture toughness for
              structural ceramics, dielectric constant for the electrical ceramics, and
              thermal conductivity, thermal expansion, and compressive creep for
              refractories) are being included in the database as well. Software is being
              developed to (1) access this database via the Internet, (2) measure
              microstructural features such as grain size and distribution, (3) illustrate
              key property data appropriate
for the microstructure being examined, and (4)
              conduct virtual measurements. The database and software is being beta tested
              and then refined based upon the results. Ultimately, the digital library of
              ceramic microstructures (DLCM) is being transferred to the National Institute
              of Standards and Technology (NIST) and will be linked with an existing Web
              site, Ceramics WebBook, which provides a guide to data centers, tools, and
              resources.

This project is a partnership among three universities,
              University of Missouri at Rolla, Georgia Tech, and North Carolina A&T; and the
              University of Dayton Research Institute. 

Significant co-funding of this
              project is being provided by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the
              NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences in recognition of the
              emphasis on collections development in the area of materials science. 

