Title       : ITR/AP: Tools and Methods for Multiscale Biomolecular Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0121361

Award Number: 0121361
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2962227            (Estimated)
Investigator: Celeste Sagui celeste_sagui@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Board  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lubos Mitas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lee G. Pedersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerzy Bernholc  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1164,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award is the result of a proposal submitted to the Information Technology
              Research (ITR) Initiative.  The grant is being funded jointly by the Divisions
              of Materials Research, Chemistry, Biological Infrastructure and Molecular and
              Cellular Biosciences.  

Large-scale electronic structure and atomistic
              simulations have proven themselves to be essential in advancing our
              understanding of the complex physical and chemical transformations undertaken
              by biomolecules in carrying out their cellular functions.  The breathtaking
              progress in computer performance and recent advances in algorithms for
              molecular simulations systems are opening unprecedented opportunities to
              investigate the biomolecular processes in silico, i.e., by accurate modeling of
              fundamental natural laws and processes through their computer representations. 
              The overarching goal of this project is to seize this opportunity and develop a
              set of computational methods and tools which will achieve a qualitatively new
              level of usefulness, flexibility, accuracy and scientific impact.  These goals
              will be achieved by combining significant new developments of both quantum and
              classical simulation methods, exploring their interoperabilities, and by the
              exploitation of parallelism and recent algorithmic advances.  Realistic
              biomolecular simulations are notoriously difficult because they typically
              involve very large and complex mamcromolecules such as DNA or proteins, which
              need to be simulated in a proper solvent environment.  While ideally one would
              like to describe biomolecules and all their transformations with ab initio
              accuracy, this is clearly an unreasonable goal given the computational demands
              of such simulations.  What is, however, well within reach is an integrated
              multiscale approach that treats different parts of the biomolecular system with
              differing levels of accuracy, depending on their imporatnce.  For instance, in
              order to understand enzymatic reactions, there is a need to understand the
              structure and chemistry of the complex reaction centers built up by the
              three-dimensional folding of proteins as accurately as possible.  Our strategy
              is to decompose the large system into a set of overlapping nested regions,
              using an appropriate physical representation (quantum, classical, or continuum)
              and to develop interfaces that provides a physically consistent description and
              keeps the fundamental physical laws intact.

To achieve these goals we aim to
              develop a set of modular tools for biomolecular simulations which treat parts
              of the system at a quantum, classical atomistic or continuum level, as needed
              for efficient studies of large moelcular complexes.  At the quantum level, we
              will treat the system with a combination of quantum Monte Carlo (QMC), quantum
              chemical post-Hartree-Fock and density functional methods (DFT).  At an
              intermediate level, calssical molecular dynamics with empirical force fields
              will be used, while continuum methods may serve to describe the large
              length-scale properties of the solvent environment.  In order to build such
              tools, substantial algorithmic improvements to current methods need to be
              developed at each "level" of the physical representation, along with proper
              interfaces between the different descriptions of the system.  The most
              important innovative features of our approach will be the following: (i) the
              unprecedented use of the highly accurate QMC approach and its new developments
              for biological simulations; (ii) at a density functional level, algorithmic
              improvements will enable routine calculations of thousands of atoms including
              quantum molecular dynamics, and also dynamically call the QMC approach for
              checking the accuracy of the DFT functionals in problematic cases; (iii) the
              electrostatic interactions will be treated in a highly accurate manner in the
              classical mechanics regions, with the implementation of point multipolar
              expansions, polarizabilities and low-order continuous wavefunctions, which will
              provide a robust interface between the quantum and classical regions; (iv) the
              codes will be based on real-space grids as these enable true O(N) scaling on
              parallel machines, are more flexible in terms of boundary conditions, and allow
              for additional gains in accuracy, while preserving stability, via the
              introduction of non-uniform grids; (v) our methodology relies on proven
              multigrid methods that allow for an accelerated convergence to the proper
              solution on different length scales; (vi) the codes will be developed under an
              Open Source GPL license and made available to the public as "add-on" packages
              to existing codes, such as AMBER; (vii) the codes will be scalable and
              portable, running on both massively parallel supercomputers and workstations. 
              They will use modern Web-based technologies for providing access to simulations
              and their results.

The new capabilities will enable us to attack key
              challenges and paradigmatic biomolecular problems, such as enzymatic reactions,
              blood coagulation proteins, and others, both as a part of our ITR program and
              through the efforts of the scientific community at large.  Ultimately, we will
              distribute our codes freely to the biosimulation community via the GPL license
              in order to achieve a wide spread dissemination of results and maximum
              scientific impact.  In addition to the research goals, this program has
              considerable educational goals, aimed at developing a set of interdisciplinary
              modern courses that will generate student interest and excitement about
              computational and simulation science and technology.  Toward this end, we will
              develop a curriculum for the Center for High Performance Supercomputing being
              currently formed at NCSU, build a set of educational tools which will be
              introduced and disseminated during summer workshops for students and
              postdocs.
%%% 

