Title       : FSML: Environmental Monitoring System For The Romberg Tiburon Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2001   
File        : a0121998

Award Number: 0121998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  2001   
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63942              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Carpenter ecarpent@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alissa J. Arp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen M. Bollens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The National Science Foundation's Biological Field Stations and Marine
              Laboratories (FSML) has awarded a grant to the Romberg Tiburon Center (RTC),
              the marine science laboratory and teaching facility of San Francisco State
              University.  This grant will fund the purchase of a long-term environmental
              monitoring system that will be located on the north shore of San Francisco Bay
              at the RTC.  Because of the dynamics of marine physics, chemistry, and biology
              in the region, the San Francisco Bay estuary is a site of constantly changing
              conditions of weather, salinity, temperature, clarity, current direction, solar
              irradiance and phytoplankton (microscopic algae) concentrations. Marine
              scientists need a long-term record of these conditions to place
              project-specific observations into the context of changes in Bay conditions
              over various temporal scales.  Furthermore, anticipated long-term changes in
              climate can only be assessed via a record of conditions in the Bay. 

Funds
              from the grant will be used to establish a weather station that will record
              temperature, wind speed and direction, barometric pressure, rainfall and solar
              irradiance. In addition, sensors will be placed at a series of seawater depths
              off the RTC pier to record water quality conditions. All data will be collected
              continuously, saved on a workstation computer at the RTC, and graphed to show
              minute by minute trends. 

The information will be available to scientists
              from other laboratories both on the Bay and at nearby marine laboratories
              outside the Bay.  There are many immediate applications for the information
              collected by this system.  For example, the data will help a scientist working
              on a research ship to understand how his or her observations fit into trends in
              the biology and physics of the estuary.  Long term changes in warming or in
              salinity of the Bay water can be documented.  A Data Center will be constructed
              at a site at the RTC that is easily accessible to the public. SFSU will also
              make the data available to the public via a website. The University anticipates
              that students will find the information to be an excellent learning tool in
              which they can study the interplay among the tides, seasons, weather and the
              biology of bay waters.

