Title       : Workshop Series for New Physics Faculty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0121384

Award Number: 0121384
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $773413             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth S. Krane   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard V. Khoury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc of Phys Tchrs
	      One Physics Ellipse
	      College Park, MD  207403845    301/209-3300

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) This project consists of a series of workshops for new physics
              faculty that provide undergraduate teaching enhancement activities in a
              concentrated four-day workshop accompanied by a continuing program of follow-up
              activities that seek to solidify and expand the gains of the workshop. The
              audience is newly-hired physics faculty, usually in the first three years of
              their initial tenure-track position. The workshops aim to involve 20-25% of the
              entire number of U.S. physics faculty hires at four-year colleges and
              universities during the project, and thus the program has a significant impact
              on physics teaching throughout the U.S. The project is based on prior
              workshops. Those activities are expanded in several ways: (1) The size of the
              annual program is being increased from 50 to 70 participants, and faculty from
              all 4-year colleges and universities are invited. (2) Along with AAPT, the
              American Physical Society (APS) is a joint sponsor of the program and plays a
              significant role in the follow-up activities. (3) The American Astronomical
              Society (AAS) is also sponsoring the program, departments of astronomy are
              being invited to nominate participants, and about 10 astronomers are included
              among the annual participants. The AAS is also sharing in promoting the
              follow-up activities. (4) There is a national steering committee to provide
              oversight to the program. The follow-up activities are a particularly important
              component of this program. By scheduling followup sessions at national and
              regional meetings of the AAPT, APS, and AAS, the participants in these
              workshops can participate in discussions relevant to the improvement of
              teaching and to general problems faced by new faculty. In this way the project
              promotes a continuing active interest in these topics among former participants
              and also brings into the discussions new faculty who were not able to attend
              the Workshops as well as postdocs and advanced graduate students who are
              contemplating faculty careers. The program thus enlists a significant share of
              the resources of the national physics and astronomy communities to the
              advancement of undergraduate teaching.
