Title       : ITR/SY+PE+IM+AP Collaborative Research: Computer-Linked Auto-Fabricated Models
               for Education in Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0121282

Award Number: 0121282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430932             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur J. Olson olson@scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Pique  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michel F. Sanner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Goodsell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
This is a research project in the design and implementation of novel Human
              Computer Interfaces for educational use in structural molecular biology.  This
              project will explore, define, and assess the role of computer-generated
              physical models in teaching scientific content and concepts.  The purpose is to
              enhance the understanding and communication of the complex world of life's
              molecular machinery to a broad community.  Using structural data on biological
              molecules and their complexes, the participants will prototype novel physical
              models via automated design and fabrication technologies and develop
              replication processes for broader distribution.  The models will be used
              directly for enhance visualization and as input/output devices that
              interactively integrate with commutation and computer graphics for information
              retrieval, manipulation, and simulation.

This project will provide new,
              tangible modes of interacting with, and understanding of, both the fundamental
              concepts and the complex data that are coming from the rapid advances in
              genomics, proteomics, and other areas of structural molecular biology.  It will
              enable a broad range of students to learn, query, and explore in a field of
              growing scientific and social importance - the molecular basis of life. 
              Physical models will give both haptic and visual support of the importance of
              shape in biological function.  Use of physical models as tangible computer
              interfaces will revolutionize how students explore and understand biomolecular
              structure, interaction, and function.

