Title       : An Active Mathematical Software Collection for Inquiry-based Computational
               Science and Engineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0121669

Award Number: 0121669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack J. Dongarra dongarra@cs.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chung Ng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allen J. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shirley V. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christian P. Halloy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is creating an active collection of high-quality numerical software
              for science and engineering education. It is intended to support a rich, highly
              interactive, and inquiry-based learning environment needed to enable learners
              at various levels to master the use of numerical methods and software
              libraries. The PIs argue that the emergence of scientific computing as a third
              scientific methodology on par with experimentation and theory-building, is
              placing increasingly greater demands on the ability of end-users to locate and
              determine the appropriateness of good algorithms for computing. This NSDL
              collection is based on Netlib, the on-line repository of choice for numerical
              software for science and engineering for the past decade and a half. This
              premier public collection of high quality mathematical software is maintained
              through the work of experts in the field who both moderate new submissions and
              organize and catalogue them with appropriate metadata for simple accurate
              searching. The collection is being extended and enhanced through the
              integration of two technologies: "NetSolve" and "Repository in a Box". NetSolve
              makes the Netlib's numerical software directly usable on computational servers
              over the network from a variety of familiar client interfaces (e.g. Matlab,
              Mathematica, Fortran, C), without requiring end-user downloads and installation
              of the software. An adaptive solver interface guides users in selecting
              appropriate software, in setting parameters correctly, and in interpreting
              numerical results. This interface is being further extended to provide more
              detailed feedback to users about the heuristics it uses and the decisions it
              makes in selecting and parameterizing software to solve a particular problem.
              The Repository in a Box (RIB) toolkit supports the creation of an interoperable
              network of software repositories through the use of an IEEE standard for
              software metadata. It is being used to catalog software from the Netlib
              collection and its installation on NetSolve servers, so that all project
              participants can selectively mirror the active software content and contribute
              to it. RIB's data model is being extended to allow cataloging of additional
              information about software and related resources, such as teaching modules,
              evaluations, and user interface modules.
