Title       : ITR/AP: Model-Based Integration of Methods for the Optimization of Process
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0121497

Award Number: 0121497
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $955000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ignacio E. Grossmann ig0c@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John N. Hooker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1687,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This ITR research medium research project will put together an interdisciplinary
              research group whose aim will be to develop a new modeling and a solution
              framework that nontrivially integrates a wide class of solution methods,
              including mathematical programming, constraint satisfaction, and a variety of
              heuristic algorithms. The objective of this framework is to be able to
              effectively tackle challenging engineering optimization problems. The group
              will be composed of faculty and students from Computer Science, Operations
              Research and Chemical Engineering. The key goal for the group will be to
              identify principles according to which algorithms can be integrated. These
              principles will then form the basis for a modeling language that guides the
              integration. Furthermore, new solution techniques will be developed for hybrid
              models and for global optimization of nonconvex discrete/continuous
              problems.

Two paths of integration will be investigated. One is to exploit
              problem structure at the modeling stage by using an idea developed in
              constraint logic programming: namely, by writing the problem in the form of
              "global" constraints that individually invoke algorithms tailored to the
              special structure of each constraint. A second is to make a fundamental
              distinction, at both the modeling and solution stage, between two types of
              algorithms: checkers and solvers. The research will be applied primarily to the
              optimization of process systems, with a focus on synthesis of reactive
              distillation systems and the integrated testing of new products and batch
              manufacturing. Because these problems have both discrete and continuous
              aspects, and the second involves difficult nonlinearities, they provide a
              natural context for combining optimization and logic-based methods. However,
              the research will develop a general-purpose approach to modeling and solution,
              rather than one that is exclusively for process systems applications.

