Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Hippocampal Modulation of Auditory
               Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2001  
File        : a0121861

Award Number: 0121861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17985              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Gluck   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Mr. Orduna and his advisor Dr. Gluck
              will conduct a year long investigation of how auditory discrimination training
              affects cortical representations of complex sounds. The natural environment is
              full of complex sounds containing a variety of information relevant to
              behavior.  Learning about sounds or images can lead to changes in perceptual
              sensitivities that facilitate the processing of behaviorally relevant events. 
              Although the neural mechanisms underlying these changes are not well
              understood, they are thought to depend on the brain's capacity to adaptively
              modify its cortical representations of sensations.  Orduna and Gluck will
              measure electrophysiological responses of rats and humans to complex sounds
              before and after subjects have been trained to discriminate these sounds. 
              Computational models of cortical and hippocampal processing suggest that the
              hippocampus modifies cortical representations to facilitate learning.   The
              investigators will evaluate the role of the hippocampus in auditory learning by
              comparing learning-induced representational changes (measured as changes in
              evoked responses) in the auditory cortices of normal and hippocampal-lesioned
              rats. 

The joint use of behavioral and electrophysiological techniques, in
              combination with lesion techniques, will facilitate comparisons between the
              neural mechanisms underlying auditory learning in humans and other mammals. 
              This project will illustrate a new way of evaluating current theories of how
              the cortex and the hippocampus interact during learning and memory processes. 
              These scientific results should provide new knowledge about the brain basis of
              learning and memory.

