Title       : Nanooptics with Plasmonic-Nanomaterials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0121814

Award Number: 0121814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir M. Shalaev shalaev@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this project, optical properties of nanomaterials with different structures
              will be theoretically studied. The fundamental problem to address is how the
              symmetry of a nanostructured material influences its optical properties and,
              related to this, what geometrical structure should be chosen for best
              performance of the material. We specifically focus on metal-dielectric crystals
              and composites that can support various plasmon modes, resulting in strongly
              enhanced optical responses. In our research we particularly consider local
              optical phenomena that occur in sub-wavelength, nanometer-sized areas of the
              material.

We plan to study photonic crystals made of periodically structured
              metal, which we refer to as i) plasmonic crystals. The goal here is to develop
              robust band-gap materials, with large and scaleable gaps in the visible and
              near-infrared. Because of large and negative permittivity of metals, they are
              intrinsically gap materials and can dramatically improve performance of
              photonic band-gap crystals and ease their fabrication. By employing the skin
              effect that expels light from metal, losses can be dramatically decreased,
              which is a major foe for metals. By taking control of losses we hope to open
              new avenues for various applications of plasmonic crystals in photonics.

By
              combining plasmonic crystals with submicron-sized resonators made of nearly
              percolating composites, we will develop ii) left-handed materials in the
              visible and near-IR, which have a negative refractive index in this spectral
              range. The plasmonic mesh-like crystals, in this case, can provide negative
              permittivity, whereas the composite resonators lead to negative permeability.
              Such material with simultaneously negative permittivity and permeability should
              have negative refraction. Another possibility for developing left-handed
              materials, which we also plan to explore, is based on periodical arrays of
              metal needles. The left-handed materials have unique optical properties and can
              find a number of novel applications, for example for developing super-lenses,
              which are capable of perfect image reconstruction.

In these projects we also
              plan to study iii) light-managed extraordinary optical transmittance through an
              optically-thick metal film. This new idea stems from our recent theory that has
              successfully explained the earlier observed extraordinary transmittance through
              subwavelength hole arrays. Because of the optical Kerr nonlinearity of a film,
              the interfering light beams can result in a periodic modulation of the
              refractive index in the film. This modulation can act as a periodic "hole
              array," created by light itself, allowing the extraordinary light transmittance
              through the film. This idea, when developed into a theory, can open new avenues
              for manipulating light with light and for developing all-optical transistors,
              switchers, and modulators.
%%%
In this project, optical properties of
              nanomaterials with different structures will be theoretically studied. The
              fundamental problem to address is how the symmetry of a nanostructured material
              influences its optical properties and, related to this, what geometrical
              structure should be chosen for best performance of the material. We
              specifically focus on metal-dielectric crystals and composites that can support
              various plasmon modes, resulting in strongly enhanced optical responses. In our
              research we particularly consider local optical phenomena that occur in
              sub-wavelength, nanometer-sized areas of the material.
***

