Title       : Electronic Encyclopedia of Earthquakes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0121703

Award Number: 0121703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $650009             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Jordan tjordan@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Simpson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Henyey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert K. Reitherman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is expanding a pilot version of the web-based Electronic
              Encyclopedia of Earthquakes (E^3) into a major collection under the auspices of
              the Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC), the Consortium of
              Universities for Research in Earthquake Engineering (CUREE), and the
              Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology (IRIS). E^3 provides a portal
              for students, educators, and others seeking information about the science of
              earthquakes, earthquake engineering, and the practical aspects of hazard
              characterization and loss reduction. Access to a wide variety of teaching
              materials is enabled, along with curricular linkages to interfaces to many
              types of archived and real-time databases, including data from global and
              regional seismic networks, national seismic hazard maps, and elastic and
              inelastic response histories of structures exposed to real or simulated (e.g.
              shake table) earthquakes. The collection facilitates the use of large data sets
              as part of an on-line learning environment that encourages and facilitates
              inquiry and exploration. Furthermore, E^3 is informed by the National Science
              Education Standards content recommendations for grades 5-8 and 9-12. As an
              entry-based collection built on three tiers of content: (1) Glossary & Outline,
              (2) Synopsis, and (3) Content In Depth and Curricular Connections, E^3 promotes
              a user's ability to access knowledge on a simple level quickly or probe deeper
              for more detailed information. Three types of search interfaces will be
              included: keyword search, controlled vocabulary, and map-based. Important
              co-funding of this project is being provided by the Division of Earth Sciences
              in NSF's Geosciences Directorate.


