Title       : Conference: Travel Grant for 2002 IEEE-AP-S International Symposium & USNC/USRI
               National Radio Science Meeting to be held in San Antonio, TX June 16-21, 2002.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0121897

Award Number: 0121897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9975               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Young   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IEEE
	      445 HOES LANE
	      Piscataway, NJ  088544103    /   -

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

The 2002 IEEE-AP-S International Symposium & USNC/USRI National Radio
              Science Meeting is an annual international conference co-sponsored by the
              Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE), and the Union of Radio
              Science International (URSI). The conference regularly draws about one thousand
              participants representing academia and industry. The Antennas and Propagation
              Society (AP-S) of the IEEE along with several subgroups of URSI will meet in
              San Antonio, Texas in June 2002.

Each year, the Antennas and Propagation
              Society promotes student participation in the conference through a number of
              mechanisms. One of the most important is the Student Paper Competition at the
              conference. This selective program brings the world's best students together in
              an integrated program in which they present their work to a technical audience
              including a group of judges. The program helps develop the students' technical
              acumen as well as their communication and presentation skills. It also helps
              introduce them to the international technical community and helps to build a
              community of students who will lead the next generation of electromagnetic
              technologists.

The AP-S provides financial support of various forms
              including assistance in finding low cost housing. but does not reimburse travel
              expenses. Travel support from NSF will aid students from U.S. universities only
              and will ensure that the program is open to the widest range of interested
              applicants from the U.S. universities.

This proposal requests support to
              defray the travel expenses for young investigators whose papers have been
              selected for presentation at the Conference, but who lack funds and might not
              be able to attend without such support. It is proposed that the AP-S Technical
              Program Committee select those from U.S. universities to receive the support.

