Title       : Neuroscience of Music: Linking Cognition and Emotion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0121839

Award Number: 0121839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol L. Krumhansl clk4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Krumhansl will conduct a year long
              investigation of the hypothesis that dynamic changes in emotions experienced
              while listening to music are produced by the interplay of expectations and the
              sound events.  Recent research has documented new interdependencies between
              cognition and emotion.  Music is an outstanding model to explore such
              interdependencies because people report that their primary motivation for
              listening to music is its emotional effects, and these effects are described as
              having great personal and social significance.  Likewise, psychological
              research on music emphasizes the role of cognition in the experience of music,
              specifically, on how it is perceived, organized, remembered, and performed. 
              Many issues are still poorly understood such as:  How is it that patterns of
              sound in time can have such a profound effect? What is it in the music that
              causes the emotion? Are musical emotions like other emotions? How do the
              responses depend on the listeners' previous musical experience and training? 
              Krumhansl's project will explore these questions by way of examining the neural
              substrates underlying the perception of music.  One study will uses both
              functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electrical potential recorded
              at the scalp (ERPs) on excerpts that conform to varying degrees to statistical
              predictability, principles of perceptual organization, and conventions of
              tonal-harmonic music.  A second study uses fMRI to investigate possible
              dissociations between sources of expectation, in particular, dissonance,
              tonality, meter, and temporal order.  A third study uses fMRI on the brain of
              volunteers listening to musical excerpts that have been found in previous
              research to produce distinctive patterns of psychophysiological changes
              associated with the basic emotions of sad, happy, fearful.  A last study uses
              ERPs to look for brain correlates of descriptions of musical structure based on
              formal music theory. 

This research promises to yield insights into the
              neural structures involved in music at both cognitive and affective levels, and
              the links between them.  It will also broaden current conceptions and
              methodologies in the study of emotion. Greater knowledge about the effect of
              music on emotion and the nature of music may lead to novel practical
              applications.

