Title       : ITR/IM: Enabling the Creation and Use of GeoGrids for Next Generation Geospatial
               Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0121269

Award Number: 0121269
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peggy Agouris peggy@spatial.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah M. Nusser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chaitanya K. Baru  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony Stefanidis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary-Kate Beard-Tisdale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1655,9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to advance science in information management,
              focusing in particular on geospatial information. It addresses the development
              of concepts, algorithms, and system architectures to enable users on a grid to
              query, analyze, and contribute to multivariate, quality-aware geospatial
              information. The approach consists of three complementary research areas: (1)
              establishing a statistical framework for assessing geospatial data quality; (2)
              developing uncertainty-based query processing capabilities; and (3) supporting
              the development of space- and accuracy-aware adaptive systems for geospatial
              datasets. The results of this project will support the extension of the concept
              of the computational grid to facilitate ubiquitous access, interaction, and
              contributions of quality-aware next generation geospatial information. By
              developing novel query processes as well as quality and similarity metrics the
              project aims to enable the integration and use of large collections of disperse
              information of varying quality and accuracy. This supports the evolution of a
              novel geocomputational paradigm, moving away from current standards-driven
              approaches to an inclusive, adaptive system, with example potential
              applications in mobile computing, bioinformatics, and geographic information
              systems. This experimental research is linked to educational activities in
              three different academic programs among the three participating sites. The
              outreach activities of this project include collaboration with U.S. federal
              agencies involved in geospatial data collection, an international partner
              (Brazil's National Institute for Space Research), and the organization of a
              2-day workshop with the participation of U.S. and international experts.

