Title       : Evaluating the Efficacy of a New Functional Imaging Protocol for Obtaining Data
               on Functional Connectivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2001    
File        : a0121926

Award Number: 0121926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle Hampson CHELL@BOREAS.MED.YALE.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Hampson will conduct a year-long
              investigation of techniques for using the covariation in activity of brain
              regions during periods of unconstrained cognition (without a psychological
              task) to build maps of the connected neural systems that support reading and
              understanding language.  Recent advances in neuroimaging have led to the
              production of a plethora of new data on brain function. However, methods for
              deploying such data to develop models of interacting brain regions are
              presently limited.  One new functional neuroimaging technique for studying
              brain interactions (or connectivity) examines low-frequency temporal
              correlations between resting state activity levels in different brain areas. 
              This technique is used with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).  Dr.
              Hampson's project will apply this technique to the neural circuitry of reading
              in order to evaluate and refine the method.  She will investigate the
              relationship between such maps of connectivity and psychological measures of
              reading performance.  She will also assess whether resting state fMRI data can
              provide information regarding the existence and strength of interregional
              connections in individual subjects. The connectivity of this system has been
              previously investigated using imaging methodologies that examine across-subject
              correlations between brain areas. In the present project, the pattern of
              connections found between brain areas involved in reading will be correlated
              across individuals with their scores on a range of reading skills tests to
              determine which neural connections are most important for the different
              sub-processes of reading.

The techniques developed in this project are
              likely to lead to general methods that could be used to study relationships
              between brain connectivity patterns and psychological measures across subjects
              in many different high level cognitive systems.  Such methods will be an
              important tool for investigating brain function at the systems level. 
              Moreover, the findings will be incorporated into a new model of the neural
              substrate underlying reading ability. This model is intended to provide a
              framework for understanding reading disorders and to guide future experimental
              efforts. 

