Title       : ITR/SY: Electronic Books for the Tele-immersion Age: A New Paradigm for Teaching
               Surgical Procedures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2001    
File        : a0121657

Award Number: 0121657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1750000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Andries van Dam avd@cs.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory F. Welch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1654,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Tele-immersion will provide a dramatic new medium for groups of people remote
              from each other to work and share experiences together in an immersive 3D
              virtual environment, much as if they were co-located in a shared physical
              space.    Immersive electronic books that in effect blend a "time machine" with
              3D hypermedia, will add an additional important dimension, that of being able
              to record experiences in which a viewer, immersed in the 3D reconstruction, can
              literally walk through the scene or move backward and forward in time.  While
              there are many potential application areas for such novel technologies (e.g.,
              design and virtual prototyping, maintenance and repair, paleontological and
              archaeological reconstruction), the focus here will be on a societally
              important and technologically challenging driving application, teaching
              surgical management of difficult, potentially lethal, injuries.   Today, the
              pace of surgical innovations has increased dramatically, yet the mechanisms for
              training and re-training suffer from inflexible timing, extended time
              commitments, and limited content.  Traditional videotaped instruction has long
              been available to help surgeons learn new procedures, but this approach is only
              marginally effective due to the fixed point of view that is integral to the
              narration, lack of depth perception and interactivity, and missing information;
               in short, the experience of watching a video is not sufficiently close to
              being there and seeing the procedure.   In this project the PI will develop a
              new paradigm for teaching surgical procedures that allows surgeons to witness
              and explore (in time and space) a past surgical procedure as if they were
              there, with the added benefit of instruction from the original surgeon or
              another instructor, as well as integrated 3D illustrations, annotations, and
              relevant medical metadata.  The trainees should be able to freely and naturally
              walk around a life-sized, high-fidelity, 3D graphical  reconstruction of the
              original time-varying events, pausing or stepping forward and backward in time
              to satisfy curiosity or allay confusion.   To make this reality, the PI and his
              team bring together experts in several disciplines, and will be able to
              collectively leverage their prior work in tele-immersion, time-varying 3D scene
              capture, interaction metaphors, "cinematic" techniques. and authoring tools.

