Title       : Adsorption of Quantum Fluids inside Carbon Nanotubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0121088

Award Number: 0121088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Massimo Boninsegni boninsegni@physics.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports theoretical and computational research and education on
              quantum fluids. Accurate numerical simulations, based on quantum Monte Carlo
              methods, will be performed to study the adsorption of Helium on a variety of
              substrates with the aim of investigating novel physical phenomena involving
              superfluidity and Bose condensation in confined systems. The PI will study
              physisorption of quantum fluids inside carbon nanotubes, in zeolites, and on
              alkali metal substrates to include helium mixtures and molecular hydrogen. His
              earlier exploration of helium confined in bundles of nanotubes suggested the
              possibility of a low temperature transition to a novel anisotropic superfluid
              phase and a possible commensurate to incommensurate transition. In this award,
              a theoretical investigation of the phase diagram of helium and molecular
              hydrogen inside carbon nanotubes will be carried out. It is thought that the
              confinement of molecular hydrogen will prevent crystallization at low
              temperatures enabling the observation of a superfluid state. Simulations will
              be performed using realistic interactions of helium atoms and hydrogen
              molecules with the confining system. 
%%%
This award supports theoretical and
              computational research and education on quantum fluids. The PI will use quantum
              Monte Carlo methods to study helium trapped inside of bundles of carbon
              nanotubes. The confinement of the helium atoms inside the carbon nanotube
              structures alters the properties of the helium quantum liquid leading to
              possible novel physical properties. The system is at sufficiently low
              temperature that quantum mechanical effects become important. The PI will also
              study molecular hydrogen in carbon nanotubes and the interaction of both
              liquids with zeolites and alkali metal surfaces that confine or reduce the
              dimensionality of the liquid. This research contributes to the fundamental
              knowledge of nanostructures and the study of materials on the nanoscale.
              
***


