Title       : ITR/SY: Computational Design of Mixed-Technology Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2003   
File        : a0121616

Award Number: 0121616
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1712000            (Estimated)
Investigator: N R. Aluru aluru@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chang Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Danesh K. Tafti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Umberto Ravaioli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kartikeya Mayaram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1658,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to develop new computational design tools with
              rigorous experimental validation to enable design and development of
              distributed, heterogeneous mixed-technology systems. Mixed-technology system
              development requires research on two fronts: The first is the component or the
              device level and the second is the integration of heterogeneous components at
              the system level. At the component or the device level, the research will focus
              on four building-blocks: Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS), Biological
              Microelectromechanical Systems (Bio-MEMS), Nanoelectromechanical Systems (NEMS)
              and Biological ion channels integrated with nanoelectronics
              (nanobioelectronics). Efficient computational design tools integrated with
              experimental validation will be developed for each of these building blocks. At
              the system level the research focuses on integration of MEMS and Bio-MEMS with
              conventional electronics. 
Device level modeling research will focus on
              development of new scattered point computational methods for fast, efficient
              and flexible analysis of micro and nanoscale devices, development of multiscale
              approaches combining continuum and molecular approaches, development of
              enhanced continuum models to capture microscopic phenomena, and development of
              efficient reduced-order modeling approaches for fast dynamic analysis. System
              level modeling research will focus on development of new algorithms and
              techniques to integrate various micro-device partial differential equations
              solvers with the circuit simulator (SPICE3) and development of efficient time
              stepping schemes with different numerical devices for simulation of the
              complete system. The experimental effort will focus on development of new
              fabrication approaches for realizing nanobioelectronics, NEMS and systems level
              integration of MEMS and Bio-MEMS with conventional electronics.

