Title       : BMPs Regulate Ionotropic Glutamate Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2001  
File        : a0121210

Award Number: 0121210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370386             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis M. Higgins higginsd@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm Slaughter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) regulate many aspects of neural development
              and they are also neuroprotective in mature animals.  It is, therefore,
              important to understand the mechanism of action of these neurotrophic factors. 
              Previous studies of BMP signaling pathways have focused on the transcriptional
              activities of these proteins and have emphasized their ability to alter neural
              cell fate by inducing or repressing gene expression.  Preliminary studies from
              this laboratory, however, indicate that BMPs can also induce rapid (<1 second)
              changes in the conductance state of ionotropic glutamate receptors and that
              this occurs in both mature (adult human retinal) and developing (rat
              hippocampal) neural cell populations.  Thus, there may be a second, parallel
              pathway for BMP signaling that acts independently of nuclear events and that
              alters neural function by acutely regulating existing ion channels in cultured
              neurons.  The experiments in this project will characterize this pathway by
              comparing the effects of BMPs on the three types of ionotropic glutamate
              receptors and by determining whether BMPs also affect voltage-sensitive ion
              channels.  In addition, the project will characterize the types of receptors
              mediating the effects of BMPs on glutamate receptors and will determine whether
              BMPs modulate glutamatergic synaptic transmission in tissue culture.  It is
              anticipated that these experiments will substantially expand our knowledge of
              BMP signaling mechanisms and that they will also provide an initial assessment
              of the ability of BMPs to function as synaptic modulators. 

