Title       : A Pilot Project to Investigate Continuous Performance fMRI in Normal Humans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0121905

Award Number: 0121905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49967              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Van Horn John.D.Van.Horn@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Van Horn will spend a year
              developing and validating methods and tools needed for examining continuous
              motor-sensory tasks performed while brain activity is monitored by functional
              magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).  Current experimental frameworks for
              monitoring brain activity via fMRI during psychological tasks rely principally
              upon discretely presented stimulus periods or events.  Such approaches are
              ideal for the study of perception-based cognitive processes, yet many
              real-world behaviors (such as motor acts) are continuous in nature, suggesting
              a need for new methodological frameworks designed for use with fMRI. The
              statistical approaches designed and applied in this project will be used to
              extend the continuous performance framework into a new class of fMRI paradigm. 
              This project involves the custom design and fabrication of specialized stimulus
              input devices for the MR environment that will permit a continuously sampled
              response domain.  Moreover, it involves computationally intense statistical
              modeling of data because the paradigms require measuring concurrent performance
              variables, potentially confounding variables (e.g. heart rate, respiration,
              eye-movements, etc.), and fMRI acquisition parameters, in order to include
              these in the experimental design.   To examine the validity of the continuous
              task methodology, a variety of tasks will be studied.

The techniques
              developed in this project will assist in developing new approaches to studying
              brain activation paradigms for fMRI.  These new approaches emphasize dynamic
              aspects of brain-behavior relationships.  The work in this project will
              facilitate the development of computational models of continuously performed
              psychological processes.

