Title       : SGER: A Method to Identify and Characterize Potentially Redundant Genes within
               the Drosophila Genome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a0121111

Award Number: 0121111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Mahaffey jim_mahaffey@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0121111
Mahaffey

Genetic analyses of Drosophila melanogaster have yielded
              substantial insight into the mechanisms governing many aspects animal
              development and life.  However, though we have learned much from these studies,
              there is still much that we do not know.  This became alarmingly apparent upon
              examining the initial phase of the annotated genome where it was found that
              over two thirds of Drosophila genes had not been identified from prior studies.
               Further, though numerous genetic screens have been completed, there are still
              many gaps in our understanding, even in well-studied processes.  There may be
              several reasons for this; one significant reason is that some genes are
              refractory to analysis by conventional genetic screens because of genetic
              redundancy.  Given that genes with redundant or overlapping functions are
              likely to have important roles, and that there may be numerous cases of
              overlapping gene functions in Drosophila, it is essential that we develop
              methods to detect and to test the function of potentially redundant genes, yet
              a systematic method to identify redundant genes has not been employed in the
              past.

Dr. Mahaffey will conduct a screen to identify potentially redundant
              gene pairs functioning during Drosophila embryonic development.  The scheme
              involves first identifying potential candidates by similarity, then cloning and
              using in situ hybridization to determine if there is overlap in expression. 
              Finally, RNA interference will be used to determine whether or not the gene
              pairs have overlapping roles.  To test the validity of this method, Dr.
              Mahaffey will initially select candidate gene pairs that encode zinc finger
              proteins.  It is important to note that the design of this project is not
              limited to Drosophila; it should be useful in studies of redundant genes in
              other organisms (certainly; C. elegans, and in other model organisms using
              morpholino antisense procedures).

