Title       : ITR/SY: Computational Logic Tools for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0121403

Award Number: 0121403
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2160000            (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Dill dill@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zohar Manna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1667,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Formal logic is an extremely powerful and general conceptual tool that
can be
              made even more useful if it can be manipulated computationally.
Since
              computational logic is often difficult to implement and
computationally
              expensive, progress on automating it has lagged
somewhat.  However, the
              problems and their solutions are becoming
better understood and computational
              power has continued to advance
exponentially, so the possibility of developing
              practical
computational solutions to many interesting logic problems is
              now
potentially solvable.

There are three themes to the project:
              computational logic components,
educational applications, and systems
              applications.  The first theme
encompasses both the theoretical research and
              implementation work
necessary to develop practical software components for
              manipulating
logical representations at several levels of abstraction,
              including
decision procedures for fragments of first order logic and
              automated
deduction for first-order logic.  The second theme involves the use
              of
computational logic for computer-assisted analysis of designs in
              three
application areas of critical importance: networking, hybrid
              systems,
and computer security.  The third theme is the development and use
              in
the classroom of instructional courseware for mathematical
              concepts
relevant to computer science. This work is in collaboration
              with
Stanford's Educational Program for Gifted Children (EPGY).

The impact
              of this work follows from making computational logic
accessible and available.
               Computational logic components will make it
easier to construct sophisticated
              software applications, by providing
powerful off-the-shelf building blocks for
              solving problems that would
not otherwise be tractable.  Improved analysis
              tools and techniques
will result in superior system designs achieved faster
              and at lower
cost.  Instructional software will enhance the sophistication
              and
problem-solving abilities of computer science students.
