Title       : ITR/SY: Center for Modeling of Quantum Dynamics, Relaxation and Decoherence in
               Solid-State Physics for Information-Technology Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2001    
File        : a0121146

Award Number: 0121146
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : September 30,  2008  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir Privman privman@clarkson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dima Mozyrsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christino Tamon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ming-Cheng Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Lawrence Glasser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This grant is the result of a proposal submitted to the Information Technology
              Research (ITR) Initiative.  The grant supports a Center for Modeling of Quantum
              Dynamics, Relaxation and Decoherence in Solid State Physics for Information
              Technology Applications.

The theoretical research center will investigate
              solid state implementation of coherent, controlled quantum dynamics in support
              of the recently established experimental efforts in quantum information
              processing.  The initial research focus of the center will be on the
              theoretical study of few- and multi-qubit systems where the medium for the
              qubit interaction, relaxation, and decoherence is a semiconductor
              heterostructure containing a two-dimensional electron gas.  For quantum
              computing applications, the latter is frequently considered at low temperature
              and high magnetic fields, corresponding to the conditions of the quantum Hall
              effect.  This project includes exploration  of the main research topics of
              relevance to quantum computing in the solid state, for instance, transport
              associated with single-quantum (single-spin) measurement ideas, or effects of
              gates on qubit interaction control, relaxation and decoherence.

Owing to the
              emergence of several large-scale experimental efforts in implementing quantum
              coherent devices for computation, the center will respond to the growing need
              for research into promising directions of the design of such devices.  The
              theory center will provide an added fundamental and overarching approach
              complementing goal-oriented experimental efforts.  The center will provide
              research in the application of many-body physics techniques to the analysis of
              quantum information systems, including relaxation, decoherence, measurement,
              and quantum transport features; education of the next generation of scientists
              who will be concerned with the implementation and application of quantum
              computers; formation of the scientific network in this emerging field of solid
              state physics by means of publications, conferences, seminars and exchange
              visits.  Members of this interdisciplinary center include those with
              backgrounds in mathematics and computer science, electrical and computer
              engineering, materials science and physics.
%%%
***

 

