Title       : Teachers Domain Collection: Life Sciences, K-12
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0121636

Award Number: 0121636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore W. Hodapp                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1016222            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele Korf michele_korf@wgbh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WGBH Educational Fdn
	      125 Western Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02134    /   -

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              TeachersDomain.org (w.t.), a digital library collection, is being developed to
              harness WGBH's extensive broadcast, video, and interactive programming
              resources in the Life Sciences to support standards-based teaching and learning
              from elementary through high school. The product is a searchable, Web-based
              repository of contextualized multimedia materials that teachers are able to
              access easily and productively for their own professional development, as well
              as to enrich classroom activities with students. WGBH is expanding this library
              from its current focus on the topic of Diversity and Adaptation, to include
              resources that span the Life Sciences across the entire K-12 curriculum. These
              materials are being organized to reflect alignment with commonly taught
              classroom units as well as with the performance standards currently applied at
              both state and national levels. These multimedia assets are being metatagged
              and presented with extensive contextual information to allow for effective use.
              Annotations, background essays, standards correlations, and lesson plans
              accompany each archival resource, and features such as personalized resource
              bins and community discussion boards enable ease of use and maximum impact. The
              initiative grew from WGBH's longstanding commitment to the support of
              educational reform efforts nationwide, a commitment perhaps most evident in the
              subject area of science. The WGBH archives are rich with high quality,
              multimedia assets, especially within the subject area of science. The
              overarching intent in TeachersDomain.org is to get these resources out of the
              vaults and into the hands of teachers and students in digital form that is
              directly targeted to their teaching and learning needs.
