Title       : ITR/AP+IM: Computational Tools for Modeling, Visualizing and Analyzing Historic
               and Archaeological Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0121239

Award Number: 0121239
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Griffin                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000544            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Allen allen@cs.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth A. Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn Meskell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven K. Feiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Murray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1655,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              e are proposing to develop computational tools for researchers
and students to
              model, visualize, and analyze historic and ancient
sites. This proposal
              addresses four major scientific components
to support this research. First, we
              are proposing new methods
of creating complex, 3-D, photorealistic models of
              large sites.
This includes a mobile robot sensing system that can be used
              as
an intelligent sensing device over a large scale. Second, we are
proposing
              to develop new methods to image below-ground data accurately
and efficiently.
              These methods are especially suited to modeling
the wealth of subsurface
              information at archaeological sites.
Third, we will be developing new database
              technology to catalog
and access a site's structures, artifacts, objects, and
              historical
references. This will significantly improve a user's ability
              to
query and analyze a site's information. Fourth, we have created
a wearable
              augmented reality system for presenting georegistered
information to mobile
              users, using overlaid graphics and sound.
We will extend this system to create
              a new class of information
visualization systems that integrate 3-D above- and
              below-ground
models, 2-D images, text and other web-based resources to
              annotate
the physical environment We will apply this system to
              support
scientists in the field, as well to allow on-site and remote tours
of
              historic and ancient sites. The research will utilize a local
testbed, the
              Cathedral of St. John the Divine in New York City,
and a unique and important
              archaeological excavation at the Dakhleh
Oasis in Egypt. The project will
              attract students and the public
to the study of world heritage; provide an
              exceptional opportunity
for active learning; and develop our ability to
              explore, analyze,
critically evaluate and interpret material culture within
              historical
contexts. The challenge is to bring the on-site experiences
              that
develop these skills to the classroom and the public in general.
Through
              critical inquiry and a variety of techniques, teachers
and students can
              reconstruct examples of material culture to develop
a complex understanding of
              the past. In this way, we can resist
the temptation to replicate with new
              technologies what we have
done successfully with other means and instead
              expand the possibilities
for learning. Through learning in context, this
              project will bring
together the primary sources of various fields and draw the
              social
sciences out of the classroom into the historical milieu. This
project
              will hopefully redefine the relationships among technology,
faculty research
              and curriculum content. Most important, it will
disseminate this information
              to as wide an audience as possible.
