Title       : SGER: Optimized Irregular Electromagnetic Field Transformation Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2001    
File        : a0121317

Award Number: 0121317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin J. Webb webb@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0121317
Webb

The investigation of a new class of diffractive structures
              having optimized irregular wavelength-scale elements is proposed. One
              interpretation of this class of structures is as a generalized photonic bandgap
              system, either within a waveguide or in unbounded media. While the
              characteristics of photonic bandgap structures, being based on classical
              periodic systems, is well known, the physical characteristics (attributes,
              limitations etc.) of irregular structures are essentially unknown. Webb
              introduced the concept of compact, wavelength-scale irregular field
              transformation elements in the context of a microwave mode converter, showed
              spectacular performance, a dramatic reduction in size, and increased
              functionality relative to traditional periodic (perturbation) approaches, and
              fabricated and tested an example. Generalized interpretations of this new class
              of diffractive structures offer tremendous application potential, such as
              revolutionary broad area vertical cavity surface emitting laser diode mode
              control and optical fiber wavelength division multiplexing elements, once the
              physics and synthesis approaches are taken from the current anecdotal stage to
              a more fundamental level of understanding. It is the purpose of this proposed
              research effort to do just that by addressing the following two
              objectives.

o Physical Characteristics and Performance Metrics: The PI
              proposes to investigate the attributes of irregular, sub-wavelength diffractive
              structures, synthesized using a nonlinear optimization algorithm coupled to a
              forward numerical electromagnetic solver, in order to develop the phys-ical
              understanding necessary to exploit a variety of possible applications. He will
              study field control using wavelength-scale structures having conducting and/or
              refractive index variations in waveguide arid unbounded media systems that
              utilize evanescent field. Using a functional metric for the required field
              transformation, search algorithms will be developed and sensitivity analyses to
              degrees of freedom, wavelength and input field performed.

o Synthesis:
              Nonlinear optimization techniques, while widely applied in areas such as
              imaging and signal processing, are not well developed for the synthesis of
              electromagnetic structures. The PI used a relatively simple multi-resolution
              algorithm in the design of irregular waveguide mode converters. He proposes the
              development of more rigorous and efficient synthesis tech-niques suitable for
              irregular diffractive structures by studying both continuous and discrete
              optimization approaches.

