Title       : Preliminary Design and Model Testing for the High Latitude Research Vessel --
               Phase II Alaska Regional Research Vessel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2001 
File        : a0121144

Award Number: 0121144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emma R. Dieter                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1363672            (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry E. Whitledge whitledge@ims.uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vera Alexander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5417      SHIP ACQUISITION AND UPGRADE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              OCE - 0121144
Whitledge

This proposal requests support for the second phase
              of the design and model testing of a Marginal Ice Zone (MIZ) Research Vessel. 
              The Science Mission Requirements have been established and reviewed by UNOLS,
              and the concept design was started in the fall of 2000.  The proposed vessel
              will replace the current UNOLS regional research vessel, the R/V Alpha Helix,
              with a more capable, multi-purpose and somewhat larger ship, better able to
              address the contemporary research support needs of a variety of users.

The
              waters surrounding Alaska Stretch from the southeastern Alaskan fjords, to the
              Bering Sea and north to the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas.  This vast region
              accounts for the majority of the United States continental shelf and its only
              Arctic waters.  Some of the most productive fisheries in the world are found
              here, and there is strong demand for research on the marine ecosystems that
              support these populations.  Marine mammal and bird research is increasing, and
              is likely to increase even more due to the "need to know" for management and
              legal purposes.  Indigenous people live along the coasts, and use marine
              resources for subsistence.  Increasing support for research in the Bering Sea
              and northern Gulf of Alaska, is, in part, driven by these considerations. 
              Little is understood of major decadal and interannual variability in
              oceanographic and atmospheric conditions or the role of high latitude marine
              systems in global climatic processes.  As a result, there is increasing demand
              for ship support in the region, and this year the R/V Alpha Helix is providing
              the maximum number of sea days possible, given her size, capabilities and
              seasonal restrictions imposed by the challenging subarctic conditions.  This
              demand is expected to increase with a more capable vessel.

