Title       : Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Preparatory Function in the Human
               Cerebellum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a0121984

Award Number: 0121984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37151              (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg Allen Greg.allen@utsouthwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas SW Medical Ctr
	      5323 Harry Hines Blvd
	      Dallas, TX  753909105    214/648-5100

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Allen will conduct a year-long
              investigation of a theory that the function of the cerebellum is to predict and
              prepare the internal conditions needed for mental or motor operations. The
              cerebellum was thought for many decades to be devoted solely to the
              coordination of movement.  However, a number of recent neurology, psychiatry,
              and neuroimaging findings indicate the cerebellum may be involved in a wide
              range of cognitive, emotional, and sensory.  These findings do not yet clearly
              indicate what role the cerebellum serves.  One recent proposal is that the
              cerebellum is involved in predicting and preparing for mental and motor
              operations and that to perform this function, it learns predictive
              relationships within sequences of neural activities.  Dr. Allen will attempt to
              test this proposal using functional magnetic resonance imaging of humans
              performing a visual selection attention task.  Blood flow activity in the
              cerebellum will be recorded as human volunteers alternate between passive
              viewing of and selective attention to visual stimuli.  During the visual
              selective attention tasks, subjects will passively listen to a structured
              sequence of tones that predicts the appearance of visual targets.  As subjects
              learn to improve their performance by attending to the predictive pattern of
              the tones, the intensity and distribution of activity in the cerebellum and
              elsewhere will be used to evaluate Dr. Allen's hypothesis.
 
The findings of
              this study should be useful for the development of a new account of cerebellar
              function.  The proposed theory is one of the few to adequately encompass the
              apparent diversity of the cerebellar function and testing it should bring us
              closer to understanding the fundamental role the cerebellum plays in the
              central nervous system.  The cerebellum is a large and intricate brain
              structure with connections to many other neural systems.  Clarifying its
              function will modify our understanding of many other aspects of brain function.
               Such advances are also expected to have significant implications for
              understanding symptoms of cerebellar dysfunction.

