Title       : Science Policy in a Changing Environment: Issues and Strategies in Agency
               Adaptation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a0121796

Award Number: 0121796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9999               (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Henry Lambright whlambri@maxwell.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is supported by a Small Grant for Exploratory Research.  It's basic
              assumption is that a transition is taking place in national science policy due
              to the end of the Cold War, globalization, the quest for economy and efficiency
              in government, increased demands for cooperation across agencies and
              governments and the enlarged role of the private sector and other trends.  A
              number of reports by NAS, AAAS, and Congress make it clear that the management
              of change is a major challenge facing the federal research and
              development
establishment in the post-Cold War, early 21st-century era. 
              However, these reports treat science policy in broad brush, and do not
              investigate what the agencies experiencing change are doing.   

The
              objective of this proposal is to explore, from the perspective of the field of
              public administration,  how the federal various research and development
              agencies are adapting to new priorities and pressures facing them. After
              conducting  field work in Washington (interviews and archival research), the PI
              prepares a "scoping paper" to frame the principal new issues facing federal
              science managers and their strategies in addressing them. On the basis of this
              scoping paper, a workshop/conference involving science policy scholars and
              practitioners will be designed and proposed.  The workshop/conference will
              address and illuminate issues of utmost importance in the relation of
              government to science and technology. It can aid policy and its administration,
              as well as stimulate further research. However, getting to this point (the
              delineation of a conference), requires the exploratory research carried out
              under this award.  
