Title       : ITR/PE+SY Digital Clay for Shape Input and Display
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0121663

Award Number: 0121663
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne J. Book wayne.book@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark G. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Rosen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jarek Rossignac  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Imme R. Ebert-Uphoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1654,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Shape is a key element in successful communication, interpretation, and
              understanding of complex data in virtually every area of engineering, art,
              science, and medicine.  While in recent years the communication of both form
              and complex data have been greatly enhanced by visualization that is based on
              planar images, computational power has reached the point where it is possible
              to consider real-time interactive 3D physical communication.  In this project,
              the PI will develop a novel interactive 2D or 3D haptic computer interface that
              enables both user-specified display of shapes as output from a computer, and
              user-directed input of shapes to a computer.  This so-called "digital clay"
              will allow users to convey and/or sense multiple-element, parallel information
              strands.  It is a distributed input/display device, the surface of which can be
              shaped by a user and acquired by a computer; alternatively, the clay can be
              shaped by the computer for the user to examine.  Like ordinary clay, digital
              clay will allow an area of moderate size to be touched, reshaped with pressure,
              and seen by the user in true 3D form.   Unlike ordinary clay, digital clay also
              provides parameters to the computer that will represent the shape to the
              computer for further analysis, storage, replication, communication and/or
              modification; or, will allow the computer to prescribe its shape.   This
              combined input and output feature of the clay enables two-way communication
              between the computer and the user.  Some previous implementations of
              digital-clay-like devices have focused on reshaping of non-physical volumes of
              'virtual clay' using glove-like or haptic manipulator interfaces to a computer
              in which the virtual clay is stored.  The PI's approach is different;  digital
              clay comprises an instrumented, actuated, computer-interfaced physical volume
              bounded by an actuatable surface that acts as the haptic interface.  This
              surface is displaced by rows or arrays of controllable interconnected
              fluidic-driven actuators, which together act to convey the surface topography
              of 3D objects by means of manipulation of a stereolithographed scaffold
              internal to the volume of the clay.   Each actuator comprises a discrete
              fluidically-inflatable cell that is connected to two common pressurized
              reservoirs (within a base) through a dedicated two-way miniature valve
              integrated with a pressure sensor, manufactured by MEMS technology existing at
              Georgia Tech.  The position of each discrete surface element can be altered
              either by the user or by the host computer.  The simple  measurement of volume
              flow rate combined with suitable software-based kinematic analysis allows the
              determination of the entire volume of the clay, and therefore the coordinates
              of its surface.   A unique feature of the digital clay is that the force that
              is necessary to actuate the discretized surface is derived entirely from the
              two fluidic reservoirs, thus eliminating the need for small-scale,
              electrically-driven actuators that may have limited torque or linear force.  
              This fluidic approach overcomes the constraints imposed by actuator energy
              density limits, and distributed wiring and sensing requirements, that have
              heretofore prevented structures such as digital clay from becoming a reality. 
              Furthermore, the user can activate the device interactively with the host
              computer by sensing and overcoming the force that is exerted by the liquid
              pressure to concomitantly set (or reset) the shape of the device to a desired
              state.  In this project the PI will develop and demonstrate the digital clay
              hardware, its computer interface, and associated software, and will further
              illustrate its efficacy in applications of interest (e.g., computer-aided
              design, medical and bioengineering diagnostics, and reconfigurable input/output
              displays).   Of particular note is the potential of digital clay to aid
              visually impaired persons in receiving/sending haptic information from/to a
              computer.

