Title       : ITR/AP: An Ensemble Approach to Data Assimilation in the Earth Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0121182

Award Number: 0121182
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4369999            (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis B. McLaughlin dennism@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan S. Willsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kerry A. Emanuel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dara Entekhabi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paola Malanotte-Rizzoli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1661,1687,4444,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ITR/AP: An Ensemble Approach to Data Assimilation in the Earth Sciences

New
              data sources are beginning to have a dramatic impact on our ability to
              understand the earth as an integrated system. Our prospects for dealing with
              the environmental issues of the 21st century -- climate change, population
              pressures on natural resources, and major modifications in global element
              cycles -- depend largely on this new information. However, our ability to
              process and interpret environmental data is not keeping pace with the dramatic
              increase in available information, especially information from airborne and
              orbital remote sensing platforms. If we are to realize the potential benefits
              of new sensing technologies we will need to develop intelligent environmental
              data assimilation procedures that are able to efficiently extract useful
              information about the earth from a diverse set of data sources.
              

Environmental data assimilation can be posed as a problem of estimating a
              large number of unobservable or highly uncertain variables (e.g. sea surface
              heights, atmospheric pressures, hydrologic fluxes, etc.) from a large number of
              related but noisy measurements (e.g. microwave radiances or backscatter
              detected by a satellite sensor). The estimation procedure relies on
              mathematical models that relate unknowns to measurements. Environmental
              estimation problems are challenging because the systems of interest: 1) are
              spatially distributed and highly variable over a wide range of space and time
              scales, 2) are difficult to describe with precision, 3) are often nonlinear,
              even chaotic, and 4) are often characterized by non-unique relationships
              between unknowns and measurements.

This project is concerned with very large
              problems (many measurements and many unknowns) which are not amenable to
              traditional data assimilation techniques but are of crucial interest to
              researchers in the earth sciences. An interdisciplinary team will develop a
              better understanding of the issues of dimensionality reduction and uncertainty
              propagation that are crucial to large-scale data assimilation. So-called
              ensemble methods provide a particularly informative way to identify these key
              features.  A new generation of "intelligent" data assimilation methods will be
              developed that build on the understanding gained from the reduced problem. The
              applicability of these methods will be investigated on problems of broad
              interest in the earth sciences, including problems that 1) deal with coupled
              systems, 2) cut across traditional disciplines, and 3) work with remote sensing
              data sets.

This ITR project brings together acknowledged experts on
              environmental data assimilation. It is a group ITR project, rather than several
              individual projects, which cuts across earth science disciplines. The research
              will be coordinated with: 1) a seminar series, 2) joint supervision of Ph.D.
              students and post-doctoral researchers, 3) a Ph.D. mentoring program, 4) a
              selection of cross-cutting sample problems, and 5) co-authored
              publications.

 

