Title       : ITR/SI: Adaptive Wide-Area Information Delivery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0121341

Award Number: 0121341
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $780000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry M. Levy levy@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anna R. Karlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Gribble  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1658,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The explosive popularity and exponentially increasing scale of the World Wide
              Web has severely stressed the Internet's content-delivery infrastructure.  This
              stress has begun to expose the inefficiencies and limitations of the Web's
              traditional client-server architecture.  A progression of new mechanisms and
              alternative architectures have recently appeared, including content delivery
              networks (CDNs), such as Akamai, and peer-to-peer overlay networks, such as
              Napster. Despite the rapid deployment and global use of these architectures,
              however, little is understood about their behavior in many cases. 

The goals
              of this research project are threefold.  First, the effectiveness of existing
              Internet content-delivery architectures will be quantitatively analyzed,
              specifically focusing on (1) cache infrastructure, (2) content-delivery
              networks, and (3) peer-to-peer networks.  Second, based upon these
              measurements, the design of new or enhanced architectures for Web content
              delivery will be explored.  Third, new designs will be implemented, deployed,
              and measured.  One particular focus will be the design and implementation of
              adaptive systems that make heavy use of self-measurement and on-line
              algorithms, e.g., to dynamically optimize request routing, content placement,
              or the topology of the peer-to-peer overlay network.  Overall, the hope is to
              increase the understanding of content-delivery architectures and to develop new
              content-delivery mechanisms that greatly improve the behavior of the
              Internet.

