Title       : ITR/IM+AP: Developing the National Virtual Observatory (NVO) Data Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a0121296

Award Number: 0121296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alyssa A. Goodman agoodman@cfa.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip M. Sadler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Kirshner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0121296
Goodman


The goals of this project are to explore the
              development of a data model that will define the abstract set of rules to
              permit the National Virtual Observatory (NVO) to operate on large, diverse data
              sets. 
The project is part of the larger US astronomy effort to build an NVO.
              The National Academy of Sciences Decadal Survey of Astronomy (2001) strongly
              endorsed the NVO project and recommended that both NSF and NASA fund it.  This
              project is one of the important first steps in the NVO. The rudiments of a
              well-defined data model must be in place before extensive development can begin
              on the "access engine" for the NVO, and the access engine must be in place
              before extensive development of the final, science-driven, analysis tools can
              be carried out. Since, however, the development of a data model, an access
              engine, and analysis tools can not be done successfully as a sequential
              process, there must be testing and redevelopment of each aspect of the NVO at
              every stage in an iterative process with analysis tools, access engine, and
              data model tested together and then re-engineered to fit the final science
              drivers. The scientists and computer specialists involved in this particular
              project have access to a wide-range of different data (from X-ray to radio) in
              their local community and plan to use these different data as a testing ground
              for an experimental data model. This project has been funded as an initial
              development test, for two years, to assure that it will maintain the
              flexibility needed to re-engineer the data model in the light of future
              developmental challenges. 
***


