Title       : ITR/SI: Cooperative Computing for Distributed Embedded Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0121416

Award Number: 0121416
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1409852            (Estimated)
Investigator: Liviu Iftode Iftode@cs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Hsiao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ulrich Kremer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The objective of the proposed work is to develop an integrated
              computational-communication a chitecture
for large scale netwo ks of embedded
              systems,called cooperative computin .Unlike distributed comput-
ing,coope
              ative computing is pe formed ove a dynamic ad-hoc network with volatile nodes
              and connections,
and expects statistically correct executions.E .ective
              esource management,in pa ticula power and energy
management,will be c ucial
              since most devices in the netwo k will be mobile and will ely on batte
              y.The
basic idea in coope ative computing is that nodes coope ate in pe
              forming a global task in an ad-hoc manne
using thei local esou ces and state
              information to att act task 's computation o
              communication.Caching,
routing,topology discove y,o any speci .c use -de .ned
              application,can be implemented as a global task
over the cooperative computing
              model.
     To effectively cooperate,the nodes that are involved need to know
              the esources and constraints they face
in successfully accomplishing the ta
              get task.In such a power and esource constrained environment,the
coope ating
              nodes must intelligently make the best decisions to ensu e the quality of esult
              (QoR).
With these goals in mind,the p oposed esea ch is to develop a system a
              chitectu e to support coope ative
computing ove dynamic netwo ks of embedded
              systems.Our resea ch will address the following issues:
How to de .ne a global
              task at the application and ope ating system levels?
How to prog am very large
              networks of embedded systems to execute a global task without handling
each
              node individually?
How to implement self-outing using peer-to-peer
              communication only?
How to measure a pa tially successful execution?
How to
              predict the powe dissipation and energy consumption of individual nodes,and
              nodes cooper-
ating ac oss the network?
How to optimize a task to reduce its
              powe and ene gy budget running on individual nodes,and across
nodes in
              network?
     The system a chitectu e for coope ative computing is based on
              Smart Messages (SM),which can be
viewed as intelligent ca ie s of data in a
              netwo k.Sma t Messages a e collections of code and mobile data
that migrate th
              ough the netwo k,a single network hop at a time,executing at each step.Smart
              Messages
a e self-outing,namely they a e esponsible fo dete mining thei own
              paths th ough the netwo k,utilizing a
minimal set of facilities p ovided by
              nodes in the netwo k.An SM may be denied a equest to oute th ough
a node due
              to the node 's esou ce limitations,in pa ticula its emaining ene gy level.We
              conjectu e that
Smart Messages p ovide a .exible support for a wide variety of
              applications,anging from data collection
and dissemination,content-based
              outing and object t acking,to more t aditional dist ibuted
              computing
applications in which execution of a task is sp ead across a
              collection of devices.
     As pa t of this p oposal we plan to implement and
              extensively evaluate seve al p ototype implementations
of the Smart Message a
              chitectu e.Ou testbed will consist of networks of embedded multicontrollers
              and
PDAs based on Bluetooth sho t-range wi eless communication.
