Title       : Tapestry of Times Past - Request for a Planning Meeting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0121826

Award Number: 0121826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10608              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Lindberg drl@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Tapestry of Times Past 
A Paleontological Portal for North
              America

David Lindberg
EAR-0102826

The University of California Museum
              of Paleontology (UCMP) will host a meeting of representatives of the Society of
              Vertebrate Paleontology, the Paleontological Society, and the United States
              Geologic Survey (USGS) in order to plan the development of a paleontology
              portal for North America based upon the color-coded geologic map developed by
              the USGS.  Using web-based technology and relational databases, the map and its
              associated stratigraphic column can be made interactive, allowing access to
              information about particular geographic regions, geologic time periods and
              environmental depositions - the flora and fauna, major events, fossil evidence,
              etc.  This portal will be enhanced by links developed by individual museums and
              institutions, specific to particular geographic regions and/or time periods.
              Because it is dynamic, the map becomes a scalable portal for all current
              exhibits (both real and virtual) as well as those yet to be developed. 
              

Such a paleontology portal will provide personalized access to researchers,
              teachers, and to the inquisitive learner.  Consider the following scenarios: 

              A researcher clicks on a section of the Permian in Texas to learn about current
              research efforts related to Permian exposures in that state.
 A middle school
              class in Florida uses the maps to construct and test hypotheses as to why most
              dinosaur fossils are found in the Midwest rather than Florida. 
 A user clicks
              on the map and finds himself in the Devonian of New York.  Besides the
              generalized information of the time period, the local site link is to the
              Geologic History of the State of New York, a project of the Paleontological
              Research Institute.

This project provides a unique opportunity for
              paleontological societies to come together for a unified purpose-the sharing of
              their research with the public.  The portal becomes a single entry point into
              the paleontological history of the United States - the flora and fauna, the
              events, the processes at work.  It will facilitate and integrate an exploration
              through geologic time and geographic location.


