Title       : ITR: Data Driven Design Optimization in Engineering Using Concurrent Integrated
               Experiment and Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0121058

Award Number: 0121058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael W. Plesniak                     
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Doyle D. Knight knight@jove.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Khaled Rasheed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yogesh Jaluria  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory S. Elliott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Noshir A. Langrana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1652,1687,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The proposal focuses on the development and validation of an innovative
              methodology for Multi-criteria Design Optimization (MDO) in engineering which
              integrates concurrent experiment and simulation.  This methodology, denoted
              Data Driven Design Optimization Methodology (DDDOM), represents a major change
              from current engineering design practice which uses experiment and simulation
              in a sequential manner.  The methodology will leverage the inherent advantages
              of experiment and simulation in a Dynamic Data Driven Application System. The
              methodology will be validated for the optimal design of three cases: a flush
              mounted inlet for a generic ogive-cylinder body, a cooling system for
              electronic components, and a lumbar vertebral spinal structure.  The
              experiments and simulations will be performed at Rutgers University.  The
              proposal includes an integrated educational program involving students at the
              high school, undergraduate and graduate levels with specific emphasis on women
              and minorities.  The research program will draw students from five existing
              programs of the Rutgers School of Engineering Office of Special Programs. Four
              research teams will be formed with participants drawn from each of these
              programs.   These teams will provide a unique opportunity for research
              experience and leadership development.  Endorsing organizations include Boeing,
              IBM, and the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.

