Title       : Neurocognitive Dynamics Of Sleep Onset
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0121953

Award Number: 0121953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59168              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Walker matthew_walker@hms.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Walker will conduct a year long
              investigation of the human brain systems which control the descent from full
              consciousness into the reduced consciousness of sleep and produce the cognitive
              experience of sleep onset dreaming.  Sleep is an essential part of human life,
              occupying approximately one third of our time. The shift from wake to sleep
              arguably represents the most striking transition that the human brain and mind
              normally experiences.  Although we are beginning to understand what brain
              mechanisms trigger this shift, the actual processes that produce the state of
              sleep remain unknown.  Of additional interest is the type of mental experience
              that accompanies this wake-sleep transition, often involving brief
              hallucinations/dreams containing visual and auditory events as well as feelings
              of movement.  Recent studies have suggested that these sleep-onset dreams are
              related to the re-play and consolidation of memories of novel daytime
              experiences, particularly those requiring the learning of new skills (e.g.
              engage in novel physical or mental activities for extended periods of time such
              as the first day of skiing).  Dr. Walker and colleagues have been able to
              reliably produce near identical, stereotyped sleep-onset dreams by having human
              subjects play a ski simulator game for extended periods during the day.  The
              present project uses this method to observe and control the cognitive processes
              of sleep onset dreaming as volunteers brains are being imaged in functional
              magnetic resonance scanner.
Identifying the brain mechanisms involved in the
              sleep-onset process would provide information of wide value to both the basic
              neurosciences and to clinical research.  It would not only increase our
              understanding of the neurocognitive basis of both the sleeping brain and the
              dreaming mind, but would also expand our understanding of human sensory and
              perceptual experience and of how new knowledge and skills are acquired, learned
              and reprocessed. This information would also provide a platform for new
              theories of human perception, cognition and learning, and will assist in the
              formulation of new treatments for a variety of neurological and sleep
              disorders.

