Title       : ITR/SY: Collaborative/RUI Research on the Perceptual Aspects of Locomotion
               Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0121084

Award Number: 0121084
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1400000            (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Thompson thompson@cs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter S. Shirley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Hollerbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah Creem-Regehr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1654,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              No current system allows a person to naturally walk through a large-scale
              virtual environment.  The availability of such a locomotion interface would
              have impacts on a broad range of applications, including education and
              training, design and prototyping, physical fitness, and rehabilitation;  for
              some of these applications natural walking provides a level of realism not
              obtainable if movement through the simulated world is controlled by devices
              such as a joystick, while for others realistic walking is a fundamental
              requirement. Prototypes have been built for a variety of computer-controlled
              devices on which a person can walk, but there has been little investigation of
              the utility of such devices as interfaces to a virtual world and almost no
              study at all of the interactions of visual and biomechanical perceptual cues in
              such devices.   This project addresses key open questions, the answers to which
              are needed if locomotion interfaces are to offer effective interaction between
              users and computer simulations.   An effective locomotion interface must
              provide users with accurate visual and biomechanical sensations of walking; 
              thus, a key objective of this work is to determine how to synergistically
              combine visual information generated by computer graphics with biomechanical
              information generated by devices that simulate walking on real surfaces.   The
              PI and his collaborators will investigates methods that allow more accurate
              walking in a locomotion interface while accurately conveying a sense of the
              spaces being walked through.  Specific issues to be considered include how to
              facilitate the perception of speed and distance traveled, how to provide a
              compelling sense of turning when actual walking along a curved path is not
              possible, how to give a user the sense that he/she is walking over a sloped
              surface, and more generally how to give a user a clear sense of the scale and
              structure of the spaces being walked through.   The PI's findings on these
              issues will be relevant across the spectrum of possible approaches to
              locomotion interfaces.

