Title       : ITR/SI: Broadband MIMO OFDM Wireless Access
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0121565

Award Number: 0121565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1950800            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon L. Stuber stuber@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Barry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Ann Ingram  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ye (Geoffrey) Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven W. McLaughlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The convenience of wireless communications and the ever-increasing demand for
              higher data rates has motivated the proposed study of more efficient methods of
              transmission.  One highly spectrally efficient link architecture is the
              multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) architecture, which uses multiple
              transmit  antennas and multiple receive antennas.   Under ideal conditions, the
              theoretical capacity of a MIMO channel increases linearly in the number of
              transmit/receive antennas. In other words, the theory promises that more bits
              can be conveyed through the same bandwidth by simply adding more antennas at
              each end of the link.  Orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) is a
              high-data rate modulation technique that is already part of some
              single-transmitter communications standards and is known for its scalability
              and its convenient and cost-effective implementation using standard digital
              signal processing architectures.  This study seeks to determine how to combine
              OFDM with MIMO architectures over real channels.  A challenging goal of this
              research is to arrive at a flexible, scaleable, wireless modem with bandwidth
              efficiency on the order of 4 to 10 bits per second per Hertz.

The study will
              include analysis of the major functions of the physical (PHY) and medium access
              control (MAC) layers.  Hardware experimentation will include MIMO channel
              measurements, including characterization of MIMO interference, and verification
              of the MIMO OFDM link in real-time on a software radio test-bed.  Methods for
              performing MIMO OFDM channel estimation and synchronization jointly over the
              spatial channels are being investigated, taking into account noise and channel
              estimation and synchronization errors. An adaptive transmitter is also being
              studied that combines space-time processing based on singular-value
              decomposition (SVD) with adaptive modulation.  Solutions to the major
              transmission impairments in OFDM systems, which include intersymbol
              interference (ISI) due to insufficient guard interval, interference from
              co-channel systems, and the effects of amplifier non-linearities on OFDM will
              be sought for MIMO OFDM systems.  To provide data reliability, the combination
              of space-time coding, Turbo coding with iterative receivers, and hybrid ARQ
              strategies for error control across the PHY and MAC layers are being
              considered.  Finally, media access protocols will be optimized to work with the
              parameters of the OFDM air interface, such as the OFDM symbol period. 


