Title       : Nasca Population Nucleation and Residential Agglutination in the Late
               Intermediate Period
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2001   
File        : a0121756

Award Number: 0121756
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc P. Bermann bermarc+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Viviana Siveroni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The movement of population from rural towns to large centers remains one of
              
the most common but striking trends in human settlement.  Researchers have
              
had little trouble in formulating explanations for this population
              
nucleation in market societies.  However, these market-based approaches
              
have proven of little utility in societies - - or segments of societies - -
              
not dominated by market institutions.  Because these societies were
              
generally non-literate and left no written records, archaeology provides
              
the only means to study long-term demographic change in such
              societies.

Viviana Siveroni will investigate chronological settlement trends
              in a 
non-market population of the prehispanic Andes in the Nasca Valley,
              Peru. 
Recent archaeological research has revealed massive regional changes
              
between AD 550 and AD 950, including: (a) the abandonment of many rural
              
homesteads and settlements as people flocked to large centers; (b) the end
              
of a long-standing ideology and ceremonial practice (including that
              
associated with the famous Nasca "lines"); and (c) an increase in social
              
stratification even as political decentralization grew.  Nothing is known
              
of the changes at the household or community levels that accompanied these
              
broad regional changes.  Siveroni will investigate potential changes by
              
excavating and comparing residential areas from a rural village (Las
              
Carretas) dating to early in this period to those at a center dating to
              
late in the period (Huayuri).  Her work will explore community religious
              
practices, social structure, and political organization, while focusing on
              
potential shifts in economic activities.  One critical goal of the research
              
is to explore the relationship dynamics between population nucleation and
              
reorganization of the household economy.

The importance of this project is
              that Siveroni will assess several 
theoretical models in which household and
              communal level processes are 
themselves the cause of regional population
              nucleation.  This research thus 
represents an attempt to link levels of
              analysis in a new way.  Processes 
such as population nucleation must be
              observed and studied at the regional 
level, but their causes may reside at
              the sub-regional level, even the 
level of the household or individual actor.
              Documenting human motivations 
and social processes in a world not governed by
              rational market forces is 
an important contribution of this kind of
              explanatory archaeology; placing 
this work squarely in current debates in
              locational geography and political 
science.




