Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Neural Substrates of Primate Communication: A
               Comparative Study of Facial and Hypoglossal Nuclei
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2002   
File        : a0121286

Award Number: 0121286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8787               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph L. Holloway rlh2@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick R. Hof  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Gannon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Primates use diverse sensory channels in their communication among social
              partners, ranging from the pungent "urine washing" of ring-tailed lemurs to the
              flamboyant "lip flip" gesture of gelada baboons to the complex rhythms of human
              speech. These signals are often highly nuanced and produced in a flexible,
              context-sensitive manner. Since the nervous system has a central role in the
              planning and execution of communicative behavior, one would expect significant
              species differences in the brain structures that subserve communication. To
              date, however, little is known about species differences in the brain's control
              of the orofacial system that is so vital to the production of facial expression
              and vocalization. This research project will contribute to our knowledge of the
              neural substrates underlying two important transformations in the evolution of
              primate communication: (1) the more dominant use of facial expressions among
              great apes and humans, and (2) the skilled use of the tongue and lips in the
              service of human spoken language. In a sample that includes New World monkeys,
              Old World monkeys, apes, and humans, brainstem regions that directly supply the
              muscles of facial expression and the tongue will be analyzed using techniques
              to reveal their chemical composition and cellular structure. The results of
              this study will help to clarify how neural organization determines
              species-specific communicative signals, including human speech, and will
              provide insights into the evolution of the primate brain
