Title       : ITR/SY: Communication and Data Sharing Services for Dynamic Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0121277

Award Number: 0121277
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1030000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy A. Lynch lynch@theory.lcs.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander A. Shvartsman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1667,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing and analyzing algorithms to solve problems of
              communication and data sharing in highly dynamic distributed environments such
              as found in networks of mobile and embedded devices.  The term dynamic here
              encompasses many types of changes, including changing network topology,
              processor mobility, changing sets of participating client processes, a wide
              range of types of processor and network failures, and timing variations.  The
              properties being studied include ordering and reliability guarantees for
              communication and coherence guarantees for data sharing.  The algorithmic
              results are accompanied by lower bound and impossibility results, which
              describe inherent limitations on what problems can be solved, and at what cost.
              This is particulary important in the networks of embedded devices that need to
              operate subject to the resource constraints such limited battery power, storage
              capacity, communication bandwidth and computation power.  

The communication
              and data-sharing problems to be solved are viewed as high level global
              services, which span network locations. These services generally provide
              performance and fault-tolerance guarantees, conditioned on assumptions about
              the behavior of the environment and of the underlying network substrate. 
              Traditionally, research on distributed services has emphasized specification
              and correctness, while research on distributed algorithms has emphasized
              complexity and performance.  This project combines and synthesizes these two
              concerns: It yields algorithms that perform efficiently and degrade gracefully
              in dynamic distributed systems, and whose correctness, performance, and
              fault-tolerance guarantees are expressed by precisely-defined global services. 
              Because the setting is so complex, the algorithms are also be very complex,
              which means that it it is necessary to decompose them into smaller, more
              manageable pieces.  In this project, many of those smaller pieces are being
              viewed as lower-level, auxiliary global services. These auxiliary services
              provide lower-level communication and data-sharing capabilities, plus other
              capabilities such as failure detection, progress detection, consensus, group
              membership, leader election, reconfiguration, resource allocation, workload
              distribution, location determination, and routing.  This work is being carried
              out in terms of a mathematical framework based on interacting state machines. 
              The state machines include features to express issues of timing, continuous
              behavior, and probabilistic behavior.   

The theoretical work in this
              project is guided by the requirements of systems that include networks of
              mobile and embedded devices and examples chosen from several prototype
              applications, including distributed file management, information collection and
              dissemination, computer-supported cooperative work, distributed games, and
              multimedia transmission.    

