Title       : ITR/SY: The Aware Home: Sustaining the Quality of Life for an Aging Population
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a0121661

Award Number: 0121661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1599997            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory D. Abowd abowd@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Irfan Essa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron F. Bobick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wendy A. Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth D. Mynatt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1657,1667,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a standard award.  The focus of this project is on development of a
              domestic environment that is cognizant of the whereabouts and activities of its
              occupants and can support them in their everyday life.  While the technology is
              applicable to a range of domestic situations, the emphasis in this work will be
              on support for aging in place;  through collaboration with experts in assistive
              care and cognitive aging, the PI and his team will design, demonstrate, and
              evaluate a series of domestic services that aim to maintain the quality of life
              for an aging population, with the goal of increasing the likelihood of a "stay
              at home" alternative to assisted living that satisfies the needs of an aging
              individual and his/her distributed family.   In particular, the PI will explore
              two areas that are key to sustaining quality of life for an independent senior
              adult: maintaining familial vigilance, and supporting daily routines.   The
              intention is to serve as an active partner, aiding the senior occupant without
              taking control.  This research will lead to advances in three research areas: 
              human-computer interaction;  computational perception;  and software
              engineering.   To achieve the desired goals, the PI will conduct the research
              and experimentation in an authentic domestic setting, a novel research facility
              called the Residential Laboratory recently completed next to the Georgia Tech
              campus.   Together with experts in theoretical and practical aspects of aging,
              the PI will establish a pattern of research in which informed design of
              ubiquitous computing technology can be rapidly deployed, evaluated and evolved
              in an authentic setting.  Special attention will be paid throughout to issues
              relating to privacy and trust implications.   The PI will transition the
              products of this project to researchers and practitioners interested in
              performing more large-scale observations of the social and economic impact of
              Aware Home technologies.

