Title       : Next-Generation Ultrafast Laser Processing and Micromachining: Integrating
               Research with Practice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0121122

Award Number: 0121122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225959             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon P. Longtin jlongtin@ms.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1406,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              High-power ultrafast lasers offer significant advantages for next-generation
              laser materials processing, particularly at small length scales, which makes
              them well suited for micromachining and MEMS structures.  The extremely high
              laser intensities associated with ultrafast lasers result in unique, nonlinear
              laser-material interactions that provide innovative new possibilities for
              laser-material processing.  This proposal presents a unified series of research
              tasks that address both fundamental scientific issues while presenting
              practical techniques and solutions for real-world applications. The proposed
              tasks include 1) novel beam delivery techniques for delivering a high-quality,
              minimal distortion ultrafast laser beam to a workpiece for processing without
              the need for a vacuum chamber, 2) sub-surface machining of transparent
              materials in which features can be fabricated underneath the surface of
              transparent materials for true three-dimensional micromachining, 3) modeling
              breakdown and material removal to predict a given material's response and
              removal rates from specific ultrafast laser parameters, and 4) precision
              processing of novel materials such as SU-8 for MEMS applications, which
              presents unique capabilities over traditional manufacturing.  A central focus
              of the research tasks is to provide both fundamental understanding while at the
              same time providing practical knowledge for industrial and other real-world
              users.  As an educational tool for both graduate and undergraduate students,
              the project will provide excellent training in optics, lasers, and engineering
              on the microscale (both time and space).  These topics are often only minimally
              covered, if at all, in traditional mechanical engineering programs, and this
              project will provide much needed training in these areas.
