Title       : Multiple Photon Microscopy for Bacterial Biofilm Plasmid Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a0121203

Award Number: 0121203
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340155             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Bryers JBryers@nso2.uchc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Conn Health Center
	      263 Farmington Ave.
	      Farmington, CT  060302806    860/679-3173

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks to develop dynamic multiple photon laser microscopic methods
              to non-invasively quantify plasmid retention, transfer, and expression within
              model bacterial biofilms.
Recent literature has confirmed that adherent
              bacteria are phenotypically different than their freely suspended counterparts.
              Being bound within a biofilm may also enhance the segregational stability,
              expression, and rate of conjugative transfer of plasmid-DNA between bacteria.
              This is important since plasmid-bearing bacteria, in a biofilm, may transfer
              genes and phenotypes (e.g., disinfectant and antibiotic resistance, xenobiotic
              degradation capacity) more readily to neighboring bacteria. To date, little
              quantitative data exists regarding plasmid retention, transfer, and expression
              in mixed culture biofilm ecosystems.  Specific aims are to: (1) Develop
              recombinant bacterial species and recombinant plasmid(s) that will allow
              non-invasive microscopic determination of areal concentrations of all biofilm
              inhabitants including plasmid-bearing hosts, plasmid-free recipients, and
              transconjugants in a developing model biofilm; (2) Evaluate the segregational
              and structural stability of the transfer recombinant plasmid in developing pure
              cultures; (3) Refine existing non-invasive microscopic methods to quantify
              plasmid retention and transfer within developing binary-and tertiary culture
              biofilms; and (4) Quantify plasmid transfer kinetics and heterologous gene
              expression within a model tertiary culture biofilm community as a function of
              environmental conditions (nutrient concentration, O2 concentration, pH), donor
              species (gram positive vs. gram negative), and donor fluid phase
              concentration.

