Title       : Green's Functions Research and Education Enhancement Network (GREEN)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0121545

Award Number: 0121545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $607394             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory M. Shreve gshreve@kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adam C. Powell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marcia L. Zeng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laura M. Bartolo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 7444      NATIONAL SMETE DIGITAL LIBRARY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7444,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              To facilitate research and education in Green's functions and their
              applications, this project is developing an education-oriented digital library
              focusing on Green's functions and their applications - the Green's Functions
              Research and Education Enhancement Network (GREEN). GREEN will serve
              undergraduate, graduate and professional education user communities and support
              Green's functions research and application development in academia and
              industry. The project is providing an integrated learning environment and set
              of digital resources for science, mathematics, engineering and technology
              education (SMETE) and is aggregating and organizing learning materials related
              to Green's functions and their applications. This project has two primary
              objectives. The first objective is to implement a solution for transforming and
              expanding the existing digital resources of an on-line collaborative work group
              (the National Institute of Standards and Technology Green's Functions Working
              Group or NIST-GFWG) from a loose collection of useful digital resources to an
              NSDL-SMETE digital library. The second objective is to enhance the educational
              value of the proposed NSDL-SMETE library by applying an education-oriented
              metadata schema (Learning Object Metadata schema from the IEEE Learning
              Technology Standards Committee) to the collection and coupling that schema with
              a quality assurance process and support tool that will provide for the
              continual evolution and refinement of the collection materials during their
              lifecycle. Significant co-funding of this project is being provided by the
              Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the NSF Directorate for Mathematical
              and Physical Sciences in recognition of the emphasis on collections in the area
              of Green's functions represented in this work.

