Title       : ITR/SY: Discrete Models & Algorithms in the Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0121555

Award Number: 0121555
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2899392            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alistair Sinclair sinclair@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Karp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Umesh V. Vazirani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christos H. Papadimitriou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1687,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research is centered on four major computational themes which 
are linked
              in various ways:

1. Quantum Computation:  
A study of novel quantum
              algorithms, of entanglement as a computational 
resource, and of connections
              to fundamental issues in quantum physics, 
such as the transition from
              classical to quantum. 

2. Modeling the Regulatory Processes of the Cell:
In
              the post-genomic era, the computational modeling of the operation 
of an
              entire cell at the level of interactions among genes, proteins 
and
              environmental conditions.

3. Statistical Physics and Computational
              Complexity: 
A study of central concepts of statistical physics, such as phase
              
transitions and critical exponents, with emphasis on their computational
              
manifestations and their relevance to the analysis of large systems 
with
              local interactions.

4. Mathematical Economics and the Internet: 
A study of
              the Internet as a novel computational artifact and a complex 
economic arena,
              as well as of the algorithmic adaptations of Game Theory 
and Mechanism Design
              necessary for such a study.

The four PIs --- Richard Karp, Christos
              Papadimitriou, Alistair Sinclair 
and Umesh Vazirani --- are all based in the
              Computer Science Division at 
UC Berkeley.  Each of them has a track record of
              research in at least one 
of the above areas, and a substantial interest in at
              least one other.  
The project also includes one senior scientist from each of
              the four areas: 
Birgitta Whaley (Quantum Physics), Adam Arkin (Quantitative
              Biology), 
Yuval Peres (Probability and Statistical Physics), and Scott
              Shenker 
(Economics and the Internet).  

The research is rooted in a
              realization that a computational perspective 
is becoming increasingly
              important in the Natural and Mathematical Sciences,
and conversely that the
              Sciences are posing new challenges for the theory 
of computation, many of
              which are related.  It aims to foster this connection 
within a dedicated
              program of research and graduate education.
