Title       : A Compact Electron Injector for an X-Ray Lithography Ring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1990   
File        : a9060668

Award Number: 9060668
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49994              (Estimated)
Investigator: David U. L. Yu davidyu@pacbell.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DULY Research Inc
	      1912 MacArthur Street
	      Rancho Palos Verdes, CA  902751111    310/548-7123

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1456,
Abstract    :
              We have proposed a method to reduce the size of a                              
              compact x-ray lithography machine used for etching                             
              the next-generation high-density computer chips.  A                            
              high gradient electron accelerator powered by a                                
              relativistic klystron is used in place of the                                  
              conventional linac as an injector to a superconducting                         
              synchrotron radiation ring to produce intense x-rays.                          
              Recent experimental results have demonstrated that                             
              electrons can reach the same final energy in a much                            
              shorter section of the high gradient accelerator than                          
              the conventional linac.  The proposed machine is                               
              therefore much smaller than the conventional x-ray                             
              synchrotron machines.  The compact machine enables                             
              manufacturers to utilize high-energy, high-intensity x-                        
              rays to produce various high-density computer chips                            
              in a factory environment.  In Phase I of this research,                        
              we will perform conceptual studies for the injection                           
              system, and will consider the related physics and                              
              engineering issues for combining the relativistic                              
              klystron high gradient accelerator (RK/HGA) and                                
              the superconducting synchrotron radiation ring                                 
              (SSRR) into a single x-ray production machine.                                 
              Particular consideration will be given to the                                  
              compatibility of the extremely short pulses produced                           
              by the RK/HGA and the macropulses required by                                  
              the SSRR, to the preservation of electron beam                                 
              emittance, and to tradeoff studies of various kicker                           
              magnet configurations in order to ensure efficient                             
              transfer of the beam from the RK/HGA to the                                    
              SSRR.
