Title       : Non-Intrusive Diagnostics to Study Soot Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1990   
File        : a9060897

Award Number: 9060897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49924              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Serio mserio@AFRInc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Fuel Research Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  06138    860/528-9806

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1407,
Abstract    :
              One of the most important processes in combustion is the                       
              formation and destruction of soot.  The concentration of soot                  
              controls the energy radiated by the flame and hence the flame                  
              temperature.  The effectiveness of soot destruction convrols                   
              the combustion efficiency and the environmental acceptability                  
              of the combustion device.  To provide an instrument for soot                   
              research, development, and eventually for process monitoring,                  
              this proposed project would develop a low cost (under                          
              $50,000), portable, versatile, non-intrusive flame diagnostic                  
              instrument having the following capabilities:  1) Measurement                  
              of spatially resolved mean value of both concentration and                     
              temperature of gas species and soot by tomographic                             
              reconstruction of line-of-sight Fourier Transform Infrared                     
              (FT-IR) emission and transmission (E/T) spectrographic data.                   
              2) Measurements of spatially resolved data on the time                         
              variations of species concentration and temperature.  The                      
              objective of Phase I is to develop and validate the method of                  
              FT-IR E/T tomography for flames being studied at the National                  
              Institute of Science and Technology (NIST) and General Motors                  
              for which data from other techniques are available.  These                     
              data would be used to help determine the mechanism for the                     
              formation and destruction of soot.  In Phase II, fiber optics                  
              and multi-plexing would be developed for obtaining multiple                    
              lines-of-sight simultaneously and the FT-IR turbulence                         
              measurements would be developed to allow spatially resolved                    
              data to be obtained.  Software and hardware would be developed                 
              for on-line, in-situ diagnostic instrumentation.                               
                                                                                             
              The successful completion of this program will result in a                     
              powerful, rugged instrument for in-situ diagnostics capable of                 
              measuring important properties of multi-phase reacting mefia                   
              either in research and development, in manufacturing or as a                   
              process monitor.  Applications include measurements in                         
              industrial gas turbines, industrial and residential furnaces,                  
              utility boilers, process heaters, jet engines and diesel                       
              engines.
