Title       : Semiconductor Surface Chemistry for Biosensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1990   
File        : a9060358

Award Number: 9060358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick E. Guire pguire@surmodics.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SurModics, Inc.
	      9924 West Seventy Fourth Street
	      Eden Prairie, MN  55344    612/829-2707

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1111,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The concept of photoaffinity immobilization of specific binding                
              proteins has been patented and reduced to practice with antibody               
              on glass by this company. The development of additional reagents               
              and reaction procedures is proposed for the affinity coupling                  
              (covalent) of receptor molecules (especially antibodies) to the                
              activated surface of passivated (by hydrophilic spacer coating)                
              silicon-based sensors. Additional trifunctional photoreactive                  
              reagents will be synthesized and coupled to the sensor surface                 
              for the specific covalent binding of monoclonal antibody (using                
              one of the two antibody binding sites), leaving the remaining                  
              stabilized antibody binding site available for functional                      
              exchange between surface-immobilized analyte and free analyte                  
              molecules in the test sample. The specific, one-step                           
              purification-covalent immobilization of the antibody through a                 
              long, hydrophilic, flexible tether adjacent to the short-spacer                
              immobilized analyte group, is expected to provide cost efficient               
              production of stabilized immunosensors with improved performance               
              (faster response and regeneration, as well as increased                        
              sensitivity, particularly where rapid analyses are required). The              
              system proposed will detect toluene and/or related aromatic                    
              hydrocarbon derivatives. Demonstrating laboratory feasibility                  
              with this immobilized, stabilized immunosensor system with this                
              type of analyte will support the utility of this technology for                
              sensitive, rapid, and selective sensing and monitoring of                      
              biologically active agents. The sensor device will reversibly                  
              recognize and quantitate analyte content in batch or continuous                
              sampling situations and transduce the signal with electronic                   
              recording and transmission of data. Such a device would offer a                
              broad  range of applicability for periodic sample analysis and                 
              real time, on line monitoring of fluids (air, water) as well as                
              dosimetry measurements in air and physiological fluids.
