Title       : An Optimal Time-Dependent Receiver for Interference Rejection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  1990  
File        : a9060106

Award Number: 9060106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49979              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey H. Reed   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Adv CounterMeasure Sys
	      9838 Old Placerville Rd
	      Sacramento, CA  958273559    916/362-9226

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1454,
Abstract    :
              This SBIR project examines a new and innovative                                
              method of implementing a receiver that has superior                            
              performance over that of conventional receivers in                             
              rejecting interference.  The improved interference                             
              rejection allows the transmitter to use less power to                          
              achieve the required bit-error rate performance, and                           
              hence reduces the probability that the transmitter will                        
              interfere with other users of the spectrum.  The new                           
              receiver, called the optimal time-dependent receiver                           
              (OTDR), is developed by considering a receiver as a                            
              time-varying filtering process.  The OTDR is an                                
              adaptive time-varying filter that is optimized to handle                       
              changing signal conditions and nonstationary                                   
              interference.  The superior performance of the OTDR                            
              is obtained by exploiting the cyclostationary nature of                        
              the interference.  The OTDR is capable of performing                           
              down conversion, equalization, multipath rejection,                            
              interference rejection, baud sampling, synchronization,                        
              and symbol conversion all within the same operation.                           
              The OTDR can be configured to handle a variety of                              
              modulation types, all using little or no additional                            
              hardware, and thus is capable of numerous and varied                           
              modes.  The OTDR is implemented using digital signal                           
              processing techniques and the hardware can be made                             
              small, reliable, and maintenance free.                                         
                                                                                             
              The objective of this SBIR project is to determine the                         
              theoretical and experimental performance of the                                
              OTDR in several realistic commercial situations.  The                          
              evaluation will include determining the trade-off in the                       
              OTDR system design.
