Title       : Intelligent Bus Extender Crossbar Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1990  
File        : a9060742

Award Number: 9060742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Farrelle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Optivision Incorporated
	      3450 Hillview Avenue
	      Palo Alto, CA  94304    415/855-0200

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 4095,
Abstract    :
                   This project is funded under the National Science Foundation's            
              (NSF) Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program, which is              
              designed to provide an opportunity for small business, particularly            
              the small high technology firm, to participate in NSF research.                
              Phase I of the SBIR program serves as a filter to select promising             
              proposals and determine if the firm can do high quality research.              
              Phase II is the principal research project.  Phase III is the                  
              conversion of the NSF-funded research into commercial applications             
              and technological innovation supported by follow-on private venture            
              capital or other non-federal financing.                                        
                   This is a Phase I project to investigate a new type of low                
              cost, high performance optical interconnection network:  an                    
              intelligent bus extender crossbar network (IBECN).  It involves                
              combining fiber bus extenders with an electronic crossbar packet               
              switch to network high-speed workstations.  The fiber extender has             
              been designed and studied under a Phase I SBIR grant from DOD, and             
              a hardware prototype is being developed in Phase II.  That project,            
              however, involves only two workstations at a time.  This research              
              would allow more than two workstations to transfer data at 200                 
              million bits per second over fiber lines.  This transfer rate is               
              approximately double that for current optical (FDDI) local area                
              networks and, while less than for future gigabit networks, the cost            
              of the switches is expected to be significantly cheaper than for               
              either FDDI or gigabit equipment performing similar                            
              interconnection.  There are extensive commercial applications in               
              parallel computing, signal processing and telecommunications.
