Title       : Toward the Origin of Whales: Eocene Cetacea from Pakistan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9526686

Award Number: 9526686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johannes G. Thewissen thewisse@neoucom.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              S. Taseer Hussain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern Ohio C of M
	      4209 State Route 44
	      Rootstown, OH  44272    330/325-6500

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,5943,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Thewissen  9526686     This project investigates the transition of cetaceans
              (whales, dolphins, porpoises) from terrestrial quadrupeds to obligate marine
              swimmers.  This transition is one of the few paleontologically documented
              examples of macroevolutionary change in mammals.  The project will interpret
              patterns of macroevolutionary change in two systems that underwent pervasive
              modifications, locomotion and hearing, and evaluate its paleoecological
              context.     Hypotheses.-- Seven hypotheses will be tested.  Two of these make
              predictions about changes in the modes of locomotion in early cetaceans.  Three
              hypotheses make predictions about evolution and function of the cetacean middle
              and inner ear.  Another two hypotheses address the physical environment under
              which this transition took place, making prediction about paleoecology.     New
              fossil material will be collected from freshwater and shallow marine sediments
              of the Kuldana and Kohat Formations of Northern Pakistan, the only area where
              the earliest and most plesiomorphic cetaceans are found.  This material will
              allow testing of the hypotheses.   Kuldana/Kohat cetaceans lived across a
              variety of depositional environments in what is now a structurally complex
              area, requiring detailed geological study.  Sedimentological study will
              elucidate the physical setting of the transition.  Related, ongoing work
              includes analyses of modern cetacean ear development and function, and an
              analysis of physiological constraints, based on stable oxygen isotopes.  
              Significance.-- Cetacean origins is one of the best documented examples of
              land-water transitions among vertebrates, and showcases several form-function
              complexes that underwent pervasive change.  Cetacean swimming evolved from
              quadrupedal paddling to dorsoventral oscillation of the broadened tail, and the
              Kuldana cetaceans display intermediate modes.  The ears of cetacean ancestors
              were tuned to mid-frequency airborne sounds, whereas modern cetaceans hear
              underwater high- (odontocete) or low- (mys ticete) sounds.  The position of the
              Kuldana cetaceans is unclear, but their auditory morphology is different from
              their terrestrial sister group and modern cetaceans.  Fossil morphologies
              interpreted in an established phylogenetic context and against a background
              provided by modern aquatic mammals elucidates these evolutionary patterns. 
              Studying the sedimentology of the rocks that document these morphological
              patterns clarifies the ecological setting of the land-to-water transition.  
              This study is of broader significance for the higher phylogeny of mammals.  It
              will provide morphological data to test phylogenies of the affinities of sperm
              whales (odotocete paraphyly) and the relationship of cetaceans to artiodactys
              (artiodactyl paraphyly).  These phylogenetic hypotheses were proposed on the
              basis of molecular data, and are greatly disputed by morphologists.    Studies
              of faunal evolution have suggested that Indo-Pakistan contacted Asia in the
              Cretaceous.  Geological data dispute this claim.  This study will provide a
              critical test for the Eocene paleontological data.
