Title       : A National Center for Computational Electronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1998      
File        : a9526127

Award Number: 9526127
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $484710             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl Hess k-hess@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Umberto Ravaioli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9526127 Hess  The National Center for computational Electronics, founded in 1988
              at the University of Illinois and later expanded in 1992 to include a second
              site at Stanford University, has played a role in advancing on a national level
              various aspects of research and education in computational electronics.  Over
              60 groups from academic  institution s and industry are affiliated to the
              center.  NCCE has provided services to the scientific community, and has pursed
              cooperative projects on interdisciplinary research, involving academic and
              industrial groups, and national laboratories. This is a continuation of the
              funding provided by the National Science Foundation to partially support the
              operation of the NCCE site at the Beckman Institute of the University of
              Illinois.  The proposed activities encompass several areas, from research to
              education and services.  The focus of research will be in the formation of
              collaborative groups working on key research problem in computational
              electronics. Major challenges exist in the areas of deep submicron silicon
              device simulation,  optoelectronics device simulation, as well as quantum
              transport in nanostructures.  The role of NCCE is to create conditions for
              improved communications and technology transfer between the various components
              involved with semiconductor research and development. Different goals and
              uncorrelated efforts have created wide gaps and a lack of standardization.  By
              creating wide interdisciplinary collaborative groups, which involve the broad
              expertise necessary for problems that go well  beyond the capabilities of
              single investigators or even single institutions, NCCE intends to create an
              environment  where the proposed collaborative themes will be developed in a
              more efficient way, while the models and the computer software will evolve in a
              consistent and standardized fashion.  NCCE is now organizing two major working
              groups on full band structure Monte Carlo simulation for silicon devices and on
              semiconductor laser simulation.  Sever al other groups are involved in
              simulation of quantum nanostructures, numerical approaches for hydrodynamic
              simulation models, and interactive environments based on the World Wide Web for
              research and education activities.  NCCE has gained over the last two years
              considerable experience in the development of interactive distributed MOSAIC
              environments for computation/visualization in research and education, and taken
              advantage of the WWW for technology transfer to industry.  This  activity will
              be expanded in close collaboration with  the other NCCE groups and with  the
              the natonal Center for Supercomputing Applications, to improve access to
              information on the WWW for NCCe affiliates, realize environments for remote
              distributed collaboration, improve mechanisms of technology transfer, and
              generate new educational materials for computational electronics.  NCCE will
              continue to provide a wide range of services tot the computational electronics
              community.  These services include a Visitor's program at the Beckman Institute
              which has been instrumental in fostering collaborative interactions, a
              newsletter which will be expanded in scope to take advantage of the distributed
              WWW capabilities to create an electronic information system, release of
              software for large scale simulation and education, and the organization of the
              International Workshop on Computational Electronics.
