Title       : Identification of Preferential Flow Paths at Sites of Groundwater Contamination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1996      
File        : a9526888

Award Number: 9526888
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49998              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Butler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl D. McElwee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey C. Bohling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9526888  Butler    A considerable body of research has identified the spatial
              distribution of hydraulic conductivity as a significant control on the movement
              of contaminants in the subsurface.  A number of theories have been developed to
              quantify the influence of spatial variation of hydraulic conductivity on 
              contaminant transport using stochastic processes or fractal representations to
              model the conductivity variations. It is increasingly apparent , however, that
              the modeling of the conductivity variations at a site using, for example, the
              first two moments of  a stationary stochastic process estimated from core data
              may have limitations in unites composed of a complex mixture of lithologies. 
              Clearly, site-specific features of the hydraulic conductivity distribution of a
              larger scale need to be quantified in order to reliably predict contaminant
              movement in such systems.  In particular, knowledge of the existence of
              laterally contiguous zones of high hydraulic conductivity, which serve as
              preferential flow paths, is often critical for the successful modeling of
              contaminant transport a site. The field identification of such somes, however,
              has proven to be a rather difficult task at site. The field identification of
              such zones, however, has proven to be a rather difficult task. Conventional
              field techniques only provide information of a highly averaged nature or
              information restricted to the immediate vicinity of the test well.  The
              ultimate objective of the research proposed here is to develop a completely new
              field method for the estimation of spatial variations in hydraulic
              conductivity.  Although developed for the general task of estimation of
              hydraulic conductivity variations in saturated formations, this method would be
              especially effective for the identification of preferential flow paths.  This
              new methodology involves three primary elements: (1) a recently proposed
              methods for hydraulic tomography, (2) multilevel sampling wells commonly
              employed in large-scale tracer tests for obtaini ng vertically isolated water
              samples, and (3) miniature fiber-optic pressure sensors recentlydeveloped for
              biomedical applications.  One of the primary constraints on the field
              application of hydraulic tomography has been the need for detailed information
              about vertical variations in pumping-induced head changes.  The use of
              miniature fiber-optic pressure sensors in the small tubing of the multilevel
              samplers, however, should enable that constraint to be overcome and the
              considerable potential of hydraulic tomography to be realized.  An initial
              one-year assessment of the methodology is the primary purpose of the work
              proposed here.  This assessment will include a theoretical extension/analysis
              of the hydraulic tomography approach and a preliminary field evaluation of the
              methodology at a very heavily instrumented field site where some information
              about the interwell variations in hydraulic conductivity is available from a
              previous large-scale tracer test.  The coupling  of the detailed head data
              provided by miniature fiber-optic sensors in multilevel samplers with the
              tomographic inversion method has the potential of providing     extremely
              useful information about the site-specific hydraulic features controlling
              contaminant transport.  The incorporation of such features into a site model
              should dramatically improve the quality of the resulting model predictions,
              thus leading to more reliable risk assessments and a more efficient allocation
              of resources for site characterization and remediation activities.  In
              addition, this methodology should produce much more detailed description of
              hydraulic conductivity variations than has previously been possible.  These
              more detailed descriptions should help refine existing approaches for the
              modeling of conductivity variations and, hopefully, help better tie the
              conductivity variations to their geologic basis.  ??
