Title       : Comparative Nucleophilic Displacement Reactions at Phosphorus and Silicon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9526145

Award Number: 9526145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Holmes rrh@chemistry.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9183,BIOT,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program provides continued support to Dr. Robert R. Holmes of the   Chemistry
              Dearptment, University of Massachusetts at Amherst, for   research on the
              reactivity of phosphorus and silicon compounds.  During   substitution
              reactions, phosphorus and silicon accommodate five or six   groups around the
              central atom.   Highly reactive species of this type   will be synthesized,
              characterized using NMR spectroscopy, and modeled   using ab initio methods and
              the capabilities of  the San Diego   supercomputer Center.  Cyclic
              pentaoxyphosphoranes and isoelectronic   five-coordinate anionic silicates will
              be the focus of the investigation.    Substituents with rings of varying sizes
              and a variety of donor atoms   will be prepared.  The phosphorus work is
              expected to give information on   the mechanism of hydrolysis of cyclic
              adenosine monophosphate, cAMP,   while the silicon work models the initial
              stages of silanol   polymerization.  In both cases, the goal is to explore the
              formation of   six-coordinate intermediates as the source of the increased
              reactivity   observed for five-coordinate phosphorus and silicon compounds. 
              The   reaction rates for hydrolysis and solvolysis of the higher coordinate  
              derivatives will be determined and compared to those of the lower   coordinate
              species.  Nitrogen donor atoms will be used in order to mimic   the functions
              of amino acid residues present at the enzymatic active site   and assess their
              role in forming higher coordinate intermediates.  This research will determine
              the role of an alternate reaction pathway in   two important cases.  The
              possibility of six-coordinate intermediates   affecting both reactivity and
              geometry in the physiologically important   reaction of phosphoryl transfer or
              in the commercially important   polymerization of silanol has not been
              previously explored.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
