Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Integrated Structural and Fluid- Inclusion Study of
               Rolling Hinges and Low-Angle Normal Faults in Metamorphic Core Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1996   
File        : a9526242

Award Number: 9526242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas O. Wright                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Bartley jbartley@mines.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F              Zp                  C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                     Zp     
              Zp          4 @                                                                
                                                                                             
                                            ,   -   .   /   0   1   2   3   4   5   6        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            F
                 Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   ' A@    "  Default
              Paragraph Font                0          5                               7 -  
              -   (   $ w ! a   J   2 #   *   4   4   .   (   #                              
                )   >   U   k   }              0          5                              
              9526242  Bartley  Controversy still surrounds the processes that form
              metamorphic core complexes and extensional detachment faults.  Specifically,
              questions remain regarding the angle(s) at which detachment faults are
              initiated and slip, the capacity of such faults to generate significant
              earthquakes, the characteristics of the transition from crystal-plastic to
              cataclastic to brittle deformation along the faults, the extent to which the
              faults and their footwalls are deformed by isostatic forces induced by tectonic
              denudation, and the mechanics of isostatically driven deformation of large
              normal faults and their footwalls. To address these questions, and integrated
              field and fluid-inclusion study of three faults and their footwalls will be
              carried out:  the Simplon line, central Alps, Switzerland; the Whipple
              detachment, California; and the Raft River detachment, Utah.  Results from
              these areas will be compared to each other and to our previous results from the
              Brenner line, eastern Alps, in order to avoid site-specific results and to
              allow comparison between different orogenic settings.   Statisti cally
              significant populations of orientation and kinematic data will be collected,
              along with oriented samples for thin section study.  Microthermometric analysis
              of fluid inclusions along healed fractures of known orientation will permit
              direct constraints to be placed on the depth-temperature conditions under which
              specific sets of structures formed, providing a reliable context in which to
              interpret the orientation and kinematic data.  Whole-rock chemical data on
              mylonites and cataclasites from Whipple Mountains minidetachment horizons will
              also be collected in order to assess models for the role of fluids in the
              initiation of cataclastic/brittle deformation and detachment faulting.         
                             ;                                                     Oh     +' 
              0                                       $       H       l                      
                                      D       h                                              
                  R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       9526249
                                          Felicia   S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n      
                                  (                                                   +      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  Smith      
                              Felicia Smith               @      h                           
              @                                   @      h                                   
                                                                              @              
                                          Microsoft Word 6.0                                 
                                  2                                                          
                                          ;                                                  
                                     e =       e                                             
                                               j       j   j       j       j       j       j 
                                                                                       1     
                                                                                   _       _ 
                   _       ~                           T   M   6                           j 
                                                                                             
                     j       j                                                               
                     j               j                                       ~              
              j       j       j       j                                                      
                                                                                    9526242 
              Bartley  Controversy still surrounds the processes that form metamorphic core
              complexes and extensional detachment faults.  Specifically, questions remain
              regarding the angle(s) at which detachment faults are initiated and slip, the
              capacity of such faults to generate significant earthquakes, the
              characteristics of the transition from crystal-plastic to cataclastic to
              brittle deformation along the faults, the extent to which the faults and their
              footwalls are deformed by isostatic forces induced by tectonic denudation, and
              the mechanics of isostatically driven deformation of large normal faults and
              their footwalls. To address these questions, and integrated field and
              fluid-inclusion study of three faults and their footwalls will be carried out: 
              the Simplon line, central Alps, Switzerland; the Whipple detachment,
              California; and the Raft River detachment, Utah.  Results from these areas will
              be compared to each other and to our previous results from the Brenner line,
              eastern Alps, in order to avoid site-specific results and to allow comparison
              between differen
