Title       : U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research: The Development and Study of Strengthening
               Agents for Limestone Using Sol-Gel and Coupling Agent Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1998     
File        : a9526499

Award Number: 9526499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21760              (Estimated)
Investigator: George S. Wheeler   (Principal Investigator current)
              C. Jeffrey Brinker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Metropltn Museum of Art
	      
	      New York, NY  10028    /   -

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9526499  Wheeler    This Americas Program award will support collaborative 
              research between Drs. George Segan Wheeler and Elizabeth  Stevenson Goins of
              the Sherman Fairchild Center,  Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, Dr. J. C.
              Brinker,  University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, and Dr. Juan Mendez  Vivar,
              Universidad Autonoma Metropolitana- Iztapalapa,  Mexico.   The primary
              scientific objective of the project is  the development and study of sol-gel
              materials and coupling  agents for strengthening limestone.  The past
              performance of  sol-gel-derived strengthening agents, (referred to as 
              consolidants), on limestone has been poor because of the  lack of adhesion
              between the gels and the grains of calcite  comprising the limestone.  This
              project will examine the  ability of organoalkoxysilanes to serve as adhesion 
              promoters between calcite and inorganic gels.    An important, long-term
              benefit can accrue from the  development of these consolidants by extending the
              life of a  significant portion of Mexican and United States  architectural and
              sculptural heritage represented in  limestone.  This heritage is at serious
              risk due to the high  susceptibility of limestone to degradation by acid rain
              as  well as other deterioration processes.  ***
