Title       : Workshop on Secular Variations in the Rates of Production of Cosmogenic Nuclides
               on Earth; February 2-4, 1996; Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New
               Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1996  
File        : a9526774

Award Number: 9526774
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Gosse   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Reedy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles D. Harrington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DOE-Albuquerque Operatns
	      
	      Albuquerque, NM  87115    /   -

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Gosse  9526774   This proposal requests support for an international,
              multi-disciplinary, and multi-purpose workshop on the production rates of
              cosmogenic nuclides in terrestrial rocks, to take place at Los Alamos National
              Laboratory, New Mexico, February 2-4, 1996.  The goals of this workshop are: 
              to gather those of us who are working to determine this production rates of
              terrestrial cosmogenic nuclides with those working in fields that are useful to
              this undertaking.  This includes scientists whose principal interests and
              expertise include:  geology and geochronology; accelerator and conventional
              mass spectrometry; nuclear and analytical chemistry paleomagnetism and
              geomagnetic dipole field intensity research; the influence of solar activity on
              cosmic rays; and calibration of the 14C timescale.  to provide a forum in which
              to discuss A) measurements of production rates, B) models relating to
              cosmic-ray intensity and nuclear cross sections to production rates, C) the
              current state of knowledge concerning temporal and spatial variability of
              productio rates.  to assemble recommendations that help steer and focus future
              efforts to calibrate cosmogenic nuclide surface exposure data methods.  to
              compile an annotated bibliography of current relevant publications with
              evaluation.     More than forty invited speakers will present papers. 
              Discussions on specific topics and general discussions will occur throughout
              the three days.  Lessons learned and recommendations for future research will
              be published along with the abstracts and an annotated bibliography of most
              relevant publications.   The terrestrial cosmogenic nuclide time scale, like
              the conventional radiocarbon time scales, needs to be calibrated to the true
              (calendric) time scale.  While the cosmogenic techniques are in their infancy
              and as the number of geological applications of cosmogenic nuclide exposure
              dating rapidly increases, this workshop is necessary and timely.  The recent
              call (Clark and others, in review) to change by 17% the pre vious 10Be (and
              other nuclides) production rate estimate (Nishiizumi et al., 1989) for -13 kyr
              of exposure is just one example of the urgent need of this workshop.   The
              proposed workshop will be share-supported between NSF and Los Alamos National
              Laboratory and the Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics.  Funds from
              NSF are requested for participant support and publication costs.  No NSF funds
              will be used for salaries or for support of foreignn participant travel or
              participants who are employees of LANL.
