Title       : Meltwater Flow Through Snow from Plot to Basin Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9526875

Award Number: 9526875
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Williams markw@snobear.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tad Pfeffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              T. Nelson Caine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tissa H. Illangasekare  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9526875   Williams    The primary objective of this study is to develop a
              definitive set of observations of spatial and temporal heterogeneity of: 1)
              surface structure of a snowpack during melt, 2) internal flow paths, and 3)
              delivery of water at the snowpack base.  From these data we will the define the
              spatial statistics of meltwater flow through snow.  Modeling and additional
              field efforts will build on this empirical data base to extend our
              understanding of meltwater pathways through snow to the small basin scale
              (8ha).  We concentrate in this proposal on observations which will characterize
              and quantify the detailed processes which determine infiltration and runoff. 
              This more detailed knowledge of the physics of snow hydrology will make
              possible more reliable modeling and prediction of snowmelt runoff.    We
              propose to quantify the spatial and temporal variation of meltwater flow
              through snow using an extensive array of 116 snow lysimeters that will
              determine i) the characteristic correlation lengths of snowmelt runoff: ii) the
              spatial variance of meltwater flow; and iii) effective hydraulic conductivity
              of the snowpack.  Aerial photographs using near-IR wavelengths will be used to
              provide a specific methods for inferring the onset and degree of heterogeneous
              infiltration from remote sensing observations, and to more accurately predict
              the discharge hydrograph of a ripening snowpack, again from remote sensing
              measurements.  The evolution of internal flowpaths will be constructed from
              non-destructive   temperature and comductance probes and from destructive 
              measurements of snowpack stratigraphy and dye tracers.  The information on snow
              physical characteristics will be used to parameterize an existing meltwater
              infiltration model coupled with the development of a second model that
              explicitly includes the dynamics of preferential flowpaths.  Plot and modeling
              efforts will be then be scaled to the 8 ha Martinelli basin to evaluate the
              importance of spatial and temporal variations of meltwater  infiltration at the
              catchment scale.
