Title       : SGER: Dynamic Fault Tolerance Methods for Robotics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9526363

Award Number: 9526363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian D. Walker   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph R. Cavallaro  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research, in the Small Grants for Exploratory Research mode,  investigates
              the area of fault tolerance for robotics. This  activity has produced a series
              of potentially valuable individual  ethods.  The goal of this project is to
              develop the foundations for  a rigorous approach to robotic fault tolerance. 
              The research  involves synthesis of a protective operating system shell 
              environment for robots, and incorporation of this environment into  a new
              approach for provably fault tolerant robotic systems. The  operating system
              shell is designed to protect the robot from the  effects of errors in the lower
              level manipulator system and the  higher level plan.  This shell is composed of
              a number of  fault tolerance tasks at a discrete decision making level. These  
              tasks will be identified and outlined for a three link planar  robot during the
              year of exploratory work. The robot will be  enhanced with two sensors per
              joint and will be kinematically  redundant for positioning tasks in the plane.
              This level of  hardware redundancy will provide fault tolerance capabilities to
               the robot. A formal model will be developed for this simple example  robot and
              used to demonstrate the potential benefits of the  research approach. This work
              will provide formal methods to verify  fault tolerance for lower and higher
              level subsystems of a robot  system.  The key overall goal is to combine
              diverse techniques for  robotic fault tolerance into a provably correct
              methodology.  The  development of formal tools for the approach will be
              important in  proving rigorous results about robot fault tolerance. In the one 
              year of the SGER project, a series of fundamental examples will  demonstrate
              how the above approach can significantly impact this  emerging research area.
