Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Integrated Structural and Fluid Inclusion Study of
               Rolling Hinges and Low-Angle Normal Faults in Metamorphic Core Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1996   
File        : a9526249

Award Number: 9526249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas O. Wright                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61256              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Axen gaxen@ess.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             w "                  C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    w "     w
              "          4 @                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                           ,   -   .   /   0   1   2   3   4   5   6         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                :   G     >     *           
              B p            ' =   )            B p            ' =   (            B p        
                   ;   '            B p              ;   &            B p            6 X   % 
                        B p            6 X   $     .      B p  1   7     + E   # 9526249 
              Axen  Controversy still surrounds the processes that form metamorphic core
              complexes and extensional detachment faults.  Specifically, questions remain
              regarding the angle(s) at which detachment faults are initiated and slip, the
              capacity of such faults to generate significant earthquakes, the
              characteristics of the transition from crystal-plastic to cataclastic to
              brittle deformation along the faults, the extent to which the faults and their
              footwalls are deformed by isostatic forces induced by tectonic denudation, and
              the mechanics of isostatically driven deformation of large normal faults and
              their footwalls. To address these questions, and integrated field and
              fluid-inclusion study of three faults and their footwalls will be carried out: 
              the Simplon line, central Alps, Switzerland; the Whipple detachment,
              California; and the Raft River detachment, Utah.  Results from these areas will
              be compared to each other and to our previous results from the Brenner line,
              eastern Alps, in order to avoid site-specific results and to allow comparison
              between different orogenic settings.   Statistical ly significant populations
              of orientation and kinematic data will be collected, along with oriented
              samples for thin section study.  Microthermometric analysis of fluid inclusions
              along healed fractures of known orientation will permit direct constraints to
              be placed on the depth-temperature conditions under which specific sets of
              structures formed, providing a reliable context in which to interpret the
              orientation and kinematic data.  Whole-rock chemical data on mylonites and
              cataclasites from Whipple Mountains minidetachment horizons will also be
              collected in order to assess models for the role of fluids in the initiation of
              cataclastic/brittle deformation and detachment faulting.                       
               ;                                                        Oh     +'  0         
                                           $       H       l                                 
                           D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       9526249    
                                      Felicia   S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n          
                              (                                                   +          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              Smith          
                          Felicia Smith               @     |                             @  
                                              @     |                                        
                                                                          @    F #           
                                      Microsoft Word 6.0                                     
                              1                                                              
                                      ;                                                      
                                 e =       e                                                 
                                           j       j   j       j       j       j       j     
                                                                               O   1         
                                                                                             
                                       1           T       6   O                       j     
                                                                                 O           
                 j       j                                                                   
                 j               j                                       ~               j   
                 j       j       j                           <                               
                                                                               9526249  Axen 
              Controversy still surrounds the processes that form metamorphic core complexes
              and extensional detachment faults.  Specifically, questions remain regarding
              the angle(s) at which detachment faults are initiated and slip, the capacity of
              such faults to generate significant earthquakes, the characteristics of the
              transition from crystal-plastic to cataclastic to brittle deformation along the
              faults, the extent to which the faults and their footwalls are deformed by
              isostatic forces induced by tectonic denudation, and the mechanics of
              isostatically driven deformation of large normal faults and their footwalls. To
              address these questions, and integrated field and fluid-inclusion study of
              three faults and their footwalls will be carried out:  the Simplon line,
              central Alps, Switzerland; the Whipple detachment, California; and the Raft
              River detachment, Utah.  Results from these areas will be compared to each
              other and to our previous results from the Brenner line, eastern Alps, in order
              to avoid site-specific results and to allow comparison between different o
