Title       : Collaborative Research: Micromechanics of Eolian Sand Dune Development: Computer
               Simulations and Field Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1998  
File        : a9526708

Award Number: 9526708
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172723             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Kocurek garyk@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kocurek  9526708   New models and computational techniques in nonlinear dynamics
              and improved instrumentation for field studies motivate a re-examination of the
              problem of eolian dune formation.  The goals of the proposed investigation are
              to be advance models for the origin and evolution of eolian dunes and dune
              fields, to work out the predicted consequences of these models, and to subject
              them to rigorous field testing.  The study will follow an integrated approach,
              bringing together computer simulation, field observation and experimentation,
              and analytical models.  The work plan for the study proceeds in step-wise
              fashion from consideration of sand patch (incipient dune) nucleation,
              continuing with investigation of isolated bedforms, graduating to treatment  of
              interactions between bedforms, and ending with study of the overall dynamics of
              dune fields.  At the sand-patch level, computer simulations of saltation over
              sand patches plus field experimentation are aimed at understanding why and how
              nucleation first occurs and growth follows.  At the bedform level, computer
              simulation of airflow and saltation over developing bedforms, tested and
              constrained by detailed field measurements, will be used to explore the
              conditions under which evolution to dune forms with slipfaces occurs.  At the
              bedform-bedform interaction level, extensive field measurements of airflow
              lateral and downwind from dunes will be performed to probe the regulating
              effects of dunes on their neighbors.  The interactions between a variety of
              constructed dunes under a range of conditions will be documented to produce a
              functional map describing the results of dune-dune interactions.  These results
              will be compared to simplified computer simulations of bedform mechanics.  It
              is expected that an analytical model of dune field development, based on
              simplifying assumptions emerging from the simulation nd field efforts, will
              result.  Throughout the entire study, factors that may affect bedforms at any
              of the levels of development an d interaction, such as wind velocity and
              variability and sand supply, will be explored.  Predictions of the resulting
              model will be compared with the morphology of natural dune fields.
