Title       : Tectonic Setting, Depth of Emplacement, and Unroofing History of the Middle
               Proterozoic Wolf River Batholith and Associated Plutons, Wisconsin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1995   
File        : a9526944

Award Number: 9526944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126119             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel K. Holm dholm@kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9526944  Holm   Understanding the origin and tectonic setting of voluminous
              Middle Proterozoic (1.5-1.3 Ga) magmatism across the United States and Canada
              has long been one of the foremost problems in Precambrian geology.  Whereas
              early views largely considered emplacement of the magmatic belt in an overall
              extensional 'anorogenic' regime, recent structural work in a variety of areas
              in the western U.S. seems to favor a compressional or transpressional regime.  
              Because such evidence comes from widely scattered locations including central
              New Mexico, southern Nevada, Colorado, Arizona, and western South Dakota, the
              results have been interpreted as representing a regional deformation related to
              plate interactions in a compressional setting.  This interpretation, if
              correct, has new and important implications for the Proterozoic tectonothermal
              evolution of southern Lauretina and require further testing and re-evaluation
              of structures and thermal histories of Middle Proterozoic intrusions across the
              entire magmatic belt.   In order to test this interpretation, the PI will
              investigate the tectonic setting, depth of emplacement, and unroofing history
              of the Middle the PI will Proterozoic Wolf River batholith and associated
              plutons in Wisconsin.   He will carry out a detailed field, microstructural,
              and Ar/Ar thermochoronlogic investigation.  The field and microstructural work
              will assess whether the fabrics are synintrusive or postintrusive features and
              whether they are compressional or extensional in origin.  Detailed field
              studies mapping out fabric orientations and assessing kinematic indicators
              should help distinguish between local strains related to pluton emplacement,
              regional strain during intrusion, or post-intrusive solid-state strain.   The
              field and microstructural work will be complemented by an Ar/Ar
              thermochronlogic investigation of the plutonic complex and country rock. 
              Whereas Rb-Sr biotite age dating results from Wisconsin have provided us with a
              first-order picture of cooling and/or  reheating during much of the
              Proterozoic, the results are open to interpretation and important questions
              remain.  A detailed Ar/Ar study on several different mineral phases
              (hornblende, muscovite, and biotite) should help to assess the depth of
              emplacement of the Middle Proterozoic plutonic complex and to better determine
              the timing an d pattern of unroofing or cooling of the Proterozoic rocks in the
              region.
