Title       : Dissertation Research: The Origins of Pottery in China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1995  
File        : a9526055

Award Number: 9526055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11867              (Estimated)
Investigator: Prudence M. Rice price@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Prudence Rice, Mr. Haining Wang will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological research in three
              areas of China and combine fieldwork with analysis of excavated ceramic
              materials. He will attempt to understand the factors which led to the
              development and adoption of pottery in this region. Pottery first appears in
              China approximately 10,000 years ago in many regions. There is no suggestion
              that it is other than an indigenous invention or was introduced from elsewhere.
              Mr. Wang will study sites in three widely separated regions which are
              ecologically distinct. He will examine site reports and materials recovered to
              reconstruct, as far as possible, subsistence practices and social organization.
              He will attempt to calculate population sizes and population density. He will
              also visit sites and determine and record the surrounding physical environment.
              In particular he wishes to understand what potential resources were available
              to inhabitants of the region. Finally, he will conduct laboratory analysis of
              excavated ceramic remains to determine the specific functions which ceramic
              vessels served. He will  carry out chemical analysis of residues adhering to
              shards to learn what individual vessels contained.  Archaeologists are
              intrigued by the fact that ceramics appear in many parts of the Old World at
              roughly the same time. Although it is possible that knowledge of the practice
              spread from one source, the appearance of ceramics is always one of a larger
              complex of traits which include new forms of social organization and
              subsistence practices. Researchers do not understand which of these are most
              directly responsible for the development and adoption this trait which
              constituted a major technological advance. Mr. Wang's carefully designed
              project should shed new light on this question.  This research is important for
              several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It
              will address a question of major significance and assist in the training of a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
