Title       : Kinetics of Dissolution and Crystal Growth of Silicates and Aluminosilicates in
               Aqueous Soultions at Low Temperatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2000     
File        : a9526794

Award Number: 9526794
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $441445             (Estimated)
Investigator: Danny M. Rye rye@milne.geology.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio C. Lasaga  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lasaga  9526794   It is proposed to continue the studies of the experimental
              determination of the dissolution and precipitation kinetics of silicates and
              aluminosilicates as functions of pH, temperature, ionic strength,
              catalysis/inhibition and the Gibbs Free energy of reaction.  We will examine
              the surfaces of the reacted minerals using surface analytical techniques (XPS,
              AES, SEM, AFM in particular), which when combined with rates determined from
              solution shemistry using flow-through and column reactors will provide
              information on surface reaction mechanisms.  In situ observations of reaacting
              mineral surfaces, using the AFM at lower temperature and new optical
              interferometric techniques at hydrothermal temperatures, will provide a bridge
              between the conventional kinetics experiments and ex-situ surface analysis. 
              The new experimental findings on the kinetics of mineral-fluid interactions
              will be coupled with extensive molecular physics studies done in our group to
              ascertain the atomic dynamics governing geochemical processes.  Our
              experimental work continues to lead the way in describing both dissolution and
              precipitation rates of major rock-forming silicates and aluminosilicates as a
              function of  G, as well as being the first to measure precipitation rates in
              phases more complex than quartz.  The non-trivial full rate laws that have been
              developed in our prior work are proving to be very important in successfully
              applying experimental rate data to model field cases, such as the Pijiguaos,
              bauxite deposit in Venezuela using accurate two-dimensional hydrodynamic fluid
              flow models.  With the continuing work proposed here, the coupling of
              experiment, theory and models should result in the first completely
              quantitative physical and chemical model of water-rock interactions from the
              atomic level to the field setting under a wide set of geological environments
              including diagenesis in a dynamic sedimentary basin or the chemical evolution
              in a major bauxite deposit.
