Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Weekly Dissipative Predator/Prey Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1996     
File        : a9526961

Award Number: 9526961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Schaffer wms@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9526961  Schaffer       The investigator and his colleagues study predator-prey 
              models as perturbations of Hamiltonian systems.  Predation is an  important
              factor in natural and man-made ecosystems.  Recently, it  has been observed
              that two species predator-prey models subject  to seasonal forcing exhibit
              interesting behaviors in the presence  of seasonal variations in the
              environment.  Most interesting is  the fact that for certain parameter regimes
              there exist infinite  numbers of coexisting attractors corresponding to
              oscillations of  different period and amplitude.  In the face of continuing 
              perturbations from without, such a circumstance promotes the  likelihood of
              violent and unpredictable variations in system  dynamics, i.e., in the
              densities of predators and victims over  time.  Put another way, the
              mathematics suggests that small  variations in ambient conditions, for example,
              year-to-year  variations in the climate, can induce enormous and wholly 
              unexpected changes in species abundances.  Interpreted  biologically, the
              parameter regimes in question correspond to  prey populations the densities of
              which are predator-limited,  i.e., to the circumstance in which predators keep
              victim  densities well below their carrying capacity.  That such  regulation is
              not unusual is evidenced by the fact that victim  populations often explode
              when "released" from predation.  In  agricultural systems, such irruptions can
              be the unintended (and  economically catastrophic) consequence of pest
              eradication  programs.  From a mathematical viewpoint, strong regulation of 
              herbivore populations by their predators corresponds to "weak  dissipation."
              Previous investigation of the two species model  suggests that such situations
              can usefully be viewed as  perturbations of the Hamiltonian limit, in which
              case the  dissipation is, perforce, zero.  Because these models include 
              seasonality, the equations are "nonintegrable" with the  consequence that the
              topology phase space is extraordinarily  complex.  The mat hematical questions
              thus relate to which aspects  of the Hamiltonian topology are preserved under
              weak dissipation  and to the rapidity with which these features are eradicated
              as  dissipation levels increase.       The present project seeks to extend the
              basic mathematical  model of predator-prey interactions in several directions. 
              The  generalizations include increasing the numbers of interacting  species and
              examining the consequences of weak dissipation in the  context of a patchy
              environment, for example, cultivated fields  distributed among old fields and
              woodlands.  In addition, the  investigator and his colleagues address
              agroeconomic issues -  namely, the feasibility of substituting generalist
              arthropod  predators for insecticides as a principal means of controlling  pest
              species.  The conventional ecological wisdom is that given  sufficient
              understanding of predator requirements, such a  substitution is both feasible
              and desirable.  In fact, the history  of modern agriculture is nothing if not
              the story of increasing  victim carrying capacity with the consequence that
              effective pest  control by predation would necessarily correspond to weak 
              dissipation.  The challenge, therefore, is to devise management  policies that
              allow for the effective control of economically  significant pests and, at the
              same time, avoid an increased  potential for devastating outbreaks.
