Title       : Microwave Effects on Liquid and Solid State Materials Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1995 
File        : a9526040

Award Number: 9526040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Clark   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to develop a working understanding of microwave
              interactions with materials that will enable targeted industrial operations to
              apply microwave technologies to product manufacturing.  The PIs plan the: (1)
              development of experimental procedures to obtain quantitative, in situ
              processing data on microwave interactions with materials in forms ranging from
              liquid to solid states; (2) identification of the mechanisms leading to
              observed differences between conventionally and microwave-processes samples;
              (3) production of samples that illustrate the differences between conventional
              and microwave processes; (4) data to serve as a basis for scale-up of microwave
              equipment for continuous and/or large batch processing; (5) assessment of
              temperature measurement techniques used in microwave processing; and (6)
              technology transfer in this area.  This grant is for the completion of a
              project in progress in which the primary chemical systems under study are
              sol-gel derived silica.  A silicon alkoxide precursor mixed with water and
              alcohol is being reacte d under the influence of both microwave and
              conventional heating techniques.  Using Fourier transform infrared (FITR) and
              Raman spectrosopies, among other methods, for measuring the effects of
              microwave irradiation during processing --- a cavity ring-down apparatus
              outfitted with a microwave applicator, the effects of microwave energy and
              conventional heating on molecular bond formation/dissociation of each
              individual component of the sol are being examined.  Dielectric property
              measurements are being performed on the sol and its components at microwave
              frequencies (and temperatures) over which the reactions take place.  This
              approach enables a correlation between dielectric properties, the
              molecular/phase changes, reaction extent and the resultant properties of the
              chemicals/materials during the various stages of microwave processing. 
              Microwave irradiation increases significantly the rates of reaction during
              sol-gel processing.  Experiments are designed to determine the extent to which
              microwave energy affects each of the processing steps.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
