Title       : Hydrodynamics of Overpressuring in the Sacramento Valley, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1996     
File        : a9526951

Award Number: 9526951
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grant Garven garven@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9526951  Garven    Regional overpressuring is a phenomenon characteristic of the
              Sacramento Valley and the Coast Ranges of California.  The creation and
              maintenance of high fluid pressures in any sedimentary sequence require two
              basic conditions: (1) low-permeability confining units and (2) geologic forces
              which increase the pore pressure within these rocks.  The forces may be
              tectonic, thermal, or even chemical in nature.  The intent of this study is to
              determine which factors play a role in the creation of overpressure zones in
              the Central Valley of California and to quantify the contribution of each in
              order to successfully model the high pressures currently found in the region. 
              Sedimentary basins in the Great or Central Valley of California host regional
              aquifers and at greater depths host large petroleum reservoirs.  Geological and
              geochemical data are abundant, as the Valley has been extensively explored and
              mapped for these natural resources.  The Sacramento Basin in the north is rich
              in natural gas and geothermal resources, and deep groundwater (depths greater
              than 700 m) is noticeably overpressured in the western part of the basin near
              the Coast Ranges.  Despite the long history of geologic exploration, very
              little hydrogeologic work has been done to quantify the nature of deep
              groundwater flow of geologic processes such as overpressuring in the Great
              Valley.    This proposal seeks to increase our basic understanding of how the
              deep groundwater flow systems have evolved over geologic time in the Sacramento
              Basin.  Earlier studies on the Sacramento Basin suggest that the origin of
              anomalously high fluid pressures is related to tectonic compression. According
              to the conceptual model of Berry (1973), east-west compression associated with
              the San Andreas Fault and the Basin and Range province "squeezed" the Great
              Valley sediments like a tectonic vise, driving deep pore waters upward.  These
              forces generated high pressure zones due to the low permeability of the thick
              marine mudstone sectio n.  However, other mechanisms for overpressuring may be
              important.  Petroleum generation, dehydration reactions, crustal heating, and
              rapid subsidence are other mechanisms that need to be considered and quantified
              hydrodynamically.  A primary objective  of this proposal therefore  is to use
              hydrogeologic modeling as a tool for quantifying the relationship between the
              deep ad shallow flow systems in the Valley and test the viability of conceptual
              models for overprssuring .  Various types of field observations will be used to
              place constraints on the hydrogeologic models, but mostly we will compile
              pressure data from deep exploration wells.          The work proposed here
              represents the first effort to  quantify "deep" groundwater flow dynamics in
              the Great Valley of California.  Hydrologic testing of geologic concepts with
              coupled mathematical models form the heart of the study: hydromechanical model
              of the Sacramento Basin ought to shed basic light on other causes for for the
              origin of overpressures I the Earth's crust.  Furthermore, water resources are
              precious in the Valley which contains one of  the largest fresh-water aquifer
              systems in the world.  Improving our understanding of the basin groundwater
              systems may have  significant practical benefit with regard to understanding of
              the potential salinity contamination of the shallow, fresh-water aquifers as
              development continues to satisfy an over increasing demand for potable water.
