Title       : Structural and Thermochronological Constraints on the Role of Partial Melting
               During Late-Orogenic Extension
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9526915

Award Number: 9526915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas O. Wright                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128176             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christian Teyssier teyssier@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             4p                   C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    4p     
              4p           4 @                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                 -   .   /   0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              F    Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   9526915
              Teyssier  The goal of the proposed project is to investigate the role that
              partial melting of crust plays during late-orogenic extension.  Orogenic
              evolution typically involves crustal shortening and thickening which have
              important thermal consequences.  In particular, thermal relaxation is expected
              to lead to partial melting of the mid-to lower crust after a characteristic
              time of approximately 20-30 million years.  The late stages of orogenic
              evolution are commonly characterized by crustal extension.  Therefore, it is
              proposed that a fundamental link exists between partial melting of crust, which
              results in mechanical weakening, and late-orogenic extension produced by
              gravitational collapse of the thickened crust under its own weight.  The
              proposed working hypothesis involves extension of the rigid upper crust
              accommodated by ductile flow and migmatite-dome development in the lower crust.
               The test will be conducted in the Shuswap metamorphic core complex, British 
              Columbia, which displays, at present exposure level, a cross section of various
              levels of the crust, from high-grade metamorph ic rocks and migmatites to
              unmetamorphosed sedimentary rocks.  Preliminary work as well as published data
              suggest that partial melting in the core of this complex was coeval with
              development of Paleogene extensional fabric in the overlying crustal layers. 
              In addition, existing isotopic data suggest that terrain cooled rapidly
              (30-50(C/.yr) during Paleogene time.  Therefore, it is proposed that rapid
              cooling and exhumation of the terrain was coeval with partial melting of the
              mid-to lower crust, and that the mechanical weakening associated with partial
              melting was responsible for gravitational collapse of the orogen.  An
              integrated approach based upon the methods of structural and metamorphic
              geology as well as isotopic dating will test the proposed hypothesis.          
                            ;                                        Oh     +'  0            
                                        $       H       l                                    
                        D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                     S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t
              i o n                           (                                              
                  ,                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  9526915                             Felicia Smith          
                          Felicia Smith               @                                   @  
                                              @                                              
                                                                          @    F #           
                                      Microsoft Word 6.0                                     
                              1                                                              
                                       ;         e =       e               `                 
                   `                                       j       j   j       j       j     
               j       j                                                                     
               S   1                                                                         
                                                       5           T       5   S             
                       j                                                                     
                 S               j       j                                                   
                                 j               j                                       ~   
                         j       j       j       j                           @               
                                                                                             
               9526915 Teyssier  The goal of the proposed project is to investigate the role
              that partial melting of crust plays during late-orogenic extension.  Orogenic
              evolution typically involves crustal shortening and thickening which have
              important thermal consequences.  In particular, thermal relaxation is expected
              to lead to partial melting of the mid-to lower crust after a characteristic
              time of approximately 20-30 million years.  The late stages of orogenic
              evolution are commonly characterized by crustal extension.  Therefore, it is
              proposed that a fundamental link exists between partial melting of crust, which
              results in mechanical weakening, and late-orogenic extension produced by
              gravitational collapse of the thickened crust under its own weight.  The
              proposed working hypothesis involves extension of the rigid upper crust
              accommodated by ductile flow and migmatite-dome development in the lower crust.
               The test will be conducted in the Shuswap metamorphic core complex, British 
              Columbia, which displays, at present exposure level, a cross section of various
              levels of the c
