Title       : The Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Quality and Reliability
               Engineering Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1997     
File        : a9526413

Award Number: 9526413
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elsayed A. Elsayed elsayed@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hoang Pham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Bert Keats  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas C. Montgomery  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0400000   Industry University - Co-op             
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9149,MANU,
Abstract    :
              EEC-9526413  Elsayed    This award provides funding for a planning meeting to
              establish an  Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Quality and 
              Reliability Engineering Research jointly between Rutgers University  and
              Arizona State University.  The Center will have two locations,  the first is
              the Industrial Engineering Department of Rutgers  University and the second is
              the Department of Industrial and  Management Systems Engineering (IMSE) of
              Arizona State University.   It will supported by local/national industries,
              Rutgers University,  Arizona State University, and government and state
              agencies.    The mission of the Center is to conduct research and develop
              models  of evaluating system performance and improve quality and  reliability
              of commercial products and military systems.  The  Center's goal is to provide
              timely, high-quality and cost-effective  research, development, training,
              seminars and workshops, and  analysis in the quality and reliability areas.   
              The Center has the necessary elements for success:  1) With  increasing
              competition and emphasis on the quality of products and  reliability perceived
              by the customers, there is need for research  that will lead to a strong
              foundation to support improved quality  and reliability of commercial products
              and military systems, 2)  There is a strong interest from local and national
              industry in the  quality and reliability engineering areas, 3) The Center
              utilizes  the existing strength in quality and reliability engineering and 
              probabilistic modeling of the faculty of the Department of  Industrial
              Engineering at Rutgers University and the faculty of the  Department of
              Industrial and Management Systems Engineering at  Arizona State University, 4)
              The Center provides cost effective  research and development opportunities for
              small companies  and  subdivisions of large organizations, and 5) The Center
              provides  exposure and training for graduate industrial engineering students 
              in the area of quality and reliability engineering.     This planning meeting
              will study the feasibility in establishing an  Industry/University Cooperative
              Research Center on Quality and  Reliability Engineering.  The goal of the
              proposed Center is to  conduct research and develop models for evaluating
              system  performance and improve quality and reliability of commercial and 
              military productq.     Currently, four companies have expressed interests in
              supporting  the proposed research activities.  A planning meeting has been 
              planned in January 1996 to develop a better research plan with  invited
              companies.      This effort has been coordinated with Dr. Pius Egbelu, Program 
              Director of the Operations Research and Production Systems Program  in the
              Division of Design, Manufacture, and Industrial Innovation.
