Title       : Cross-Site: Collaborative Research: Mycorrhizal Responses to Nitrogen
               Eutrophication at Five Mesic to Semiarid Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9526564

Award Number: 9526564
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114766             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edith B. Allen edith.allen@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9526564  Allen  Although nitrogen is frequently the most limiting nutrient in
              ecosystems, continuous, elevated inputs of nitrogen may cause  significant
              ecosystem stress.  Deposition of anthropogenic nitrogen has been associated
              with recent losses of plant as well as fungal diversity throughout Europe. 
              Little is known about the effects of atmospheric nitrogen deposition on the
              structure and function of North American grasslands and shrublands, although as
              much as 30 kg nitrogen per hectare per year is deposited in southern
              California, with lesser amounts elsewhere in the US.  The three principal
              objectives of this research will be to (1) assess species composition changes
              of fungi during nitrogen eutrophication in mesic to semiarid grasslands using
              microscopy and immunoflourescence, (2) assess the kinds of  mycorrhizal fungi
              under nitrogen eutrophication to indicate the mutualistic or parasitic effects
              of fungi, and (3) conduct bioassays to determine whether inferior mutualists
              predominate after nitrogen eutrophication.   This study will examine the
              effects of nitrogen eutrophication on mycorrhizae at four experimental
              grasslands within the Long-term Ecological Research network and at a
              shrub-grasslands in southern California.  These grasslands in Michigan,
              Minnesota, Kansas, New Mexico, and California form a precipitation and
              fertility gradient.  The effects of nitrogen euthrophication will be studied on
              plants, mycorrhizal fungi and soils in experiments that have previously been
              established and in new plots at these sites.  This research is designed to
              assess the ranges and variances of mycorrhizal responses to nitrogen at three
              scales: at individual plant-root interfaces, within grasslands communities, and
              across a climatic and soil gradient.  This is a first step toward assessing the
              potential effects of nitrogen eutrophication on the structure and functioning
              of mycorrhizae-plant interactions in grasslands in the US.  This research is
              important because grasslands are the basis for range re sources and beef
              production in North America.
