Title       : Effects of Space-Time Dynamics of Surface Processes on Land-Atmosphere
               Interactions at the Mesoscale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1998     
File        : a9526628

Award Number: 9526628
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shafiqul Islam shafiqul.islam@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1325,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9526628  Islam    The goal of this proposal is to investigate the space-time
              dynamics of land-surface processes on land-atmosphere interactions at the
              mesoscale.  The achieve this goal, a well coordinated observational data
              analysis and numerical modeling approach will be pursued.  Following are the
              main tasks of this research:  *Explore the use of MM5 as the atmospheric module
              to refine the coupled land-atmosphere model   *Compare the land surface
              response of the coupled land-atmosphere model with the FIFE data.  *Establish a
              spin-up time scale as a function of initial atmospheric states and initial land
              surface states.  Examine the dependence of spin-up time on the nature of
              forcing data.  *Develop a methodology to asses the effects of spatial
              heterogeneity on the response of near-surface atmospheric processes.  Evaluate
              the relationships between characteristic scales of variabilities in soil
              wetness and space time dynamics of evapotranspiration and near-surface
              atmospheric variables.  Identify the physical mechanisms that control the
              space-time scales of soil wetness anomalies.    This proposal is designed to
              characterize the space-time dynamics of land surface hydrology and atmospheric
              response by using a coupled land-atmosphere model and measured datasets from
              the FIFE and Washita '92 sites.  Resulting information from this research would
              provide the incremental knowledge needed for accurate interpretation and
              widespread application of mesoscale models and field experiments for
              land-atmosphere interaction studies.  They will aid in addressing the spin-up
              and scaling properties of mesoscale models and in developing realistic
              land-surface hydrology parameterizations for atmospheric models.  In addition,
              this effort is directly relevant to scaling of water and energy fluxes and
              testing and evaluation of coupled land-atmosphere model segments of the GCIP 
              GEWEX (Global Energy and Water Cycle Experiment) Continental-Scale
              International Project  and EOS (Earth Observing System) science plans.
