Title       : Networking Infrastructure for Native American Education -AIHEC Consortium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1997      
File        : a9526134

Award Number: 9526134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1149550            (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve Galbavy   (Principal Investigator current)
              Luanne Belcourt  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Stone Child College
	      Box 1082 Rocky Boy Route
	      Box Elder, MT  59521    406/395-4313

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Belcourt  95-26134    This project is designed to achieve educational purposes
              through video and data interconnections. The educational purposes involve the
              development of new networking and user service training programs for both video
              and data networks, improvement of the teaching of SMET subjects in K-12 and
              postsecondary institutions that are controlled by Indians, and the improvement
              of education for American Indians in the health fields. The general concept of
              this application is to maximize the impact that already existing SMET
              coursework and programs have. This will be done by distributing the
              responsibility for offering programs throughout the AlHEC's video and data
              networks.    Because the 29 institutions that compose the American Indian
              Higher Education Consortium are widespread, generally small, and chronically
              underfunded, there has always been an emphasis on sharing resources. There is
              wide variance among the institutions with regard to levels of SMET curriculum
              and the level of networking currently available. This interest in sharing
              through networking led to the formation of the AIHEC telecommunication project
              five years ago, in order to make use of technology to make limited resources go
              further. Since that time, there has also been a good deal of interest in the
              establishment of computer interconnectivity. Approximately 1/2 of the colleges
              have such connectivity.    This project calls for funding for one year for
              developing programs that provide both short-term training in such things as
              using the Internet, using Interactive video, and technical support for
              networks. In the technology area, it also calls for the development of
              Associate's degrees in areas that provide user support. A second area of
              development in this first year is the Health Services area. AIHEC will identify
              areas of greatest need with the Indian Health Service and develop distributed
              programs in these areas.    The colleges need certain things to make these
              operations possible. First, it needs faculty with u pgraded academic
              preparation in SMET areas and it needs students who are better prepared. Thus,
              there is a component that provides for distributed graduate education for both
              college and K-12 teachers. On the other side of infrastructure, many colleges
              do not have connectivity yet. For this reason, all the Tribal Colleges in
              Montana will be linked with a system that they have designed to provide maximum
              capability for uperading. Finally, the AIHEC Telecommunications Network will be
              utilized by providing uplinks to satellites at three sites, one each in
              Minnesota, Montana, and North Dakota. These uplinks will be capable of feeding
              instruction to all 29 colleges; 7 colleges will be able to originate
              programming.
