Title       : Organometallic Complexes of the Iron Triad Metal with Nitrido, Imido, Oxo, or
               Sulfido Ligands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1999      
File        : a9526350

Award Number: 9526350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Shapley pshapley@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, funded by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic  
              Chemistry Program, will support the continuation of studies by Professor  
              Patricia A. Shapley, of the University of Illinois, into the   organometallic
              chemistry of the iron triad.  A major area for   consideration is the chemistry
              of alkyl-imido-cyclopentadienylosmium(VI)   and -ruthenium(VI) complexes, which
              transfer the imido group to organic   substrates.  Attempts will be made to
              synthesis oxo and sulfido analogs   that will also react with organic
              substrates to transfer these groups.  A   secondary objective of this phase of
              the work is to make these reactions   catalytic and/or chiral.  Chiral forms of
               heteronuclear species formed   from a dialkyl nitridoosmium complex and
              chromate ion, which was earlier   found to oxidize primary and secondary
              alcohols, have recently been   synthesized.  Attempts will be made to resolve
              these complexes and study   their effectiveness as reagents for chiral
              resolution of secondary   alcohols.  A third area to be considered is the
              preparation and study of   high oxidation state alkyl iron (III/IV) complexes,
              and neutral oxo   iron(IV) complexes.  The former will be generated by chemical
              or   electrochemical oxidation of known alkyliron(II) complexes and the latter 
               from reduction of the ferrate anion.  Some examples of oxoiron(IV)   complexes
              that are soluble in organic solvents are already available.  This project has
              as its primary objective the acquisition of a   fundamental understanding of
              the chemical reactivity of several new   classes of organometallic compounds
              that contain one of the elements from   the iron family.  Whereas the specific
              objectives are to understand the   factors that determine the stability and
              reactivity of these compounds,   there is considerable potential for the
              development of reagents that have   applications in the synthesis of organic
              compounds.  This may ultimately   provide for better ways to synthesize known
              biologically active   compounds, or to prepare new ones.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
