Title       : Observational Constraints on Binary Star Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1997  
File        : a9526034

Award Number: 9526034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74397              (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Heacox   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1206,1215,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9526034  Heacox        The  objective of the research to be carried is to deduce
              reliable  observational constraints on the theories of the formation  of 
              binary  star  systems. There is very little currently known about the  overall 
              binary  stellar  system characteristics which are  relevant  to  their 
              formation.   In particular, we do not know whether the masses  of  the 
              secondary  stars in binary systems are distributed in the same  manner  as
              those of primary and single stars.  There is almost no knowledge of  the  
              values  and  ranges  of  the  orbital  angular  momenta   values 
              characterizing   binary  stars.  This  last  issue   is   particularly 
              important, since binary star orbits may act as the repositories of the 
              original  angular  momentum of the dense cloud cores  from  which  the  systems
                form,   thus  aiding  in  the  formation  of   the   central  concentration 
              of material necessary for star formation.   A  reliable  estimate   of   the  
              joint  distribution  of  semi-major   axes   and  secondary/primary mass
              ratios, characterizing binaries as a whole,  is  needed  to  correct these
              deficiencies.  The method for deducing  this  distribution   is   that   of 
              statistical   modeling,   wherein   the  distributions  of  the  desired
              intrinsic characteristics  (semi-major  axes,  mass  ratios) are related to
              those of the observable quantities  (orbital  periods,  velocities, etc.) in a
              deterministic  manner  that  preserves  all  the information in the data. 
              Mathematically  rigorous  methods of developing such models will be used, as
              well as the use  of  the  means  of  their  statistical inversion,  to  infer 
              the  desired  intrinsic  distribution from that of the observables.  Model 
              outlines  will  be given for all observational binary star types
              (spectroscopic,  visible, etc.).  These models will be used with the data, from
               recent  and future observationally unbiased surveys of binary star systems, to
               determine  the joint distributions of semi-major axes and mass  rat ios 
              characterizing  binary  star  systems of  homogeneous  primary  types.  These 
              distributions of characteristics may then be used  to  directly  determine  the
               secondary  mass function and distribution  of  orbital  angular   momentum  
              values   (and  other   dynamic   characteristics)  characterizing binary star
              systems as a whole.    The resulting distributions will constitute the first
              truly meaningful  observational constraints on the dominant mode of star
              formation (most  stars are members of binary systems).  This will help to
              determine the  extent  to  which any of the current theories of binary star
              formation  are  correct,  and advance our understanding of the  process  of 
              star  formation in general.  ***
