Title       : Collaborative Research: Paleomagnetic and Mineral Magnetic Characterization of
               Drill Cores from the Cape Roberts Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a9526889

Award Number: 9526889
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340486             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Verosub verosub@geology.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew P. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Verosub  OPP 9526889  Wilson  OPP 9527343    Abstract    The goals of the Cape
              Roberts Project (CRP) are to elucidate the  history of fragmentation of the
              Pacific margin of Gondwana and  the history of Antarctic glaciation from
              Cretaceous through  Oligocene time.  The CRP will operate with an integrated
              science  plan in which all of the initial scientific characterization of  the
              cores will be done at McMurdo Station in the Antarctic during  two drilling
              seasons over two successive years.  The drilling  seasons will each be of two
              months duration and will operate in  much the same manner as two month cruises
              of the Ocean Drilling  Program.  The scientific activities associated with 
              characterization of the cores will include magnetostratigraphy, 
              biostratigraphy, petrography, mineralogy, and sedimentology.    Age
              determination is of principal importance in such a project  because a temporal
              framework is necessary to obtain a history of  climatic and tectonic events. 
              This award supports a program of  research which will enable determination of a
              high-quality  paleomagnetic stratigraphy, with the appropriate mineral magnetic
               studies, in support of the CRP.    For the on-site magnetic studies this award
              will: undertake  logging of the whole-core magnetic susceptibility which will 
              assist in correlation of the several overlapping cores to be  recovered during
              the CRP; determine a magnetostratigraphic  framework for dating of the cores;
              undertake mineral magnetic and  environmental magnetic studies to assess the
              reliability of the  paleomagnetic signal; and determine if environmental
              magnetic  properties yield information concerning changes in the tectonic, 
              sedimentologic, diagenetic or climatic influences on the  sedimentary record at
              Cape Roberts.  Detailed environmental and  mineral magnetic studies will also
              enable evaluation of the  sediments as recorders of the geomagnetic field.  The
              Cape  Roberts records provide the potential to obtain rare high  southern
              latitude constraints on geomagne tic field behavior.  Paleomagnetic studies
              should also provide important data  concerning crustal movements and rift
              development in the Ross Sea  sector.
