Title       : Near-Surface Processes Affecting Gas Exchange: West Antarctic Ice Sheet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9526601

Award Number: 9526601
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179047             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary R. Albert malbert@crrel.usace.army.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward M. Arons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USACRREL
	      72 Lyme Road
	      Hanover, NH  037551290    /   -

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a project to examine the physical processes  that affect the
              manner in which heat, vapor and chemical species  in air are incorporated into
              snow and polar firn.  The processes  include advection, diffusion, and the
              effects of solar radiation  penetration into the snow.  An understanding of
              these processes  is important because they control the rate at which reactive
              and  non-reactive chemical species in the atmosphere become  incorporated into
              the snow, firn, and polar ice, and thus will  affect interpretation of polar
              ice core data.  Currently, the  interpretation of polar ice core data assumes
              that diffusion  controls the rate at which chemical species are incorporated
              into  firn.  This project will determine whether ventilation, or  advection of
              the species by air movement in the firn, and  radiation penetration processes
              have a significant effect.  Field  studies at the two West Antarctic ice sheet
              deep drilling sites  will be conducted to determine the spatial and temporal
              extent  for key parameters, and boundary conditions needed to model the 
              advection, conduction, and radiation transmission/absorption  processes.  An
              existing multidimensional numerical model is being  expanded to simulate the
              processes and to serve as the basis for  ongoing and future work in transport
              and distribution of reactive  chemical species.
