Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Investigation of the Kinematics of Brittle Deformation
               through Patterns of Seismic P&T Axes and Fault Slickenlines using Micropolar
               Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1996  
File        : a9526105

Award Number: 9526105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas O. Wright                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43432              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey R. Unruh Unruh@letis.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Lettis & Assoc
	      1000 Broadway Suite 612
	      Oakland, CA  946074041    510/832-3716

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1044,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F               ;                  C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                      ;      
              ;          4 @                                                                 
                                                                                             
               %   &   '   (   )   *   +   ,   -   .   /                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                9526105 Unruh
               This is a collaborative project to continue investigation of the application
              of micropolar continuum theory to the analysis of brittle deformation.  This
              research consists of theoretical and applied elements, both of which have
              significant implications for the study of active tectonics.  Seismic events and
              slickenlines on fault surfaces are manifestations of slip on shear planes that
              occurs in the brittle part of the Earth s crust.  The slip accommodates a
              specific geometry of deformation of defined by the orientation of the fault and
              the direction of slip.  The set of all such shearing events in a given volume
              accommodates the brittle deformation of  that volume.  If we assume that this
              brittle deformation is an accurate reflection of the tectonic deformation
              imposed, that we can invert the seismic focal mechanism data or the shear
              plane/slickenline data to determine the geometry of  the tectonic deformation. 
              The inversion of such data requires a deformation model that one fits to the
              observations.  The micropolar model of deformation is a continuum model that
              includes the effects o f the rotation of rigid fault blocks on the slip
              directions in any given shear plane, which other deformation models do not
              include.  Thus, using this model permits the extraction of more kinematic
              detail from the data than other inversion techniques provide.                  
                     ;                                       Oh     +'  0                    
                                $       H       l                                            
                D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                     S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t
              i o n                           (                                              
                  $                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  9526105                             Felicia Smith          
                          Felicia Smith               @     |(                            @  
                                              @     |(                                       
                                                                          @                  
                                      Microsoft Word 6.0                                     
                              1                                                              
                                      ;         e =       e               a                  
                  a                                       j       j   j       j       j      
              j       j                                                                      
              P   1                                                                   Õ      
                                                      2           T   ?   5   P              
                      j                                                                      
                P                j       j                                                   
                                 j               j               Õ                       ~   
                         j       j       j       j               Õ           =               
                                                                                             
               9526105 Unruh  This is a collaborative project to continue investigation of
              the application of micropolar continuum theory to the analysis of brittle
              deformation.  This research consists of theoretical and applied elements, both
              of which have significant implications for the study of active tectonics. 
              Seismic events and slickenlines on fault surfaces are manifestations of slip on
              shear planes that occurs in the brittle part of the Earth s crust.  The slip
              accommodates a specific geometry of deformation of defined by the orientation
              of the fault and the direction of slip.  The set of all such shearing events in
              a given volume accommodates the brittle deformation of  that volume.  If we
              assume that this brittle deformation is an accurate reflection of the tectonic
              deformation imposed, that we can invert the seismic focal mechanism data or the
              shear plane/slickenline data to determine the geometry of  the tectonic
              deformation.  The inversion of such data requires a deformation model that one
              fits to the observations.  The micropolar model of deformation is a continuum
              model that includes the effects of the rotation of rigid fault blocks on the
              slip directions in any given shear plane, which other deformation models do not
              include.  Thus, using this model permits the extraction of more kinematic
              detail from the data than other inversion techniques provide.
