Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeological Investigation of Pacific Agriculture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1996  
File        : a9526091

Award Number: 9526091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Graves mgraves@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Michael Graves, Mr. David Addision will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological, ethnohistoric
              and ethnographic research on the island of Nuku Hiva, located in the Marquesan
              island chain. Previous work on the island indicates an original colonization by
              Polynesian people about 2,000 years ago. Descendants of these inhabitants still
              occupy the region today. Nuku Hiva is typical of the Marquesan islands in its
              size and it habitat variation which ranges from drier uplands to lower-lying
              large valleys with permanent water sources which permit irrigation. Mr. Addison
              wishes to trace the development of agriculture over time and to relate
              variations in this to environmental characteristics and to changes in social
              organization. To accomplish this, he will map agricultural terraces and other
              features such as irrigation systems which are prominent on the landscape today.
              He will also excavate selected portions of them to determine construction
              features and sequence and to collect material for radiocarbon dating. He will
              consult historic records which describe agricultural practices at the time of
              European contact and will conduct extensive interviews with present day
              inhabitants.  Because islands are constrained and clearly circumscribed areas
              they provide an excellent context to examine human-environment relationships.
              The Polynesian region of the Pacific also provides an important study region
              because it islands vary widely in size and geography and they were inhabited by
              a single stock of people at roughly the same time. Therefore it is possible to
              conduct controlled comparison studies. Such islands were originally colonized
              by small groups and over time population and population pressure increased. In
              cases such as Nuku Hiva therefore one can examine the relationships between
              population pressure, environmental variation and human response.  This research
              is important because it will shed new light on human-environmental
              interactions. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and
              further the training of a promising young scientist.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
