Title       : United States Representation to IFMBE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1995 
File        : a9526255

Award Number: 9526255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dov Jaron   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AIMBE
	      1200 G Street NW, #800
	      Washington, DC  20005    /   -

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9526255  Jaron  The International Federation of Medical and Biological 
              Engineering (IFMBE) has the aims of encouraging research and  the application
              of knowledge, the dissemination of  information, and the promotion of
              collaboration between  engineers, scientists and educators within the medical
              and  biological engineering community.  The IFMBE Administrative  Council meets
              twice each year to oversee the management of  the IFMBE, to develop projects
              such as a new journal in  Tissue and Cellular Engineering, a dictionary of
              Biomedical  Engineering and the planning of specialized international 
              technical conferences.    This project  provides partial support of the United
              States  representation to the Administrative Council of the IFMBE to  attend
              its semi-annual meetings over a period of three  years: 1995 (Israel), 1996
              (Finland and Holland), and 1997  (Hong Kong and Nice). United States
              representation to the  Administrative Council of the IFMBE is under the aegis
              of  the American Institute for Medical and Biological  Engineering (AIMBE). 
              The principal investigator for the  project, Dr. Dov Jaron, a member of the
              Board of Directors  of AIMBE, represents the U.S. on the Council.   
              Representation on the Council provides the United States  with the opportunity
              to develop new lines of communications  and collaborative projects among
              biomedical engineering  researchers from many countries and thereby to extend
              its  leadership role in medical technology research and  development.  This is
              particularly so in the newer areas of  investigation in cost-reducing and
              cost-effective health  care technologies. Information about Council
              deliberations  is to be disseminated by AIMBE to a wide audience through 
              special articles in various technical publications,  specialized workshops and
              seminars, and  electronically on  the Internet.  ***
