Title       : Factors Regulating Population Size and Colony Distribution of Adelie Penguins in
               the Ross Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9526865

Award Number: 9526865
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $476442             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Ainley dainley@harveyecology.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : H.T. Harvey & Associates
	      3150 Almaden Expressway
	      San Jose, CA  95118    408/448-9450

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    The collaborative project investigates the demographic mechanisms 
              responsible for dramatic growth in existing Adelie Penguins  Pygoscelis adeliae
              colonies, and the founding of new ones, in the  Ross Sea. Research will also
              investigate the possibility that  growth is related to documented climate
              change in the region by:  1) distinguishing the relative importance of the key
              resources  that constrain growth of colonies--availability of nesting  habitat
              vs. access to food -- and 2) examining behavioral  mechanisms (philopatry --
              the immigration/emigration balance,  and/or breeding effort/success) that
              influence colony growth as a  function of initial size and distribution. This
              will be the first  empirical a piori study to consider the geographic
              structuring of  a seabird population.  Results will increase understanding of
              1)  population regulation and patterns of dispersion, and 2) effects  of
              climate change, mediated through changes in sea-ice cover, on  penguin
              populations.  In addition, results will provide a context  in which to
              interpret conflicting data on penguin population  trends from existing programs
              that use Adelie penguins as an  indicator species for point source
              anthropogenic impacts on  Antarctic resources (e.g., fishery catches,
              disturbance by  tourism).    The 7 years of research (4 full and 1 partial
              years funded by  NSF) includes intensive field study conducted at three Ross 
              Island penguin colonies. The study will quantify reproductive  effort and
              success, food availability (access to food), diet  quality, habitat use and
              immigration/emigration relative to  colony size and environmental conditions
              (i.e., pack-ice cover).  Methods will bring together several well-established
              techniques  that have been successfully but infrequently used in Antarctic 
              biological research:  aerial photography to evaluate availability  of nesting
              habitat, microwave images of sea-ice concentration to  assess availability of
              feeding habitat, analysis of stable  isotopes to evaluate food  quality, radio
              telemetry to assess  overlap in colony feeding areas, and automatic systems to
              log  aspects of reproductive effort.  The research builds on, and  collaborates
              with the efforts of Landcare Research New Zealand  (LCRNZ), which will have
              conducted two preliminary field seasons,  including testing of new equipment,
              will continue through the  period of effort, and which is independently funded.
               Researchers  from the University of California Santa Cruz, University of 
              Wisconsin, and Avid Inc will collaborate with those from H.T.  Harvey &
              Associates and LCRNZ to accomplish project goals.
