Title       : Exploratory Research on Controlled Passive Haptic Displays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9526322

Award Number: 9526322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne J. Book wayne.book@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9139,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 Robotic devices move autonomously, apply forces to objects in their 
              environment, react to forces applied to them to achieve desired  velocities,
              positions or impedances.  Conventional robots use  motors (active power
              transduction devices) to achieve these ends.   This research examines a passive
              alternative to provide forces to  resist motion initiated by a human or other
              active agent for the  purpose of haptic display of remote or virtual
              environments or for  guidance of the agent's motion.  Ultimate applications are
              for  virtual reality displays, for teleoperation, for surgical  assistance, for
              exercise and for rehabilitation.  The advantages of  a passive approach include
              the elimination of inherent dangers of  an active device and the reduction of
              cost and complexity when a  power supply must be provided.  This research will
              utilize a  recently constructed prototype passive arm known as PTER (Passive 
              Trajectory Enhancing Robot) as a test case.  PTER has two degrees  of freedom,
              coupled via electromagnetic brakes so that  energy can  be diverted in a
              controlled manner from one axis to the other.  The  research will explore the
              theoretical and practical aspects of the  control algorithms to accomplish this
              coupling for purposes of  haptic display such as PTER.  The limitations of the
              passive  actuators provide the uniqueness and challenge of the control. The 
              control algorithm will be tested to determine effectiveness of the  controlled
              passive device against two alternatives:  (1) a direct  physical display (not
              programmable) and (2) an electrically powered  virtual display on an available
              kinematically identical robot.  The  measures of performance be both
              quantitative and subjective.   The  accuracy of the trajectory followed and the
              accuracy of  representation of an environment's impedance (force-velocity 
              relationship) can be quantitatively evaluated.  Human operators  will be
              employed to provide a more subjective evaluation on the  effectiveness of the
              passive display.  Example task s will be to  follow a virtual maze as guided by
              the feel imparted by the device.
