Title       : Innovative Laser Techniques for the Higher Resolution Electronic Spectroscopy of
               Molecular Ions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1997   
File        : a9526204

Award Number: 9526204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $378400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip M. Johnson philip.johnson@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program is providing support for   Philip M.
              Johnson of the State University of New York-Stony Brook to   develop a new
              method of laser spectroscopy, called photoinduced Rydberg   ionization
              spectroscopy (PIRI), which promises a substantial improvement   in the
              resolution attainable in the spectra of molecular cations.  This   technique
              relies upon the fact that the optical properties of neutral   molecules with
              one electron excited to a high Rydberg state are almost   identical to those of
              the corresponding ion.  The method proceeds by   preparing a neutral molecule
              in a high-n Rydberg state just below the   first ionization limit.  The ion
              cores of these Rydberg molecules are   then electronically excited by a tunable
              laser, resulting in   autoionization when an ion transition occurs.  The
              production of ions   with respect to wavelength produces spectra which are
              equivalent to   photoelectron spectra but are not restricted by the resolution
              of   electron energy analyzers.  PIRI is able to examine the excited  
              electronic states of ions which are not accessible to previous high  
              resolution threshold ionization techniques such as zero kinetic energy  
              electron spectroscopy and mass analyzed threshold ionization   spectroscopy. 
              This new technique will be applied to several small   molecules of atmospheric
              interest in order to explore the parameters and   capabilities of the method
              while gathering new information about these   important species.   
              Photoinduced Rydberg ionization spectroscopy or PIRI will enable the  
              electronic spectroscopy of molecular cations to be observed with a   resolution
              previously unattainable.  For the first time, rotational and   vibrational
              information on congested excited electronic states of ions   will be acquired. 
              Initial experiments will focus on ionic states of   oxygen, water, carbon
              dioxide, hydrogen chloride and sulfur dioxide.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
