Title       : Improved III-V Optoelectronic Performance and Reliability Through Carbon
               Tetrabromide Doping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9526483

Award Number: 9526483
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336802             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Miller dlm15@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Theresa S. Mayer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9526483  Miller  The goal of this project is to investigate and develop III-V 
              semiconductor-based optoelectronic emitters, detectors, and electronic 
              circuits with improved performance. The approach focuses on an  important
              materials issue which affects many present devices and  integrated
              optoelectronic circuits: controlled heavy p-type doping in  an epitaxial
              structure, using carbon. Gaseous, carbon tetrabromide,  CBr4 will be used for
              carbon doping in solid source molecular beam  epitaxy (MBE). Stable,
              low-resistance p-type contacts, improved laser  lifetime, and improved
              heterojunction bipolar transistor (HBT)  reliability will be developed and
              demonstrated.    The common p-type dopant for solid-source MBE is Be. At doping
               concentrations exceeding about lxlO^19/cm3, Be can diffuse rapidly  during
              epitaxial growth and also during device operation. This  phenomenon makes it
              difficult to grow high-performance microwave HBTs  with good yield and
              reproducibility using Be, and also leads to a rapid  degradation in device
              performance. As a result, commercial suppliers of  epitaxial material grown by
              MBE find it virtually impossible to sell  wafers for use in HBTs. There is also
              evidence that a similar  phenomenon limits the performance of lasers grown with
              Be. The use of  carbon rather than Be in solid-source MBE growth will reopen
              the growth  of high reliability, highly p doped, high performance devices to
              this  technique.    The approach of this project is to use carbon tetrabromide,
              CBr4, for p  type doping in solid-source MBE growth. The project couples the
              growth  by MBE of AlGaAs, GaAs, AlInAs, and GaInAs materials on GaAs and InP 
              substrates closely to the design, fabrication, and testing of HBTs,  lasers,
              and detectors. This is an extension to optical emitters,  detectors, and device
              reliability of the principal investigators' prior  work on CBr4 doping.  ***
