Title       : A New Approach to Problems in Aggregate and Polyelectric Chemistry and
               Polypeptide Aggregate Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  1997  
File        : a9526206

Award Number: 9526206
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence S. Romsted romsted@rutchem.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With funding from the Organic Dynamics Program, Professor Romsted will  
              investigate the chemical environment inside a matrix of polypeptides   which
              have been assembled on a surfactant surface. In this endeavor, a   molecular
              probe(benzenediazonium tetrafluoroborate salt) will be   coalesced as part of
              the assembly. When activated, the probe molecule   will decompose to form
              covalent bonds with its nearest neighbors. In so   doing, the chemical
              components near the probe molecule will be   irreversibly trapped and can be
              measured quantitatively. Results of these   experiments should provide, for the
              first time, quantitative   concentrations of counterions, alcohols and waters
              of hydration inside   polypeptide matrices. This is significant in that the
              chemical   environment inside an assembly differs from that in the bulk
              solution.   Since these cavities are where reactions occur, a better
              understanding of   reactive region should benefit researchers who design new
              drugs and need   to understand how reactions occur. These types of matrices are
              models for   biological reaction assemblies such as membranes and micelles. 
              Biological systems assemble molecular arrays to form cavities where   reactions
              occur with ease. That is , the reactants and the charge   distributions are
              prearranged so as to facilitate the reaction processes.   Thus, a more thorough
              understanding of these reaction zones, which this   project addresses, should
              provide scientists with the knowledge to make   better drugs, to build
              artificial reaction zones and better cope with   diseases. This proposed
              project has considerable potential and   significance.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
