Title       : Dissertation Improvement Grant: Colorado River Archaeology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1996      
File        : a9526697

Award Number: 9526697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith W. Kintigh kintigh@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Keith Kintigh, Mr. Andrew Duff will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will examine a sample of archaeological ceramics
              from late prehistoric sites in the Upper Little Colorado River (ULCR) region of
              East-Central Arizona as well as others from related sites in adjacent areas. To
              accomplish this, samples will be analyzed by neutron activation at the
              University of Missouri reactor. The elemental determinations which result will
              allow Mr. Duff to determine which ceramics came from the same sources and on
              this basis to reconstruct patterns of trade and social interaction. Mr. Duff
              wishes to examine links among the different pueblos located in the and their
              differential ties with the larger prehistoric world. Preliminary work, based on
              analysis of ceramic design, suggests that although ULCR communities were
              spatially close, their trade networks varied significantly.  A considerable
              degree of social complexity was reached in the prehistoric Southwest and given
              no other form of transportation than foot travel, archaeologists wish to
              understand how individual communities achieved and maintained links with other
              groups. A second interesting question concerns social strategies which
              permitted survival in a highly variable and unpredictable desert environment.
              Researchers hypothesize that systems were designed to allow the movement of
              goods to compensate for the spatial variation in rainfall and productivity
              which characterize deserts. To examine this question scientists must
              reconstruct interaction networks and they use archaeologically recovered
              material remains to accomplish this goal. Because clays from different deposits
              often vary in chemical composition they can often be used to trace movements of
              goods and Mr. Duff's research takes advantage of this fact.  His work is
              important for several reasons. It will shed new light on human adaptation to
              unpredictable environments. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists and will also assist in the training of a promising young
              scientist.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
