Title       : Microwave-Enhanced Solid State Reactions in Ionic Crystalline Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1999       
File        : a9526035

Award Number: 9526035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172900             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Booske booske@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Reid F. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this research project is to isolate and characterize a
              microwave-field-enhancement effect on ionic transport in ionic ceramics.  The
              investigation will emphasize experiments to establish whether this microwave
              driving force is a dominant mechanism responsible for enhanced solid state
              diffusion and of interface chemical reactions.  Measurements will made using
              halide salts, a 14 GHz microwave source, and a nonresonant waveguide
              applicator.  Theoretical analyses will be conducted in collaboration with
              researchers from the Institute of Applied Physics, Russian Academy of Science
              (Nizhny Novgorod).  Design of the experiments, the experimental applicator, and
              experimental operation will be completed in collaboration with a researcher
              from Rockwell International.  Two sets of experiments are planned: (1)
              measurements of microwave effects on grain boundary diffusion of K+ ions into
              NaCl and Na+ ions into KCl, and (2) measurements of microwave effects on
              interface-limited solid-state reaction rates for (pseudo) binary compound
              formation.  In both cases, th e reactions will be compared for
              microwave-irradiated and microwave-free samples as a function of sample
              temperature, microwave field strength, and electric field polarization.  In
              addition, the PIs plan experimental studies of temperature distributions within
              microwave-heated ceramic specimen.  This will address questions of accurate
              thermometry in microwave heating/materials processing and whether reports of
              enhanced reactions in microwave-heated glasses and ceramics can be (at least
              partially) explained by core-to surface temperature differentials of up to
              several hundred degrees Celsius.  Specifically, the PIs will characterize
              internal temperature gradients due to inverted temperature profiles through the
              experimental examination of solid-state compound formation in microwave-heated
              oxide particulate composites in which the two component oxide phases in the
              starting compact react to form one or two quasi binary compounds.  The results
              will be compared to predictions based on heat transport and microwave
              absorption modeling in oxide particulate composites.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 
