Title       : The Panaca Formation, Nevada, and Resolution of the Hemphillian/Blancan Boundary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1996   
File        : a9526386

Award Number: 9526386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Everett H. Lindsay   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lindsay  9526386   This project is for biostratigraphic and magnetostratigraphic
              study of the Panaca Formation in eastern Nevada.  This dominantly lacustrine
              deposit is more than 300 meters thick, representing aggradation in basins
              formed by tectonic extension.  both Hemphillian (latest Miocene-early Pliocene)
              and Blancan (middle-late Pliocene) mammals are known from the Panaca Fm.; our
              objective is to establish a sequence of magnetozones in the Panaca Fm. using
              both marker beds and magnetostratigraphy, and to assemble this data to resolve
              the boundary between Hemphillian and Blancan land mammal ages.   North American
              sites with Blancan and Hemphillian mammals are probably more common than sites
              of any other pre-Pleistocene land mammal ages; superposition, however, of
              Blancan over Hemphillian mammal sites is rate.  When superposition can be
              demonstrated, relative to Hemphillian and Blancan faunas, correlation and
              calibration of the boundary has never been securely established.  The Panaca
              Fm. provides a combination of thick and well exposed sediments, diverse and
              locally abundant fossils, and strong, stable magnetic minerals.  The
              combination of these factors in the Panaca Fm. promises to provide a robust
              data base for resolution of the Hemphillian/Blancan boundary.   The geochron of
              the Panaca Fm., approximately 3 to 6 m.y., was an interval of dynamic mammal
              radiation.  The early radiation of microtine rodents (e.g., voles and lemmings)
              in Holarctica, the appearance of hominids in Africa, and the Great American
              Interchange all occurred in that time span.  It is interesting that here in
              North America, where mammal chronology is most securely established, the
              boundary between Hemphillian and Blancan land mammal ages is so poorly
              constrained.  This project is designed to correct that weakness; when securely
              calibrated, the boundary between Hemphillian and Blancan land mammal ages will
              be a firm cornerstone for global correlation of biotic and geologic events
              during the late Cenozoic Era.
