Title       : A New Method of Assessing Trophic Levels in Fossil Organisms Using Calcium
               Stable Isotopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1996 
File        : a9526997

Award Number: 9526997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. DePaolo depaolo@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DePaolo  9526997   The proposed research seeks to develop and test a new method
              of assessing trophic level using stable isotopes of calcium, and to apply this
              method to fossil organisms, particularly vertebrates, not amenable to other
              methods of trophic level determination.  The study will focus on marine food
              chains, but the method developed should apply to continental food chains as
              well.  A preliminary survey of a variety of organisms suggests that biogenic
              calcium carbonate and calcium phosphate is consistently isotopically lighter
              (lower  44Ca) than source (dietary) calcium, and that the trophic level shifts
              are much greater than shifts due to temperature-dependent fractionation.  The
              work proposed involves collaboration between the PI, who has expertise in
              isotope geochemistry and mass spectrometry, and a graduate student in
              vertebrate paleontology.  Because biological processing appears to be a major
              factor determining the distribution of calcium stable isotopes in terrestrial
              settings, including seawater, the proposed research will also allow preliminary
              interpretation of possible changes in seawater  44Ca over geologic time.    
              The research plan consists of three parts:    Determining the extent to which 
              44Ca decreases between trophic levels in modern marine food chains, and
              identifying other factors that can influence  44Ca.  These results will have
              implications for the mechanisms of biological Ca transport and fixation. 
              Establishing how well fossil skeletal materials preserve their original calcium
              isotopic makeup.    Measuring enough other types of geological samples to get
              an overall view of isotopic fractionation in the Ca cycle of the earth's
              surface environment.  Preliminary data indicate that biological scavenging of
              light calcium isotope is one of the main controls on the calcium isotopic value
              of seawater.    If we are successful in establishing a technique for
              determining the trophic level of fossil organisms that does not require
              well-preserved organic material, it should  be immediately useful to
              paleontologists attempting to reconstruct the ecological relationships of
              extinct animals.  By increasing understanding of how biological processing
              affects calcium isotopic rations, the proposed research will illuminate the
              workings of a possibly important, but little understood, stable isotope system.
               Once the major parameters controlling calcium isotope abundaces in terrestrial
              materials are quantified, changes in the ocean  44Ca through geologic time may
              provide a new paleoceanographic tool.
