Title       : Novel Inorganic/Organic Hybrid Photonics Material via Laser Assisted Molecular
               Beam Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  1997   
File        : a9526024

Award Number: 9526024
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367239             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paras N. Prasad pnprasad@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James F. Garvey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9526024  Prasad    The research described in this proposal is designed to 
              generate novel composite materials for photonics  applications. Thin films of
              the proposed inorganic:organic  hybrid materials will be fabricated via the
              laser assisted  molecular beam deposition technique. The structural, linear 
              and nonlinear optical characterization of these films will  be conducted. The
              microenvironment of the composite will be  investigated using organic
              fluorescent probes whose  fluorescent peak, lifetime, quantum yield and
              anisotropy are  highly dependent on the microenvironment. The optical  quality
              will be evaluated by measuring the waveguide losses.  For the investigation of
              the third-order nonlinear optical  properties, which can be used for all
              optical signal  processing in photonics, a combination of Kerr gate,  transient
              absorption and degenerate four-wave mixing will be  performed using femtosecond
              laser pulses. Also, the third-  order nonlinear optical processes will be
              studied in planar  optical waveguide configuration and in the Fabry-Perot 
              cavity mode. For second order nonlinear optical investi-  gations, necessary
              polar structure will be introduced in the  fabricated films via the poling
              process. The second-order  nonlinear optical materials will be studied using
              both  second harmonic generation and electro-optic modulation.  %%%  A frontier
              area of current material science is the  development of novel high performance
              mutifunctional  materials for the application of emerging state-of-the-art 
              technologies such as photonics, biophotonics and  optoelectronics. A novel
              approach is presented in this  proposal for the fabrication of thin films of a
              new class of  inorganic:organic hybrid materials for photonics via laser 
              assisted molecular beam deposition. The proposed novel  inorganic:organic
              hybrid materials produced by this  technique combine the high optical quality
              and environmental  stability of inorganics with the fast and large nonlinear 
              optical response of organics. The laser as sisted molecular  beam deposition
              approach of generating inorganic:organic  composites is highly unique in that
              it involves direct low  temperature seeding of an organic vapor into a
              molecular  beam expansion of the inorganic oxide produced by laser  ablation.
              Films are grown directly on a desired substrate  which is situated downstream
              in the path of the molecular  beam.    ***
