Title       : Atlas of Glacimarine Features
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1996  
File        : a9526459

Award Number: 9526459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34833              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Davies   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Davies  OPP 9526459    Abstract  This award supports editing and preparation
              work to develop an  Atlas of Glacimarine Features.  Late Cenozoic glaciation
              directly  affected sedimentation on more than half the Earth's continental 
              shelves.  Ice continues to be a dominant influence on  sedimentation around
              Greenland and on the shelves facing the  Arctic ocean as well as around
              Antarctica.  Elsewhere,  glacimarine sedimentation is of particular
              significance on the  shelves of North America, north of, northwest Europe and
              Russia,  which were strongly influenced by the Late Cenozoic Glaciation, 
              though now ice is a minor factor.  The features of these shelves  include true
              glacimarine features, i.e. those formed in a marine  environment in proximity
              to, or strongly under the influence of,  ice, and diamictons resulting from ice
              rafting.  Also found,  since large areas of the shelves were exposed during the
               Pleistocene lowering of sea level, are terrestrial glacial and  periglacial
              features, e.g. fluvial outwash valleys and associated  deposits, tunnel
              valleys, drumlin fields, lodgement till, which  have subsequently been
              submerged and modified by marine  influences.  Better understanding of
              present-day glacimarine  environments will enhance interpretation of the
              stratigraphic  record in terms of past environments and the possible global 
              climate changes implied by these interpretations, while from an  immediate
              practical standpoint, recognizing and understanding the  features of glaciated
              shelves will become increasingly  significant as the search for energy and
              mineral resources  extends to higher latitudes and into submerged regions.   
              The planned Atlas of Glacimarine Features will provide a  reference for
              professionals, teachers and students showing  typical examples of sea floor and
              sub sea floor features seen in  glacio-marine environments, as these appear in
              seismic records  (single and multi-channel seismic reflection, high resolution,
               side scan).  Likely users of the atlas will include Qua ternary  scientists,
              marine geologists, geophysicists, geotechnical  engineers, and surveyors
              working in universities, research  institutions and government agencies, as
              well as those in  industries with offshore interests (petroleum and hard
              mineral  exploration and production, civil engineering, waste disposal, 
              environmental concerns, etc.).  The atlas will be assembled under  the guidance
              of an international editorial committee from  contributions submitted by
              members of the scientific community.  Publication is planned for late 1996.
