Title       : A National Center for Computational Electronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1998      
File        : a9526378

Award Number: 9526378
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319571             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Dutton dutton@ee.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9526378 Dutton  The main objective of this renewal proposal for NCCE (National
              Center for Computational Electronics) is to develop a shared vision and
              environment for computational electronics with primary emphasis on engineering
              TCAD tools and methodology.   Through validation of advanced modeling
              approaches to solving the Boltzmann transport equation, including calibration
              of the associated models, a hierarchy of macroscopic 2D device simulator
              capabilities will be developed.  Jointly with industry the tools and
              methodology will be used to established predictability for design and analysis
              of semiconductor devices  of feature size as small as 0.1um. This will include
              helping to establish a comprehensive set of benchmarks through international
              collaboration with NCCE's membership.  Other related goals are : (1) use
              of-state-of-the-art device simulation models and their graphics representation
              for developing educational course materials in device physics and electronics;
              (2) parameter extraction for physical models based on both experiment and
              microscopic simulation (i.e. Monte Carlo); (3) establishment of an electronic
              forum and pathway within the internet for timely information sharing regarding
              the latest development in device modeling.  Microscopic transport phenomena
              will be studied using Monte Carlo codes for solving the Boltzmann equation and
              used in support of developing and calibrating macroscopic models.  A leading
              Monte Carlo code, DAMOCLES from IBM, will be used at NCCE and provides a wealth
              of physical models and materials parameters for silicon as well as compound
              semiconductors.  The overall path for technology transfer and further
              development of educational materials for NCCE will extend well-established
              methods such as open access to TCAD tools, short courses,  workshops with
              supporting documents, articles and textbooks.  In addition, the new
              opportunities using WWW provide an exciting paradigm shift that will increase
              the effectiveness and impact of NCCE throughout the US and a mong the
              international community.
