Title       : Ab Initio Studies of Metal-Rare-gas and Metal-Hydrogen Interaction Potentials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a9526197

Award Number: 9526197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137628             (Estimated)
Investigator: Solomon Bililign Bililign@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               In this project, supported by the Theoretical and Computational   Chemistry
              program,  provides research funds to Professor Bililign at   North Carolina A&T
              University, one of the HBCU colleges.   Professor   Bililign will use ab initio
              calculations to obtain properties of   electronically excited states of free
              metal atoms.  These calculations   will also yield potential energy curves of
              some valence and Rydberg   states of excited metal atoms interacting with rare
              gas atoms and   hydrogen.  The purpose of these calculations is threefold.  The
              first is   to develop simple analytical model potential functions to describe
              the   metal-rare gas van der Waals bonding in different electronic states and  
              to test the model suggested for the bonding.  The second is to understand  
              dynamical pre-dissociation processes which occur in some of these   systems. 
              The third aspect of this work aims to understand the reaction   dynamics in
              laser induced chemical reactions of alkali metal-hydrogen   systems.  The metal
              atoms involved are Mg, Cd, Zn, Al, Si, Na and Li.  In this research program
              first principles theoretical calculations will   be performed to understand the
              mechanism by which electronically excited   metal atoms interact with closed
              shell rare gas atoms and hydrogen to   form weakly bound complexes.  The end
              result is to use the results of   these calculations to obtain analytical model
              potential functions which   describe these interactions.  The results of these
              calculations help   provide an interpretation and understanding of some
              experiments in laser   spectroscopy,  as well as the non-equilibrium conditions
              that occur in   electrical discharge laser systems and astrophysical phenomena.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
