Title       : Quantum Chemical Reaction Dynamics on Massively Parallel Computers: Algorithms
               and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9526658

Award Number: 9526658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187110             (Estimated)
Investigator: Evelyn M. Goldfield evi@sun.science.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9526658  GOLDFIELD     This project, supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry program will focus on   the development of quantum
              chemical dynamical tools and the application to several chemical   reactions.  
              The primary focus of this development will be in the area of massively parallel
                computers. Currently, much progress is being made in the field of chemical
              dynamics.  This   progress is being fueled both by the development of new and
              clever computational methods and   the incredible advances in computer power.
              Such progress means that for the first time,   theoretical chemists can
              actually envision competing with their experimental colleagues in   providing
              accurate accounts of important chemical phenomena. The aim of the research
              outlined   in this proposal is to harness the power of massively parallel
              computing to enable chemists to   apply rigorous theoretical methods to larger,
              more complex chemical systems.       At the heart of chemistry lies the motion
              of atoms and molecules.  The description of the   motions of interacting atomic
              nuclei provides the most basic and fundamental understanding of   chemical
              processes.  An important goal of theoretical chemical physics is to describe
              chemical   reactions from first principles alone.   Because atoms are very
              small, their motions are often not   adequately explained by ordinary Newtonian
              mechanics, instead, quantum mechanics is required.     Although the quantum
              mechanical equations that apply to all of chemistry have been known for   most
              of this century, only in the past several years has a complete, accurate
              theoretical   description of a chemical reaction been given, and only for the
              simplest chemical process, the   interaction of a hydrogen atom and a hydrogen
              molecules.   There is a huge difference between   knowing the form of an
              equation and having the methodological and computational tools which   enable
              one to solve it.    Chemical dynamicists for the most part have not yet
              exploited the huge potential of massive ly   parallel computing. The research
              proposed here is to develop and implement a hierarchical   parallel model for
              time-dependent quantum dynamics.   The researchers expect that this model  
              will allow them to obtain realistic descriptions of much larger and more
              complex chemical   systems than is currently possible.   They will apply this
              model to important and challenging   problems including the two most important
              reactions in combustion chemistry.   One very   important property of this
              model, which has already been implemented, is its ability to handle   easily
              and efficiently chemical systems having high overall angular momentum. Many
              theoretical   efforts concentrate on the computationally more tractable systems
              with zero total angular   momentum; such states are rarely found in nature
              however. There are often both quantitative and   qualitative differences
              between high and low angular momentum states.  Therefore, in order to   compare
              theoretical calculations with experiments it is often necessary to obtain an
              accurate   description of nonzero angular momentum states.
