Title       : (CAREER) Coupled Hydrological and Geochemical Modeling of the Formation of the
               Cigar Lake Uranium Deposit, Northern Saskatchewan, Canada
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1996       
File        : a9526860

Award Number: 9526860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey P. Raffensperger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1043,1045,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9526860  Raffensperger    Processes occurring in sedimentary basins include
              basin-scale groundwater flow, heat transport, and reactive mass transport. 
              Quantitative models of flow and transport in these settings can provide insight
              into the coupled processes that control their hydrological and geochemical
              evolution.  The Cigar Lake uranium deposit provides and excellent opportunity
              to study the coupled processes of groundwater flow and mass transport/transfer.
               It is representative of unconformity-type uranium deposits found in Canada and
              Australia, which are characterized by: location near an unconformity between
              weathered metasedimentary basement rocks and overlying thick sandstone
              sequences, their age of formation (1300-1600 Ma), an association with faulted
              basement structures and graphite-rich basement rocks, and intensive
              hydrothermal alteration halos.  Cigar Lake has been studied as an analog for
              high-level nuclear waste repositories, and has experienced relatively little
              post-formation alteration.  Data are now available on the mineralogy and
              petrology, as well as the hydrological properties, of the rocks in the region. 
              Raffensperger (1993) developed a unique finite element approach to quantifying
              two-dimensional groundwater flow, heat transport, and reactive multicomponent
              mass transport in heterogeneous geologic settings, which was used to examine
              the formation of these deposits.  However, this effort did not fully explain
              certain features of the deposits, for which additional work is required.  This
              study will examine the formation of the Cigar Lake uranium deposit and
              associated alteration, and will focus on the following topics: (1) conditions
              required for mineralization within basement rocks; (2) consideration of the
              role of feedback coupling, in which porosity and permeability modifications due
              to mineral precipitation and dissolution are incorporated into the groundwater
              flow calculations; and (3) the creation of a general research tool for the
              quantitative study of coupled hydro logical and geochemcial processes.    The
              apparent stability of the Cigar Lake deposit has been attributed to the
              low-permeability clay alteration halo surrounding it.  How this alteration
              developed and influenced the ore-forming process is a significant question
              which can be addressed through coupled modeling.  Coupling of important
              hydrological and geochemical processes, within a flexible numerical framework,
              will permit accurate integration of geological, hydrological, and geochemical
              data.  Furthermore, coupling will be significant in that the interdependence of
              hydrologic and geochemical processes may be evaluated.  Detailed simulations of
              an individual deposit will help refine the general picture presented by
              previous studies, and help answer remaining questions.  Unconformity-type
              uranium deposits are being studies as analogs for nuclear waste repositories. 
              How these deposits formed, and why they have remained relatively intact over a
              time period of 1.3 billion years constitute geologically and environmentally
              important research questions.  The educational plan consists of the following
              elements: (1) Development of an interactive, mullet-media textbook for EVSC 340
              Physical Hydrology, a core course required for all majors; (2) Inclusion of
              undergraduate students in the proposed research through independent study and
              summer research opportunities; and (3) The creation of a new course, to be
              titled "Water on Earth".  Work on the first element will begin this fall, with
              the support of a University ITC fellowship and release time provided  by the
              PI's Dean.  The third element will be developed through 1995 and 1996, to be
              taught for the first time during the 1996-1997 academic year.  The goal of the
              new course  will be to provide a "service course" in hydrology to the
              University, and to build a bridge between our understanding of hydrological
              science and the role that  understanding plays in a variety of contemporary and
              historical issues.
