Title       : GOALI/IUCP: Algorithmic Approach to Processing Geometry Represented in
               Non-Uniform Rational B-Splines (NURBS) Form
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 5,  1998    
File        : a9526119

Award Number: 9526119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241015             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie A. Piegl piegl@grad.csee.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne Tiller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  9526119  Piegl     This GOALI grant provides funding for the development of
              a new geometrical framework and algorithms for the representation, design and
              processing of Non-Uniform Rational B-splineS (NURBS) geometry. The developed
              algorithms will provide tools for the robust and accurate design and processing
              of engineering parts covered by free-form geometry. The emphasis is on
              utilizing the extra degrees of freedom of the rational form to develop new
              techniques for interpolation and approximation, shape modification, fairing,
              and various fundamental algorithms such as symbolic operators, and degree
              elevation and reduction. A B-spline-to-Bezier-to-B-spline approach is also
              proposed to take advantage of Bezier methods and to reduce the complexity of
              B-splines. The algorithms will be implemented in the context of an existing
              NURBS framework that has tools for all supporting computational work.
              Experiments involving the efficiency and usefulness of the developed algorithms
              will be performed by the industrial partner within the framework of its
              modeling system. An experimental system will also be built and evaluated
              according to specifications found in most CAD/CAM systems.      Upon
              completion, the results of this research will lead to improvements in both
              NURBS theory and advanced algorithm development. It is anticipated that new
              theoretical results will be obtained in spline theory and associated tools such
              as symbolic operators, interpolation and approximation with rational splines,
              data reduction, curve and surface fairing, and in the theory of knots and
              weights as related to the proposed algorithms. New advanced geometric
              algorithms will also emerge either as direct implementations of new theoretical
              results or as direct algorithmic solutions of problems such as optimal knot
              placement. A decomposition-Bezier-recomposition paradigm will also be
              introduced to more efficiently solve a large set of problems such as degree
              elevation and reduction, reparametrization, and various approximations . The
              primary goal of this work is to gain a deeper insight into the power of the
              rational form to obtain more efficient algorithms in terms of data storage,
              flexibility and speed. Efficient algorithms will cut lead time, enhance the
              robustness, reliability and efficiency of existing systems, and will ultimately
              improve the quality of products such as engines and turbine blades. The Bezier
              paradigm of NURBS will help in understanding many complicated algorithms and
              hence will contribute to standardizing NURBS across various engineering
              disciplines.    ***
