Title       : Physical and Chemical Heterogeneity of Aquifers: A Quantitative Geological
               Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1996     
File        : a9526795

Award Number: 9526795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Matthew Davis matt.davis@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Harter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1043,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9526795  Davis    One of the major challenges facing hydrogeologists today is
              the prediction of solute movement in the subsurface.  It has been generally
              recognized that the spatial variation of aquifer permeability is one of the
              dominant controls on the evolution of a contaminant plume.  In addition, recent
              studies suggest that the spatial variation in aquifer chemical properties may
              also influence solute movement.  One very promising approach to quantifying 
              subsurface variability and the associated contaminant transport is the
              geostatistical approach.  Geostatistical, or stochastic, models represent
              aquifer properties with spatially correlated random field.  In recent years, a
              wide variety of statistical models have been proposed in the literature to
              represent the spatial variation of permeability. Some of these models have also
              been applied to the spatial variation of chemical properties.  In general, each
              model is based on a different method for mathematically representing, or
              computationally generating, spatially correlated random variables and each 
              exhibits overall differences in appearance.  This research investigates how the
              various statistical models relate to the geological processes of deposition and
              how geologic information can be used to select and parameterize the most
              appropriate model.  Results from previous work indicate that a quantifiable
              relationship exists between the sedimentological features of fluvial bounding
              surfaces and the geostatistical properties of modality and spatial correlation.
               Fluvial bounding surfaces are hierarchical in nature and it has been observed
              that, in general, the higher the order of the bounding surface, the higher the
              probability that the surface separates regions with different mean
              permeability.  The regions of different mean permeability in turn are the
              dominant control on modality and spatial correlation structure of the
              statistical models of heterogeneity.  With regard to the spatial variation of
              aquifer chemical properties, very little fi eld data on the spatial patterns of
              variability.  This research will obtain important data on the nature of
              chemical heterogeneity and its relationship to the geological processes of
              deposition.  The primary objectives of the proposed research are to: 1)
              empirically investigate the relationship between the correlation structure of
              permeability and the spatial distribution of hierarchical bounding surfaces; 2)
              investigate the relationship between the spatial variation of chemical
              properties and geologic features; and 3) develop an algorithm for coding
              sedimentological information of depositional environment for the simulation of
              the physical and chemical heterogeneity.  The first phase will investigate the
              spatial variation of both permeability and chemical properties (mineralogy,
              grain coatings, surface area, porosity, and cation-exchange capacity) of
              deposits exposed in New England gravel pits.  The results of the field work
              will be used to develop an algorithm of simulating aquifer heterogeneity.  It
              is anticipated that the algorithm will treat different scales of heterogeneity
              separately using the indicator formalism and Bayesian statistics.    Each
              geologic setting is unique and any particular outcrop study will not be
              directly transportable to other sites.  However, if the physical and chemical
              heterogeneity can be related to general geologic properties and
              sedimentological features, the results of this research will enable much more
              portability between different geologic settings.
