Title       : Orographic Forcing of the Coastal Atmospheric Boundary Layer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1998   
File        : a9526138

Award Number: 9526138
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $462568             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Rogers drogers@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clive E. Dorman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9526138  Rogers        Coastal mountains form a barrier to the wind field that
              may affect  both the downstream and upstream evolution of the local air flow. 
              Local  regions of high or low pressure generated by the coastal zone can become
               trapped and propagate along the coastline.  Energetic, disturbances that 
              exist for between two and six days are of particular interest. These  features
              can cause significant changes in the local weather in the  coastal zone, for
              example, replacing clear skies with clouds and fog, and  causing
              intensification and reversals of the wind field. These systems  are well
              documented, but no studies have characterized their dynamical  structure,
              origin, interaction with the mean boundary layer and the  development of the
              cloud-capped layer that accompanies these events.        Accelerations of the
              flow associated with coastal barriers give  rise to strong wind forcing of the
              coastal ocean and rapid variations in  the speed of the low level air flow. 
              These orographically-forced flows  have a significant effect on the exchange of
              heat, moisture, momentum and  trace constituents between the ocean and the
              atmosphere. Since these  flows are constrained by the topography, they are
              often stationary and  persistent, consistently affecting a particular area of
              the coastline.   While the basic structure of these features is known, they
              have been  documented on only a few occasions and no systematic study has been 
              directed specifically to identifying the dynamics of these features and  their
              interactions with the thermal circulation that is also a  significant mesoscale
              feature of the summer-time California coastal zone.        This work will focus
              on in situ measurements of the along shore and  across shore structure of the
              boundary layer using aircraft and surface  based measurements.  Aircraft
              instruments will provide direct  measurements of the mean and turbulent
              structure of the coastal  atmosphere with coincident lidar measurements of the
              deformation of the  marine bounda ry layer inversion and in situ cloud
              microphysical  measurements of coastal clouds and aerosols.  An important
              result will be  the ability to resolve the temporal and spatial scales that
              dominate the  variability of the mesoscale wind field along parts of the
              California  coast, which may have a significant impact of mesoscale forecasting
              and  numerical modeling in complex terrain.  ***
