Title       : SGER: Depth from Physics in Computer Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1995    
File        : a9526210

Award Number: 9526210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Murray H. Loew loew@seas.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This award, in the Small Grants for Exploratory Research mode, will  examine
              and test a first-principles approach for determining the  relative depths of
              objects in images using only knowledge about the  medium and the intensities
              acquired in a single view.  Most methods  for inferring depth (or range) in
              computer vision have depended on  the use of multiple cameras and normally
              require the identification  of corresponding points in the resulting images.
              Alternatively,  rangefinder methods depend on sharpness-of-focus measures that 
              require calibrated-focus lenses and an unambiguous definition of  focus.  The
              planned approach is based on the physics of light  transmission and attenuation
              in a translucent diffuse medium.   These investigators have shown, in theory
              and with a small set of  experiments (in simulated biological tissue), that it
              is  straightforward to infer the relative depths of structures when  they are
              embedded in such a medium.  This work is particularly  exploratory because the
              original results arose as a byproduct of  other research and so the extent of
              its applicability in a more  general setting is not known.  Two of the
              questions to be probed  are: what are the limitations (e.g., minimum detectable
              depth  difference) and sensitivities (to assumptions, and to changes in 
              parameters) of the model; and what is the effect of the size and  shape of the
              object on determination of its relative depth.  The  research is aimed at the
              development of a capability to identify  unambiguously the relative depths of
              structures in an image, and  thus to prevent confusion about which structures
              overlie which  others. Because a single view is sufficient, it will be possible
              to  make this identification retrospectively, as long as the properties  of the
              medium are known.  This should be useful in evaluating  images arising, for
              example, in underwater, biological, and  atmospheric applications, as well as
              in more-turbid environments.
