Title       : Fundamentals of Microwave-Induced Reactions Involving Non-Ionic Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1995  
File        : a9526038

Award Number: 9526038
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58521              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin C. Hawley hawley@che.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kun-Mu Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1035,1058,9165,AMPP,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The global advantages of microwave processing over conventional heating include
              direct and volumetric heating, high selectivity, fast heating rate, and high
              controllability.  The objective of this work is to study the fundamental
              interactions between microwaves and non-ionic chemical species.  The research
              will: (1) determine the non-thermal effects during microwave-induced reaction
              by a comparative study of selected non-ionic reactions; (2) explore accurate
              temperature measurement techniques and determine the molecular temperature
              during microwave heating; (3) quantify the electric field and temperature
              distributions at the molecular level; and (4) study the effects of microwave
              reactor configuration and control on the reaction.  To verify or disprove the
              non-thermal effects during microwave heating of non-ionic species, studies of
              both epoxy-amine polymerization and epoxy-amine model-compound organic
              reactions are planned using amines of different dipole moments.  Systems of
              various dipole moments will be used because microwave effects occur primarily
              at the dipolar s ites for non-ionic reactions.  The epoxide to be used for
              polymerization is diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A (DGEBA).  The epoxides to be
              used for model-compound reactions are allyl glycidyl ether of bisphenol A
              (AGEBA) and phenyl glycidyl ether (PGE).  The amines to be used will be meta
              phenylene diamine (mPDA), diaminodiphenyl methane (DDM), and diaminodiphenyl
              sulfone (DDS).  Parallel isothermal reaction experiments will be carried out
              using microwave and conventional thermal heating.  Microwave thermal mechanical
              analysis will be investigated to measure the segmental mobility of the dipolar
              groups.  The electric field and temperature distributions at the molecular
              level will be modelled. The predicted temperatures will be compared to the
              measured temperatures.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
