Title       : Organic and Organometallic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9526388

Award Number: 9526388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Bergman pgates@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program provides continued support to work by Dr. Robert G. Bergman of   the
              Chemistry Department, University of California at Berkeley, on   reactions of
              organic molecules with transition metal complexes.  One area   of investigation
              is the synthesis of new complexes containing two metals   located in close
              proximity to one another.  Specifically targeted are   systems that are
              unsymmetrical, due to either the presence of two metals   with very different
              electronic properties or to the presence of different   reactive ligands at
              each metal center.  Research on these materials will   focus on reactions that
              are applicable to the chemical utilization of   small organic molecules, such
              as alkenes, alkynes and carbon dioxide, and   to the type of transformations
              important in organic synthesis, such as   carbon-carbon or carbon-heteroatom
              bond formation.  A second area of   investigation is the generation of
              organometallic species that are highly   reactive due to the presence of an
              unpaired electron at the metal center,   that is, organometallic free radicals,
              and capable of forming a   relatively strong covalent bond to the metal.  
              Also,  methods for the   abstraction of protons from relatively unacidic metal
              hydrides will be   developed  in order to generate very nucleophilic, low
              valent anionic   metal complexes.   Much is known about organometallic
              reactions that take place in   even-electron complexes that contain a single
              metal center with easily   accessible charges and oxidation states. This
              project moves beyond these   areas of investigation to obtain understanding of
              reaction details in   cases involving an odd-number of electrons, uncommon
              metal oxidation   states, or  more than one metal center.  The results will
              increase   understanding of reactions which are relevant to chemical
              manufacturing                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
