Title       : Model Structure Error and Model Complexity in Groundwater Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1998     
File        : a9526645

Award Number: 9526645
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W-G. Yeh williamy@seas.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ne-Zheng Sun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9526645  Yeh    The reliability of groundwater modeling is often questionable,
              primarily because the problem of model calibration has not been completely
              resolved.  In principle, the calibration of a distributed parameter model
              should include the following two aspects: the determination of model structure
              and the estimation of the unknown model parameters.  To date, however, the
              determination of model structure has received limited attention because of its
              inherent difficulty.  In practice, a complex aquifer is often represented by a
              simplified conceptual model based on limited geological information and
              subjective guess.  As a result, model structure error is unavoidable.  In most
              cases, model failure is caused by significant model structure error. 
              Literature review indicates that there exist no systematic methods to estimate
              and to reduce such type of error.  If this challenging problem can be solved or
              partly solved, groundwater modeling will be significantly improved and the
              reliability of model applications significantly increased.    Major objectives
              of the proposed research include: the development of new concepts for model
              structure identification, the development of efficient algorithms for model
              structure error estimation, and the development of data collection strategy for
              model structure discrimination.  The overriding objective is the development of
              a systematical methodology for model structure determination.    The model
              structure error of using model A to replace model B is defined as a weighted
              sum of their distances in both the observation and prediction spaces.  The
              calculation of model structure error is then formulated into a maximum-minimum
              problem.  When the real structure of an aquifer system is unknown, a stepwise
              regression procedure will be used to estimate the model structure error and to
              determine an appropriate level of model structure complexity.  A heuristic
              procedure that combines with the variational sensitivity analysis will be used
              to solve the proposed maxim um-minimum optimization problems.   Field data
              collected at a major groundwater basin in Southern California will be used to
              validate the proposed methodology.
