Title       : Geometry and Timing of Gneiss Dome Formation, Southern Tibet, China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1998  
File        : a9526861

Award Number: 9526861
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas O. Wright                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207419             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip B. Gans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F              "                   C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       D       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                     "      
              "           4 @                                                                
                                                                                             
                                        +   ,   -   .   /   0   1   2   3   4   5            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            F
                 Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 9526861 Lee 
              An integrated geological investigation, to be completed in collaboration with
              Professor Chen, Wenji and Dr. Hao Jie, Institute of Geology, State
              Seismological Bureau, Beijing, China, is proposed to test and refine postulated
              mechanisms for the formation of the gneiss domes in southern Tibet. 
              Field-based investigations will focus on the little-studied Kangmar dome and
              unstudied Lhagoi Kangri dome.  Integrated investigations include geologic
              mapping, structural, kinematic, geochronologic, and thermochronologic
              investigations within these two domes to document the geometry, kinematics
              direction, and magnitude of ductile and brittle deformation, the relative
              timing between pluton emplacement and deformation, and the age of intrusions,
              ductile deformation and fault motions.  These data, integrated with ongoing
              seismic reflection data by other workers, provide an opportunity to document
              the space-time evolution of gneiss dome formation within an overall
              lithospheric convergent setting.  The processes that lead to their creation
              have important implications for the tectonic evolution f the Tib etan plateau. 
              Therefore, an accurate characterization of the development of these gneiss
              domes in terms of their structural, kinematic, and temporal evolution will have
              significant implications for the formation of overthickened crust and perhaps
              the timing that high  elevations were achieved on the Tibetan plateau.   This
              project provides an excellent opportunity for structural geologists and
              geochronologists from the USA and China to collaborate on an integrated field
              and analytical research project that addresses fundamental questions about
              processes of gneiss dome formation in a continent-continent collisional
              tectonic setting.                          ;                                   
                    Oh     +'  0                                       $       H       l     
                                                       D       h                             
                                   R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                             
                       9526684                             Felicia Smith                     
               Felicia Smith               @         S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n     
                                   (                                                   *     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               @                                   @                         
                                                                                             
               @                                           Microsoft Word 6.0                
                                                   2                                         
                                                           ;                                 
                                                                                             
                                      e =       e                   D                        
                                                j       j   j       j       j       j       j
                                                                                        1    
                                                                                    !       !
                    !       @               l           T       5                           j
                                                                                             
                      j       j                                                              
                      j               j                                       ~              
              j       j       j       j                           w                          
                                                                                    9526861
              Lee  An integrated geological investigation, to be completed in collaboration
              with Professor Chen, Wenji and Dr. Hao Jie, Institute of Geology, State
              Seismological Bureau, Beijing, China, is proposed to test and refine postulated
              mechanisms for the formation of the gneiss domes in southern Tibet. 
              Field-based investigations will focus on the little-studied Kangmar dome and
              unstudied Lhagoi Kangri dome.  Integrated investigations include geologic
              mapping, structural, kinematic, geochronologic, and thermochronologic
              investigations within these two domes to document the geometry, kinematics
              direction, and magnitude of ductile and brittle deformation, the relative
              timing between pluton emplacement and deformation, and the age of intrusions,
              ductile deformation and fault motions.  These data, integrated with ongoing
              seismic reflection data by other workers, provide an opportunity to document
              the space-time evolution of gneiss dome formation within an overall
              lithospheric convergent setting.  The processes that lead to their creation
              have important implications for t
