Title       : Cross-Site: Stream Flow Hydrology Comparisons and Synthesis at Long-Term
               Ecological Research Sites - Links with Climate Terrestrial Ecosystems and
               Stream Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1995 
File        : a9526987

Award Number: 9526987
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171634             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia A. Jones geojulia@attbi.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon E. Grant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick J. Swanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1199,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to further understanding of relations among climate,
              vegetation, and streamflow across a range of ecosystem conditions and to
              advance intersite activities among LTER and nonLTER sites.  The overall
              objective of this proposal is to describe streamflow hydrology in a wide range
              of sites by elucidating streamflow response to a range of climatic, vegetation,
              and disturbance factors operating at time scales ranging from decadal to diel. 
              We expect to demonstrate how steamflow responds to vegetation and climate at
              each of these scales, and how this inherent coupling of climate, vegetation and
              streamflow controls streamflow response to disturbance and hence aspects of
              stream ecology.  The initial research phase of the project involves comparative
              analysis of long-term steamflow records from Andrews, Coweeta, and Hubbard
              Brook LTER sites and the Caspar Creek Experimental Watersheds site (USDA Forest
              Service/State of California).  These forest sites encompass a broad range of
              climatic (e.g., precipitation amount and seasonality, degree of snow influence)
              and vegetation  (e.g., deciduous vs. conifer, leaf area index) conditions. 
              Subsequently, they will involve a much larger group of LTER and other sites in
              a workshop and associated activities designed to develop site characterization
              and cross-site analysis for broader range of site conditions.  This work will
              include use of hydrologic models to examine hypothese concerning controls on
              water balances at the time scales of interest.  Representatives of the Climate
              and Stream Ecology Committees of LTER will take part in workshop planning and
              conduct.  Products of the overall effort will include: (1) on -line data bases
              with common variables/time resolution between sites, (2) an LTER publication
              similar to the Stream Research in the LTER Network Publication No. 15, and (3)
              journal articles from the comparative analyses conducted for the small set of
              sites and for the larger set of sites.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
