Title       : Parallel Computation and Decentralized Control of Large Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1996       
File        : a9526142

Award Number: 9526142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323112             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dragoslav Siljak dsiljak@scu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aleksandar I. Zecevic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Clara University
	      500 El Camino Real
	      Santa Clara, CA  950530250    408/554-4764

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9526142  Siljak       Transient stability simulation is among the most important
              and  frequently performed computation in power systems analysis.   Accelerating
              this process efficiently with parallel computers is of  enormous practical
              significance, and is the focal point of the  proposed research.  Our specific
              objective will be to design and  test parallel simulation algorithms based on
              the balanced Border  Block Diagonal (BBD) decomposition, which is ideally
              suited for  mapping sparse matrix problems onto multiprocessor architectures, 
              and secures both good load balancing an low intercommunication  between the
              processors.         To significantly broaden the scope of the proposed parallel
               transient stability simulation, well established epsilon  decompositions will
              be applied to sparsify the Jacobian that arises  in solving the discretized
              algebraic-differential equations by  Newton's method.  Preliminary results
              indicate that in electric  power systems very significant sparsification can be
              achieved by  discarding sufficiently small elements in blocks of matrices L and
               U where the fill-in is substantial.  In this context, and  additional
              objective will be to develop algorithms for identifying  coherent groups of
              generators in large power networks via epsilon  decompositions of the Jacobian,
              which will be linear in complexity  and serve as a basis for transient
              stability computations.         The balanced BBD and epsilon decompositions
              offer a new  approach to the design of decentralized control of large power 
              systems.  The BBD structure will be used to parallelize the  solutions of
              Lyapunov and Riccati matrix equations, which are of  fundamental importance in
              the decentralized stabilization and  optimization of dynamic systems.  Initial
              experiments indicate that  this method can be used to stabilize very large
              systems with as  many as several thousand state variables.  ***
