Title       : Improving the Impact and Relevance of Introductory Science Courses: as a
               Learning Partner.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1998  
File        : a9155744

Award Number: 9155744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1520988            (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcia C. Linn MCLINN@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Much research evidence suggests that students become                           
              disenchanted with science because their science classes                        
              overemphasize microscopic models of phenomena and formal                       
              methods of analysis and also fail to integrate everyday and                    
              scientific reasoning.  This project will develop and                           
              evaluate a new approach to science teaching and learning                       
              that is rigorous as well as pragmatic, useful, and engaging                    
              for students.  We will focus on improving introductory                         
              science courses so that they attract and retain students and                   
              meet the needs of society and the demands of the workplace.                    
              Specifically, we will identify goals for science courses                       
              that are both rigorous and useful, develop assessments that                    
              both educate students and inform teachers, investigate                         
              classroom partnerships between teachers, students, and                         
              computers that are both efficient and effective, and conduct                   
              longitudinal case studies of participation and persistence                     
              in science that are both interactive and retrospective.                        
                                                                                             
              Building on our recent research on teaching and learning, we                   
              will seek to provide a new, more substantial research base                     
              for science education reform.  We will refine our proposed                     
              solutions by conducting in-depth studies of students in                        
              small groups.  We will then test these solutions in middle                     
              school classes taught by a project team member.  Finally, we                   
              will study students longitudinally from the eighth grade                       
              through high school to determine the effect of our approach                    
              and related interventions on persistence and participation                     
              in science courses and careers.  By comparing the beliefs                      
              and decisions of students who tend not to participate in                       
              elective science courses to those of students who aspire to                    
              be scientists, we will be able to provide a much richer                        
              understanding of persistence and participation than has been                   
              provided by other investigations.
