Title       : Investigation of Questioning Processes During Conversations About Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1992 
File        : a9155726

Award Number: 9155726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond J. Hannapel                     
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190475             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emily H. van Zee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              10        Physical Sciences                       
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this project is to investigate questioning                      
              processes during science instruction.  Data sources include                    
              audio-and, video-tapes of science activities, interviews                       
              with students and teachers, journal entries, and student                       
              written work.  Analysis involves collaboration among                           
              elementary school teachers and university researchers in                       
              producing narrative analyses of transcripts of classroom                       
              conversations during science lessons.  The analysis also                       
              includes examining: a) forms and functions of questions                        
              asked by both students and teachers; b) the nature of                          
              spontaneous questions by students; c) the nature of                            
              spontaneous questions by teachers as adult learners in                         
              teacher education workshops at the Exploratorium; d)                           
              structural patterns of classroom questioning; e) uses of                       
              questions in implementing and monitoring instructional                         
              decisions; and f) developmental differences in questioning                     
              among students in different grade levels.  Participating                       
              teachers are encouraged to conduct research on questioning                     
              processes in their own classrooms and to share results at                      
              meetings at the University of California at Berkeley during                    
              the academic year.  The project also provides research                         
              opportunities for undergraduates.  Participation by minority                   
              students and teachers is encouraged in all activities.
