Title       : Leadership Development: Earth Science Resource Associates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1992     
File        : a9155198

Award Number: 9155198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emma L. Walton                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $579589             (Estimated)
Investigator: LeRoy R. Lee lrlee@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gene E. Musolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank Zuerner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wisc Acad of Sci Arts
	      
	      Madison, WI  53705    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              88        Geography                               
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The Earth Science Resource Associates project will, over a                     
              five year period, develop and maintain a network of a                          
              minimum of 60 middle/high school teachers and 40 agency and                    
              university geoscientists and university science educators.                     
              Project activities will be delivered at multiple sites                         
              including a summer program at the University of Wisconsin-                     
              Madison campus; a conference at the Wisconsin Academy of                       
              Science (Madison), a summer field trip to selected areas;                      
              and a retreat at the UW System Pigeon Lake field station.                      
              The project consists of: 1. selecting exemplary middle/high                    
              school teachers who have a strong background in one or more                    
              of the earth sciences and selecting university, agency and                     
              business geoscientists with an interest in pre-college earth                   
              science education; 2. enhancing content in earth sciences of                   
              teacher participants through class and field experiences; 3.                   
              enhancing teacher participants' background in learning and                     
              teaching through class readings and discussions, and all                       
              participants through conference speakers and discussions; 4.                   
              developing a knowledge of existing programs and materials                      
              for teaching activity based earth science; 5. participants                     
              conducting local, district, and state workshops and seminars                   
              for teachers; and developing an ongoing network.  The                          
              project proposes to directly effect an estimated 1,500                         
              students in the teachers' classes each year, an estimated                      
              200 teachers at workshops scheduled each year, as well as a                    
              large number of teachers attending information sharing                         
              presentations at state and area conferences.
