Title       : Final Development of a New Approach to Introductory Materials Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1992    
File        : a9155924

Award Number: 9155924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29205              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. McMahon cmcmahon@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles D. Graham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              This project supports a workshop aimed at the familiarization                  
              of teachers of introductory courses in materials science and                   
              engineering with a new approach developed over the past four                   
              years at the University of Pennsylvania.  The goals are to                     
              stimulate these teachers to experiment with this approach and                  
              to give input into the text developed for the new course, which                
              is approaching the stage of final revision.  The course is                     
              aimed at first- or second-year undergraduates in any                           
              engineering discipline, including materials science, and at                    
              non-engineering students with advanced high-school-level                       
              preparation in physics, chemistry, and calculus.  The                          
              innovation consists in placing all the topics covered in the                   
              now-traditional type of introductory course into a familiar                    
              context for students encountering the subject for the first                    
              time.  This is done by using the bicycle and the Walkman as the                
              paradigms for, in effect, two giant case studies.  The use of                  
              these contexts enables the student to comprehend the subject in                
              a unified way in a one-semester course and to be able to apply                 
              it to engineering situations.  It has also stimulated more of                  
              them to pursue the subject at a higher level than was the case                 
              with the traditional-type of course.  The potential impact of                  
              this new approach is a significant increase in the number of                   
              engineering students able to apply the basic principles of                     
              materials science and engineering in their own disciplines,  as                
              well as some increase in the number of uncommitted students                    
              attracted to engineering as a major.
