Title       : Public Participation in Ornithology: An Introduction to Environmental Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9155700

Award Number: 9155700
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara H. Butler                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $807937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Bonney reb5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Walcott  (Principal Investigator former)
              Gregory S. Butcher  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 9177,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Ornithology is one of the few scientific disciplines to which                  
              amateurs can still make significant contributions.  Whether they               
              observe birds at a feeder, count birds for a national census, or               
              conduct a simple experiment, their activities contribute greatly               
              to our knowledge of birds.  Furthermore, participants in bird                  
              study programs not only learn about birds, they also become more               
              aware of environmental problems.  The Cornell Laboratory of                    
              Ornithology exists to facilitate such amateur involvement and                  
              education.  This proposal is aimed at strengthening our                        
              education programs and expanding them to include under-served                  
              audiences in the inner city.                                                   
                                                                                             
              We propose to evaluate the extent to which our radio program,                  
              magazine, and Project FeederWatch appeal to various audiences                  
              and how effective these programs are at communicating                          
              information about birds and in stimulating involvement.  Based                 
              on this evaluation, we will modify our programs, then evaluate                 
              them again.  Based on this evaluation, we will modify our                      
              programs, then evaluate them again.  We are also proposing a                   
              brand-new volunteer-assisted data gathering program, which we                  
              call the National Science Experiment.  In cooperation with other               
              organizations, volunteers will look at the biology of pigeons in               
              our cities, food preferences of winter birds across the United                 
              States, and the habitat requirements of neotropical migrant                    
              tanagers.  The results of these studies will be of interest to                 
              both ornithologists and birders; furthermore, participants in                  
              the project will gain first-hand involvement with the process of               
              science.
