Title       : The Integration of Economic Principles with Design in the Engineering Science
               Component of the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1994     
File        : a9155917

Award Number: 9155917
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Chalmers F. Sechrist                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $557799             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald J. Thuesen gthuesen@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William G. Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project demonstrates how the design activity, fully                       
              integrated with economic principles, can be effectively                        
              utilized to teach the engineering science component of the                     
              undergraduate curriculum.  The project builds on and extends                   
              the experimental core curriculum being developed at Texas A&M                  
              University (under NSF funding) such that design and economic                   
              principles become infused into required engineering science                    
              courses in the curriculum at the Georgia Institute of                          
              Technology.  Professors from four engineering disciplines at                   
              Georgia Tech will be developing and testing the experimental                   
              courses over several years and reporting their experiences with                
              a design-focused teaching paradigm.  Additionally, a new course                
              is being developed focusing on the economics of engineering                    
              design that bridges from the lower to the upper division in the                
              undergraduate curriculum.  Professors from six different                       
              universities are assisting in the preparation of educational                   
              materials for this new course and for the economics components                 
              of the modified engineering science core courses.  To provide                  
              a second experimental test bed for this course, Virginia                       
              Polytechnic Institute and State University and North Carolina                  
              A&T State University will teach it during the second and third                 
              years, and the third year, respectively, of the project.                       
              Evaluation procedures for the modified engineering science core                
              courses at Georgia Tech and for the economics of design course                 
              are being developed and carried out over the duration of the                   
              research.  Effective mechanisms for transferring results are                   
              planned to be developed.  Significant support exists for this                  
              multidisciplinary effort as evidenced by the fact that one-                    
              third of the entire budget is being cost-shared by                             
              participating institutions.  Finally, a National Visiting                      
              Committee is being formed to interact with the project.
