Title       : The Delaware Teacher Enhancement Partnership: A Model for Implementing the
               National Council of Teachers of Mathematics(NCTM) Standards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1992      
File        : a9155307

Award Number: 9155307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry Kepner                            
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1107555            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald H. Wenger   (Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford W. Sloyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beatriz D'Ambrosio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen Hollowell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The University of Delaware will conduct a four-year project                    
              to enhance 230 mathematics teachers and administrators of                      
              grades 7 through 9 in making mathematical connections, in                      
              problem solving, and in reasoning and communicating about                      
              mathematics.  The focus of participants' mathematical                          
              experiences will be situation-centered mathematics tasks                       
              conducted in a technologically rich learning environment.                      
              Teacher involvement will use the teacher-as-learner and                        
              teacher-as-researcher models.                                                  
                                                                                             
              Teacher participants will be expected to attend at least                       
              two  three-week summer workshops, with administrators                          
              attending at least one day per summer of these workshops to                    
              understand the spirit of the models being used.                                
              Mathematics content focus will be on combinatorics and                         
              probability (1991 pilot), functions and statistics (1992),                     
              geometry and discrete mathematics (1993),  summarizing,                        
              organizing into Standards curricula for grades 7 through 9,                    
              and leadership training (1994), and leadership and                             
              dissemination (1995).  During the school year, weekly two-                     
              hour after school meetings will be held in each district                       
              where the previous summer workshop participants will coach                     
              their colleagues, new lessons will be piloted, and                             
              curricula planned.                                                             
              In addition, monthly three-hour workshops will be held                         
              where project staff will extend and clarify summer                             
              material.  Lastly, project staff will visit schools twice                      
              per week.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The project includes a collaborative learning component for                    
              administrators where they will consider basic leadership                       
              tasks needed to facilitate change.  The project  will also                     
              involve substantial collaboration with 8 of Delaware's 16                      
              public school districts.  Thorough dissemination of the                        
              program's features and implementation strategies for                           
              replicating the project will be undertaken in the remaining                    
              8 districts and the 3 vocational-technical districts in                        
              Delaware.  The project is endorsed by the Delaware State                       
              Systemic Initiatives Project 21.  University of Delaware                       
              and school district cost-sharing accounts for 37% of the                       
              NSF budget.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The project is well-planned, employing methodology                             
              suggested by current research in the teaching and learning                     
              of mathematics, and is systemic in nature.  It addresses                       
              the many facets of the educational system needed to insure                     
              change in the classroom.
