Title       : Documenting and Understanding Young Children's Science Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9155341

Award Number: 9155341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Snyder                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $747463             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ted A. Chittenden   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gita Z. Wilder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacqueline Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Educational Testing Serv
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08541    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Students learn scientific concepts and acquire science                         
              process skills in different sequences and at different                         
              rates. Highly effective teaching requires an awareness of                      
              where a child is in the process of concept and skill                           
              development. Dr. Ted Chittenden of the Educational Testing                     
              Service proposes an effort that combines research with                         
              teacher enhancement. Dr. Chittenden and a cadre of                             
              experienced kindergarten and primary school teachers will                      
              research two important questions: 1) Can systematic                            
              documentation of student speech, writing, and artwork add                      
              significantly to teacher effectiveness in science teaching?                    
              2) What training, materials, and institutional supports are                    
              needed to realize this added effectiveness?  In-class                          
              research by the teachers and project leaders will lead to                      
              the development of prototypical protocols and materials for                    
              training teachers to use documentation in their teaching                       
              practices.  The Educational Testing Service will develop                       
              these prototypes into marketable tools for teacher                             
              enhancement to be disseminated in partnership with a                           
              publisher.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The proposed research has the potential to establish an                        
              important new tool for science teaching in early childhood                     
              classrooms.  The teacher enhancement materials that will                       
              emerge from this research could have wide impact on teachers                   
              and schools.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This project is supported jointly by the Teacher Enhancement                   
              Program and the Research in Teaching and Learning Program.                     
              The Educational Testing Service is cost sharing on this                        
              project by underwriting the costs of developing the                            
              prototype materials into marketable products.
