Title       : An Active-Learning Curriculum for Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1992       
File        : a9155929

Award Number: 9155929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia A. Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
              Harriet J. Fell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Viera K. Proulx  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Rasala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              An Active-Learning Curriculum for Computer Science                             
              This project is producing a series of learning modules designed                
              to help students to develop the problem solving skills central                 
              to doing computer science.  Each module is a collection of                     
              interactive visualizations and related materials centered                      
              around a fundamental concept in computer science.  Typical                     
              materials include a student guide and a teacher's guide, the                   
              code for the visualization programs, manipulative materials                    
              such as games or puzzles, a collection of exercises, suggested                 
              closed labs and programming projects, and a Hypercard stack                    
              containing an explanation of the module's central topic and an                 
              annotated bibliography.  The code portion of the modules is                    
              carefully designed to teach basic software engineering                         
              principles, both directly and by example.                                      
                                                                                             
              Manipulative materials allow the students to gain an intuitive                 
              feeling for the problem to be solved.  Visualizations                          
              illustrate the central topic, a programming construct, a data                  
              structure, or an algorithm.  Each program is designed                          
              individually, so that the graphic animation best represents the                
              desired concept, and the user interface allows for interactive                 
              user experimentation.  The visualizations can also be used to                  
              demonstrate concepts in lectures.  The Hypercard stacks give                   
              background information and in-depth explanations that students                 
              can explore at their own pace.                                                 
                                                                                             
              All software is being developed on Macintosh computers in THINK                
              Pascal using QuickDraw.  Students have access to the source                    
              code, for reading and for reuse in their own projects.
