Title       : Living on Earth...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1992 
File        : a9155407

Award Number: 9155407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen T. Curwood scurwood@post.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : World Media Fdtn
	      55 Wheeler Street
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/868-8659

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              LIVING ON EARTH is a new weekly National Public Radio                          
              newsmagazine about the people and politics of environmental                    
              change.  It goes beyond the ecological segments on NPR's ALL                   
              THINGS CONSIDERED and MORNING EDITION to meet the growing demand               
              for consistent, high quality, balanced and in-depth coverage of                
              the environment, and scientific discoveries and advancements                   
              relevant to the rapidly changing ecology of our planet.                        
                                                                                             
              Audience research consistently shows that information about the                
              environment is a priority to a broad majority of public radio                  
              listeners, and these listeners are twice as likely as all adults               
              to take personal and political action in relation to                           
              environmental concerns.  With the premiere of Living On Earth in               
              April 1991, public radio in the U.S. began serving its national                
              audience with its first journalistically strong environmental                  
              show, Living On Earth.                                                         
                                                                                             
              Each week's edition of Living On Earth begins with a one minute                
              billboard, followed by a five minute newscast summarizing                      
              national and world ecological and scientific developments.  The                
              newscast includes modular breaks so that stations can insert two               
              minutes of local environmental news.                                           
                                                                                             
              The balance of each program is devoted to a theme, with produced               
              reports followed by a five minute newscast summarizing national                
              and world ecological and scientific developments.  The newscast                
              includes modular breaks so that stations can insert two minutes                
              of local environmental news.                                                   
                                                                                             
              The balance of each program is devoted to a theme, with produced               
              reports followed by interviews, commentaries, and occasional                   
              humor.  From time to time the show is devoted to a full-length                 
              documentary or debate special.  Standards of thoroughness,                     
              fairness, and excellence result in shows that stimulate as well                
              as inform.  Distributed by National Public Radio, the program is               
              available to more than 400 NPR stations in the U.S.  Already 160               
              of those stations have signed up to air the program.                           
                                                                                             
              Many environmental issues -- sustainable energy, population,                   
              biological degradation, sustainable economic development and                   
              pollution, for example -- are of global concern and cut across                 
              political, racial and cultural boundaries.  Material and                       
              information for Living On Earth is obtained from diverse                       
              producers and will be exchanged with public radio services                     
              around the world.   //
