Title       : Multi-Level Science: Genetics from DNA to Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 13,  1994   
File        : a9155724

Award Number: 9155724
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1404297            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Horwitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Neumann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : BBN Laboratories Inc
	      33 Moulton Street
	      Cambridge, MA  021381118    617/873-4277

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A fundamental aspect of the complexity of modern science is                    
              the existence of multiple levels of abstraction embedding                      
              multiple layers of meaning and representation.  This deep                      
              structure permeates virtually all areas of biology -                           
              developmental biology, physiology, anatomy, and genetics.                      
              Genetics, in particular, considers DNA, genes, chromosomes,                    
              individual organisms, kin, and populations.  Behavior at                       
              each level is, in important ways, the functional consequence                   
              of processes that take place at lower levels.  The                             
              overarching conceptual framework for this project is the                       
              inherent multi-level scale of genetic phenomena.  We plan,                     
              through the use of advanced technology, to model this                          
              conceptual framework and to investigate its implications for                   
              the learning and teaching of genetics.  We have chosen the                     
              subject of genetics as our initial area of focus for several                   
              reasons: it embodies a rich multi-level structure which                        
              lends itself perfectly to investigating the research issues;                   
              the dramatic advances in the science of genetics and                           
              genetics technology have important consequences for                            
              individuals and society; it is a rapidly changing area of                      
              enormous scientific interest in its own right; and it                          
              presents extraordinary difficulties to learning and                            
              teaching.  We plan to develop GenScope, an interactive                         
              computer environment that presents the linked multi-level                      
              processes of genetics visually, dynamically, and in ways                       
              that make explicit the casual connections and interactions                     
              between them.  The primary thrust of our project will be to                    
              investigate the educational use and benefits from student                      
              work with this environment, complemented by laboratory and                     
              classroom activities.  Our hypothesis is that students will                    
              acquire a deeper understanding of the fundamental ideas,                       
              subsuming and spanning molecular, individual, and population                   
              genetics.
