Title       : Arithmetic Project: Fractional Schemes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1995   
File        : a9155734

Award Number: 9155734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara Lovitts                         
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $391486             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adalira Saenz-Ludlow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this project is to conduct a longitudinal                       
              study that will investigate, over a period of two years, teh                   
              constructive paths that children generate when solving                         
              problematic situations that deal with fractional numbers,                      
              and the communication patterns that they develop in their                      
              efforts to explain their solutions.  Twelve children will                      
              participate in the study when they are in third grade and                      
              again when they are in fourth grade.  The researchers will                     
              develop models of the children's constructive processes in                     
              generating fractional numbers and will also develop models                     
              of the communication patterns of student-student and                           
              student-teacher social interaction.                                            
                                                                                             
              Several research questions form the basis of this                              
              longitudinal study: Is children's ability to construct and                     
              operate with different composite units essential in the                        
              construction of part-whole relations that children can                         
              quantify fractionally using the multiplicity of the parts in                   
              the whole?  Does conventional symbolization of fractions                       
              require a priori developmental constructive processes of the                   
              concept of fractions before it becomes meaningful to a                         
              child?  Do children generate their own algorithms to operate                   
              with fractions?  Are these algorithms similar to the                           
              conventional ones?  What do children gain cognitively from                     
              social interaction and under what circumstances?  What                         
              aspects of social interaction contribute to children's                         
              advances of their fraction concepts?  Are there differences                    
              in the role of social interaction depending on the child's                     
              age?                                                                           
                                                                                             
              The results of this project will contribute to the                             
              understanding of 1) children's conceptualizations of                           
              fractions over a long period of time (two years); 2) the                       
              influence of their knowledge of natural numbers on the                         
              constructive development of fractional numbers; 3) the role                    
              of social interaction (with peers and teacher) in the                          
              construction and evolution of children's concepts of                           
              fractions; 4) the cognitive demands required to symbolize                      
              concepts that had been developed mentally and verbalized                       
              using natural language.
