Title       : "Roman City"...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1993     
File        : a9155161

Award Number: 9155161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392820             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry Klein pgiupi@earthlink.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Unicorn Projects Inc
	      2201 Wisconsin Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  20007    202/965-7558

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 7259,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              "Roman City," fourth in a series of PBS specials based on the                  
              acclaimed books of David Macaulay, is an hour-long film that                   
              traces the planning, engineering, building and habitation of an                
              ancient Roman city at the height of empire.  The program                       
              continues the unique Macaulay presentation format of a                         
              cinemaquality animated dramatic story juxtaposed with live-                    
              action documentary segments, hosted by Mr. Macaulay and filmed                 
              at actual sites portrayed in the story.  Each film roots its                   
              dominant structures and technology firmly within the thought and               
              culture of its historical period.  The dual presentation style                 
              has enabled the previous Macaulay specials to capture a wide                   
              range of viewers from young children all the way up to older                   
              adults.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              "Roman City," as well as the previous award-winning Macaulay                   
              specials--"Castle," "Cathedral" and "Pyramid"--is specifically                 
              aimed at enhancing the scientific, technical and humanistic                    
              understanding of both young people and adults outside of the                   
              formal educational environment.  All indication from the                       
              previous programs suggests that this goal has been widely                      
              achieved.  There is a natural curiosity about other cultures,                  
              about things technical and how they interrelate with human needs               
              and aspirations, and we believe our unique format satisfies that               
              curiosity in an entertaining, informative and educational                      
              manner.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The ancient Romans achieved breakthroughs in planning and the                  
              delivery of those elements deemed necessary for the functioning                
              of an increasingly world.  Aqueducts, sewers, roads, bridges,                  
              amphitheaters and public buildings, even public lavatories, all                
              speak to the technical mastery of the ancient Romans.  And if                  
              their social aims were not always as "advanced" as their                       
              scientific and technological sophistication, then that, too,                   
              provides a modern object lesson on the critical and mutually                   
              dependent interrelationship of science and civilization.
