Title       : Univeristy of Arizona Biology Teaching Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1999     
File        : a9155220

Award Number: 9155220
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David B. Campbell                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $890858             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa K. Elfring elfring@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha L. Narro  (Principal Investigator former)
              Walter Doyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Larson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martinez J. Hewlett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is a five year program that will provide in-                      
              service education for high school and middle school biology                    
              teachers.  Project goals are to update teachers' content                       
              knowledge in the biological sciences, increase their                           
              research experience, and increase their experience                             
              developing and using hands-on student activities.                              
              Innovative courses for a new master's degree in biology                        
              teaching will be tested.  In addition, the project will                        
              promote continuing collaboration between precollege and                        
              university science faculty of the University of Arizona.                       
              Activities for participating teachers to be offered at the                     
              University of Arizona include the study of exemplary                           
              curricula,the study and modification of the Introductory                       
              Biology laboratories, and research opportunities in biology                    
              and education.  Interactive courses on pedagogy in biology,                    
              developing hands-on lessons and, special topics in biology                     
              will also be offered.                                                          
                                                                                             
              All activities are designed to maximize interaction between                    
              precollege science teachers and university faculty in the                      
              biological sciences and education.  Stipends will be                           
              provided for participants and graduate credit will be given                    
              for all activities.  Approximately 150 teachers in Tucson                      
              and surrounding communities will participate in project                        
              activities.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              A network of Master Teachers will be established from                          
              program participants.  Master Teachers will conduct one-week                   
              workshops at the University of Arizona and at Northern                         
              Arizona University for other teachers in the state which                       
              will be cost-shared by local school districts.  These                          
              workshops will serve approximately 270 additional teachers                     
              in Arizona.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing equals 98.4 % of the NSF award.
