Title       : Presidential Young Investigator: Synthesis of Glycopeptides and Conformational
               Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1995      
File        : a9057130

Award Number: 9057130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Kahne   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9183,9227,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Daniel E. Kahne will be supported as a Presidential Young                  
              Investigator by the Organic Synthesis Program.  He will be                     
              studying how the attachment of carbohydrates to a peptide                      
              alters its structure and in so doing modulates the biological                  
              activity.  New methods of synthesizing glycopeptides will be                   
              developed in order to facilitate the necessary                                 
              structure-function studies.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The first step involves working out strategies to synthesize                   
              glycopeptides.  Currently a glycosylation method is being                      
              developed that can be used to attach sugars to amino acids                     
              rapidly and in good yield.  Glycopeptides will be incorporated                 
              using solid phase synthesis.  This will primarily involve                      
              manipulation of protecting group schemes so that the                           
              carbohydrate moiety can be deprotected and the glycopeptide                    
              cleaved from the resin without hydrolysis of glycosidic bonds.                 
                                                                                             
              The glycopeptide sequences will have been chosen from                          
              systemswhere there is evidence that the carbohydrate induces a                 
              conformational change in the peptide.  Initial studies will be                 
              confined to peptide sequences of six to eight amino acids.                     
              Proton NMR will be used to compare the structure of the                        
              glycopeptide with its nonglycosylated analogue to evaluate the                 
              effects of the attached carbohydrate.  Assignments and coupling                
              constants can be obtained from homonuclear (phase-sensitive)                   
              and heteronuclear correlation spectroscoyy.  Through-space                     
              interactions (dipolar coupling) obtained from NOESY or                         
              spin-locked (transverse) NOE spectroscopy will give information                
              about the solution conformations.  Additional information about                
              conformational structure and dynamics can be obtained by                       
              measuring amide exchange rates and relaxation times.  The                      
              studies should begin to give a better understanding of how                     
              attached carbohydrates can modulate secondary structure in                     
              glycosylated regions of proteins.
