Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award-Stochastic Modeling of Earthquakes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1998  
File        : a9057052

Award Number: 9057052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311442             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yan Yong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,9227,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This action provides the base support for research during the                  
              initial year of the Presidential Young Investigator (PYI)                      
              Award.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              The 5-year continuing project, initiated in FY 90, will focus                  
              on the development of theoretical bases and earthquake                         
              engineering applications of stochastic processes.  Two major                   
              topics of study will be pursued.  (1) Stochastic Modeling of                   
              Plane Sources - Instead of traditional model treating the                      
              seismic dislocation source as points along a geological fault,                 
              a more refined and realistic plane model will be developed.                    
              A continous source region is divided into a finite number of                   
              point dislocation sources characterized by multiple correlated                 
              Poisson random processes.  The near field ground motions will                  
              be simulated by combining the deterministic wave propagation                   
              model and the random seismic source model.  (2) Sensitivity                    
              Analysis of Earthquake Response of Structures - The measure                    
              of the sensitivity for a structural system is defined by what                  
              is called a sensitivity function, which is a scaler for the                    
              variation of a single parameter in a single-output system; a                   
              vector for variations of multiple parameters in a single-                      
              output system; or a rectangular matrix for variations of                       
              multiple parameters in a multiple-output system.  The                          
              sensitivity with respect to the time domain variations of                      
              mass, stiffness and damping at the same time also will be                      
              investigated.  The sensitivity will be calculated from a set                   
              of sensitivity equations obtained from the governing                           
              differential equations.  For more complicated cases where                      
              multiple outputs are considered, numerical computation and                     
              simulation techniques will be used.                                            
                                                                                             
              Unlike the time domain analysis, the response sensitivity in                   
              the frequency domain is independent of the input signals.                      
              Four measures of sensitivity, namely, the Bode, Horowitz,                      
              comparison sensitivity functions and Root sensitivities will                   
              be examined.  These sensitivity analyses will be used to                       
              evaluate the performance of the control of earthquake excited                  
              structures.
