Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Awards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1994       
File        : a9057203

Award Number: 9057203
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald T. Raines RAINES@biochem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9119,9227,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to understand how the amino acid                  
              sequence of an enzyme encodes its three-dimensional structure,                 
              and how this structure manifests itself in function.Enzyme                     
              function and protein structure are both manifestations of                      
              molecular recognition.  The PI is using the tools of chemistry,                
              biochemistry, and molecular biology to determine how molecular                 
              recognition leads to enzyme action.  The research concentrates on              
              two facets of molecular recognition: enzyme-substrate recognition              
              (that is, enzymatic catalysis) and intramolecular protein-protein              
              recognition (that is, protein folding).  Dr. Reines is focusing                
              on catalysis by and folding of ribonuclease A (RNase A).  By                   
              analyzing in detail the structure and function of mutant RNase                 
              A's, they are delineating the contribution of particular amino                 
              acid residues to substrate recognition and turnover and to                     
              protein folding.  They are also interested in protein disulfide                
              isomerase (PDI), which catalyzes the interchange of disulfide                  
              bonds in other proteins.  They have cloned the cDNA that codes                 
              for PDI, and are attempting to express it in yeast.  The goal is               
              to illuminate the mechanism of catalysis by PDI.  A considerable               
              effort is being made to develop efficient, selective catalysts                 
              for the synthesis and degradation of complex molecules.  Much                  
              inspiration for this effort has come from the study of nature's                
              catalysts, the enzymes.  Illuminating the molecular interactions               
              that give rise to substrate binding and turnover may provide the               
              knowledge necessary to design a protein structure that catalyzes               
              a specific chemical reaction.  This knowledge, together with the               
              ability to specify a sequence of amino acids that folds into a                 
              desired three-dimensional structure, would allow protein                       
              engineers to create novel catalysts for medicinal analyses and                 
              therapies, and for industrial processes.
