Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1994     
File        : a9057233

Award Number: 9057233
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Gross   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Lowell Res Fdn
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  01854    978/934-4750

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1773,9163,9181,9227,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research involves exploiting the biodegradability,                        
              chirality, and spatial order of biopolymers for the construction               
              of important new materials.  The bacterial polyesters, cellulose,              
              and lysozyme have been selected for this work.                                 
                                                                                             
              Poly(hydroxybutyrate-co-hydroxyvalerate), PHBV, derived from                   
              bacterial fermentation is being used to obtain materials which                 
              have identical compositions but differ in the crystalline lattice              
              structure, crystalline perfection, spherulite size, and percent                
              crystallinity.  Synthetic analogues of bacterial polyesters are                
              being synthesized by carrying out a ring-opening polymerization                
              of enantiomerically pure n-alkyl lactones.  PHBV is being blended              
              with other polymers to develop different morphologies.  The                    
              microbial degradability of these samples will then be studied                  
              using variable biological environments.  In this way, fundamental              
              relationships between polymer structure, morphology, and                       
              degradability will be established.                                             
                                                                                             
              Cellulose derivatives will be used to form liquid crystalline                  
              polymeric materials where the cholesteric pitch will be highly                 
              sensitive to external signals.  By synthesizing cellulose                      
              derivatives which have photo- and electroresponsive groups                     
              attached at controlled sites along the chain, relationships                    
              between polymer design, the aplied external signal, and the                    
              optical rotatory properties of the material will be established.               
              This concept will be extended to other chiral biopolymer based                 
              systems to explore the effects of chain dynamics on response                   
              time.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              The insertion of photo- and electroresponsive groups at selective              
              sites of the protein lysozyme will be used to initiate research                
              into the modulation of enzyme conformation, and therefore                      
              activity.  The goal of this work is to explore methods which                   
              allow enzymes to essentially be turned on and off in response to               
              external signals which alter the spatial arrangements at protein               
              catalytic sites.  These proteins may provide novel routes for the              
              transmission of light and electrical signals.
