Title       : Presidential Young Investigators Award: Bioheat Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1994      
File        : a9057412

Award Number: 9057412
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George P. Peterson                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126183             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Baish   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9227,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The problem of heat transfer in a single blood vessel is well                   
                                                                                            
              understood because of its similarity to the case of duct flow.                 
                                                                                             
              But the collective effects of the entire vasculature are not                   
                                                                                             
              easily modeled.  The primary difficulties arise from the large                 
                                                                                             
              number of vessels, their wide range of sizes, their                            
              complicated, tree-like geometry and the time dependence of the                 
                                                                                             
              blood flow due to thermoregulation.  Most existing models are                  
                                                                                             
              based on some sort of volume average of the energy equation                    
              that yields an effective medium theory.  Typically, the blood                  
                                                                                             
              is assumed to act as a distributed heat sink or an enhancement                 
                                                                                             
              to the thermal conductivity of the tissue.  But there has been                 
                                                                                             
              considerable debate over the proper form of such models with                   
              the earlier work of the author suggesting that no single model                 
                                                                                             
              is valid under all circumstances.  In fact, effective medium                   
              theories may need to be discarded entirely in some cases.                      
              The aim of this research is to explore new ways of modeling                    
              heat transfer in tissue.  As one approach to this                              
              problem, concepts from fractal geometry will be used to                        
              represent various vascular architectures.  Another approach                    
              will be based on a recent proof of the author that blood                       
              vessels often act like conductive fibers.  A new concept of                    
              bioheat transfer results:  the tissue and vasculature may be                   
              viewed as a composite of conductive materials.  The                            
              implications of this model have yet to be fully explored.                      
              Finally, a control systems approach will be used to                            
              investigate the role of thermoregulation on tissue-level heat                  
                                                                                             
              transfer.  This will extend existing studies of                                
              thermoregulation that emphasize the whole body or regional                     
              response.  An experimental program is also planned to                          
              supplement the analytical and numerical studies.                               
                                                                                             
              The outcome of this research will be immediately valuable to                   
                                                                                             
              the designers of clinical equipment.  A reliable underlying                    
              theory is essential to the intelligent design of heating                       
              applicators and thermal sensors.  New technologies that                        
              improve safety and comfort in thermally stressful environments                 
                                                                                             
              may also result.
