Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1995   
File        : a9057312

Award Number: 9057312
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George B. Vermont                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Russell ajrche@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9181,9227,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              It is proposed to isolate a library of genomic DNA from                        
              the archaebacter Methanococcus jannaschii.  The organism                       
              is an extreme thermo- and barophile, its natural habitat                       
              being in the vicinity of a deep-sea hydrothermal vent at                       
              a pressure of 260 atm. (Methanococcus jannaschii is the                        
              most thermophilic organism from which DNA has been                             
              isolated with a laboratory growth optimum of 92oC).  The                       
              DNA from this extraordinary microorganism will be cloned                       
              into Escherichia coli using standard molecular biology                         
              procedures.  The genomic library will be screened for the                      
              gene encoding a hydrogenase enzyme.   Expression of the                        
              hydrogenase gene, using an approach which has already                          
              proved successful in cloning methanogenic bacterial                            
              genes, will enable not only the investigation of the                           
              processes controlling extreme thermostability and                              
              barophilicity, but also the production of a potentially                        
              valuable commercial enzyme.  Using the approaches of                           
              site-directed and random mutagenesis a family of similar                       
              enzymes with differing responses to temperature and                            
              pressure will be generated.  This series of closely                            
              related mutant enzymes will be far easier to compare than                      
              a set of related hydrogenases isolated from meso- and                          
              thermophiles.  Since the enzyme is extremely                                   
              thermostable, it should be possible to delineate some of                       
              the structure-function relationships which give rise to                        
              marked stability.  Of particular interest is the response                      
              of the hydrogenase to increased pressure (especially                           
              since there could be a physiological role for such a                           
              response in deep sea organisms).  The pressure regulation                      
              of this enzyme will be investigated in detail.  Some                           
              enzymes are activated or inactivated by large pressure                         
              changes, but, this hydrogenase is the first enzyme which                       
              triples activity over a relatively small change in                             
              pressure from 7.5 to 260 atm.  The kinetic results of the                      
              proposed research will be related to the structure of the                      
              enzyme.  In addition, enough enzyme will be purified to                        
              enable an early attempt at crystallization.
