Title       : Presidential Young Investigators Award: Experimental Investigations of
               Convective Heat Transfer in Complex Internal Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9057465

Award Number: 9057465
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfonso Ortega ortega@ccit.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9227,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The emphasis of this research is in Experimental                               
              Investigations of Convective Heat Transport in Complex                         
              Internal Flows.  Particularly emphasized is forced                             
              convection cooling of electronics, wherein the internal                        
              passageways formed by adjacent printed circuit boards promote                  
              highly disturbed flow.  Other examples of complex, internal                    
              heat transfer occur in gas-cooled heat exchangers where tube                   
              arrays form regions of through-flow interacting with separated                 
              flow and internal cooling of advanced gas turbine blades                       
              where heat transfer enhancement devices, such as short pin                     
              ins or periodic rib turbulators, are cast into the walls.  All                 
              of these internal flows exhibit phenomenological features that                 
              make them difficult to predict including:  (1) regions of                      
              separated and reattaching flow, (2) regions containing                         
              secondary motions, and (3) high levels of turbulence in the                    
              mean flow.  This research focuses on experimental studies                      
              on three canonical geometries that together exhibit all of                     
              these features.  These geometries are:  (1) the                                
              two-dimensional rearward facing step, or surface fence, (2)                    
              the two-dimensional channel with repeated rib roughness, and                   
              (3) the two-dimensional channel with three-dimensional                         
              roughness on one or both walls.  The first configuration is                    
              the least specialized.  In this branch of the research, the                    
              effects of free-stream turbulence on the heat transfer in the                  
              recirculation, reattachment, and redeveloping boundary layer                   
              region are examined.  Specifically, the measurements include                   
              turbulent heat transfer and, simultaneously, momentum                          
              transport, in order to clarify existing models of turbulent                    
              diffusion in non-equilibrium wall flows.  The role of                          
              free-stream  turbulence in reattaching separated flows is                      
              largely unexplored, even though flow in real devices may be                    
              highly "disturbed" due to upstream effects.  The second major                  
              branch of the research centers on experimental investigations                  
              of fully-developed channel flow with regions of separation and                 
              reattachment as exhibited by the two-dimensional channel with                  
              repeated rib roughness and the channel with three-dimensional                  
              large roughness.  There is a remarkable unifying relationship                  
              between the convective heat transfer in all of these cases.                    
              For example, the dimensionless heat transfer rate, the Nusselt                 
              number, increases as about the 2/3 power of the Reynolds                       
              number in all of these cases.  Furthermore, this relationship                  
              seems to hold for both small-scale roughness, of certain                       
              types, and large-scale protrusions or ribs.  The transport                     
              phenomena that produce this universal behavior are being                       
              examined  with the hope of identifying the roles of scale,                     
              viscous and molecular diffusion, and turbulent transport.
