Title       : Presidential Young Investigators Award: Modification of Protein Structure Near
               Charged Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9057119

Award Number: 9057119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen K. Gleason kkgleasn@athena.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9227,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The focus of this PYI research is on achieving a fundamental                   
              understanding of thin films and Interfacial Transport by                       
              utilization of state-of-the-art NMR techniques.  Several                       
              diverse areas of focus are:                                                    
                                                                                             
              Hydrogen in SiO2 Thin Films and at Si/SiO2 Interfaces - The use                
              of < 100 A thick films and lower growth temperatures in                        
              integrated circuit manufacture leads to increased hydrogen                     
              incorporation.  In SiO2 films, hydrogen is proposed to                         
              pasivate electrical defects, modify oxidation kinetics, and                    
              alter film properties.                                                         
                                                                                             
              Crystalline Diamond Thin Films - Improved understanding of                     
              diamond nucleation and growth is needed in order to deposit                    
              single crystalline films over large areas, as desired for                      
              semiconductor applications.                                                    
                                                                                             
              Photoresist Thin Films - Efforts to optimize and control                       
              microlithographic processes are influenced by the density                      
              variations and motion in polymeric photoresist films.                          
                                                                                             
              Proteins Near Charge Interfaces - Transport across biological                  
              membranes and several bioseparation and biocatalysis                           
              techniques involve proteins near charged interfaces.  Changes                  
              in tertiary protein structure induced by thorough preferential                 
              interaction with charged and polar protein segments can be                     
              observed directly with NMR.  Reversed micelles, having few                     
              chemical components and large surface areas, provide a                         
              relatively simple system for initial study.                                    
                                                                                             
              A fundamental understanding of thin films and interfaces is a                  
              crucial components of process optimization in the                              
              microelectronics and biotechnology industries.  Unique and                     
              valuable information is elucidated through the application of                  
              selected nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques to study                  
              the atomic scale structure of thin films and interfaces.  This                 
              knowledge can be used to develop and test atomistic models of                  
              film growth and interfacial chemistry, with the ultimate goal                  
              of tailoring chemical processes for desired application.
