Title       : Presidential Young Investigators Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1994      
File        : a9057406

Award Number: 9057406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip R. Westmoreland westm@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,9227,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award is to provide research support to Dr. Westmoreland                  
              under the National Science Foundation's Presidential Young                     
              Investigator Awards (PYIA) Program.  The objectives of the                     
              PYIA Program are to provide support to the Nation's most                       
              outstanding and promising young science and engineering                        
              faculty.  The awards are intended to improve the capability of                 
              U.S. academic institutions to respond to the demand for highly                 
              qualified science and engineering personnel for academic and                   
              industrial research and teaching.  Dr. Westmoreland's field of                 
              research is the study of chemical reactions ranging from the                   
              plasma fabrication of microelectronic devices to combustion                    
              and pyrolysis.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              He plans to combine molecular-beam mass spectrometry (MBMS)                    
              with optical spectroscopy, gas chromatography, and GC/MS to                    
              map concentrations within laboratory reactors.  This                           
              combination permits quantitative measurements both of reactive                 
              species (free radicals, singlet species like silicon                           
              dihydride, and ions) and of stable species.  Plasma-enhanced                   
              chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) of amorphous silicon films                   
              from silane will be studied in an MBMS apparatus.  A near-term                 
              goal is describing the existing commercial PECVD of amorphous                  
              silicon: hydrogen, silicon dioxide, and silicon-nitrogen films                 
              with sufficient accuracy for process and product-quality                       
              control, but understanding at a molecular scale will also be                   
              later directed toward new films and applications.  His goals                   
              in combustion and pyrolysis are to establish and apply                         
              detailed chemical mechanisms of oxidation and growth,                          
              particularly the formation of aromatics.  He will study three                  
              carbon hydrocarbons (propane, propene, propyne, and                            
              propadiene) to determine whether three carbon radicals form                    
              benzene, whether the benzene is formed via four carbon radical                 
              pathways,  and whether molecular or insertion reactions might                  
              also be involved.
