Title       : Presidential Young Investigator Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1994       
File        : a9057157

Award Number: 9057157
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Madeline A. Shea   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9227,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Individual-site and individual-species techniques will be                      
              developed to elucidate molecular mechanisms of cooperativity                   
              in regulatory calcium-binding proteins such as calbindin nd                    
              calmodulin.  This class of proteins regulates the cellular                     
              response to transient calcium fluxes in almost every tissue                    
              type.  Cooperative calcium binding to these proteins causes                    
              large and specific conformational transitions that modulate                    
              protein-protein interactions by controlling the sites and                      
              extent of their binding to important cellular enzymes or                       
              structural proteins.  To understand the molecular mechanism of                 
              cooperative calcium binding and its ramifications new methods                  
              are needed that can probe the intermediate states of binding.                  
              One planned approach is to apply the cryogenic isoelectric                     
              focusing technique to isolate partially saturated calcium-                     
              binding proteins and complexes of calcium-binding proteins with                
              their target enzymes.  This will allow the quantitation of                     
              intermediate states of the protein assemblies and the                          
              determination of which ones are functionally significant.                      
              Analysis of these experiments will use non-linear least squares                
              methods to determine model-independent thermodynamic and                       
              kinetic parameters.  Classical binding methods (such as                        
              equilibrium dialysis) and spectroscopic techniques (CD,                        
              fluorescence, n.m.r.) also will be applied. Statistical                        
              thermodynamic models that will describe the functionally                       
              significant properties of the system in terms of the relevant                  
              chemical species and the rules that govern transitions between                 
              them will be formulated.  This will allow a test of whether the                
              identified physico-chemical properties of the system components                
              are necessary and sufficient to account for the biological                     
              behavior.  It may also assist in design of drugs that mimic                    
              these interactions.  The coupling of ligand binding and                        
              conformational change within the calcium-binding protein and                   
              its linkage to assembly of an activated enzyme complex offer                   
              many opportunities to test and expand ideas about chemical                     
              work, free energy coupling and dynamic control of cellular                     
              events.  These findings will have broad applicability to other                 
              biological systems.
