Title       : Recruiting & Retaining Students with Disabilities in Engineering, Science and
               Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  1994   
File        : a9255803

Award Number: 9255803
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1543804            (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Ray Bowen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              50        Engineering                             
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 1203,9177,9260,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Task Force on Women, Minorities and the                                    
              Handicapped in Science and Technology                                          
              recommended that actions be taken to increase                                  
              the participation of persons with disabilities                                 
              in science and engineering.  To this point,                                    
              most attention to these educational reforms                                    
              has been given to precollege science and                                       
              mathematics education, but colleges and                                        
              universities must be involved if this goal is                                  
              to be reach.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The goals of this project are to recruit and                                   
              retain students with disabilities in the                                       
              engineering and science programs at the                                        
              University of Washington.  The project                                         
              includes four components:  (1) A live-in                                       
              summer science program for secondary-level                                     
              students who have disabilities; (2) A                                          
              mentoring program for the participating summer                                 
              students that will rely heavily on year-round                                  
              computer-based interactions with scientists (                                  
              many of whom have disabilities); (3) A                                         
              "diversity awareness" program for university                                   
              faculty and staff and local pre-college                                        
              science teachers; and (4) An information                                       
              dissemination program that will include                                        
              outreach to science and math teachers in the                                   
              northwest region.                                                              
                                                                                             
              Materials for recruiting and retaining                                         
              students with disabilities will be produced                                    
              and distributed in a variety of forms --                                       
              videotape; audiotape; computer disks;                                          
              electronic files accessible over the Internet                                  
              network; and written brochures in standard and                                 
              large print, and braille.  A conference will                                   
              provide an opportunity for dissemination of                                    
              materials for recruitment/retention as well as                                 
              those developed specifically for the summer                                    
              program.  They will be adaptable for use by                                    
              other schools.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              The quarterly "diversity awareness" workshops                                  
              for faculty, staff, students, and local                                        
              science teachers,  are intended to increase                                    
              the awareness of barriers faced by students                                    
              with disabilities and to present creative and                                  
              practical approaches for providing access to                                   
              instruction and campus services to students                                    
              with disabilities.                                                             
                                                                                             
              Methods developed in this project will serve                                   
              as models for recruiting and retaining                                         
              students with disabilities in other colleges                                   
              at the University of Washington as well as on                                  
              other campuses across the country.
