Title       : Planning Grant to Develop a Program to Improve the Teaching of Science at the
               Middle and Upper Elementary School Levels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1992   
File        : a9255854

Award Number: 9255854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joyce B. Evans                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49491              (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Pallrand pallrand@mbcl.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This planning grant seeks to develop a program to improve the                  
              teaching of science at the middle and upper elementary school                  
              levels.  The program will be directed at developing mechanisms                 
              for establishing ongoing relationships between faculty in a                    
              university research community and teachers in regional                         
              schools.  During the twelve months planning period                             
              approximately 70 teachers from three school districts - Urban                  
              School District, Suburban School District, and Rural School                    
              District will work together to review and analyze a series of                  
              science teaching tapes. Upon completion of this task, the                      
              teachers from the various schools in the three school                          
              districts will present the tapes to science teachers in a                      
              workshop in their respective systems.  The reactions and                       
              results from the workshops will be used in answering the                       
              following questions: What types of written materials for                       
              teachers should accompany such a tape?  Would a kit with                       
              examples of the materials introduced in the unit also be                       
              helpful?  What is the optimal length of time for such a tape?                  
                                                                                             
              Upon completion of analysis of the tapes, the curricula of the                 
              participating schools will be analyzed.  One of the goals of                   
              the program will be to establish some commonly agreed upon                     
              needs for middle and upper elementary school science programs.                 
              This aspect of the program is based on the assumption that                     
              every program in science education needs to be updated in                      
              response to advances in the fields of science as well as                       
              changing societal needs and needs of the various school                        
              districts.  An outcome of the planning period is the design                    
              and development of new teaching units in science that are                      
              flexible in structure and format that can be introduced into                   
              existing programs without changing the entire science program                  
              or without committing the district to new series of books.                     
              Teachers can learn how to introduce new teaching material that                 
              is limited in scope.  The new material and teaching strategies                 
              they learn with these units can also be extended to other                      
              areas of the curriculum.
