Title       : AMP: NSF ALLIANCE PROPOSAL
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1998    
File        : a9255239

Award Number: 9255239
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5881620            (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold L. Martin   (Principal Investigator former)
              Lonnie Sharpe  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 0000,9133,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Development of quality educational programs to attract and retain              
              underrepresented minorities in science and engineering is a well-              
              established national priority.  This proposal describes a program              
              designed to improve the educational framework for emerging minority            
              scientists and engineers.  The proposal will focus on undergraduate            
              education as its core component as well as the essential elements              
              required to increase the percentage of students in post-graduate               
              science and engineering programs.                                              
                                                                                             
              The partners in the proposed alliance represent diverse programs,              
              yet have remarkably common objectives.  The unifying goal is to                
              build on the existing knowledge base relative to minority                      
              participation in science and engineering and to expand the                     
              available options to enrich programs at partner institutions and               
              beyond.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This Alliance has been formed to develop strategies increase access            
              and opportunities for minority students in science and engineering.            
              The goals of the alliance are: 1) to improve the quality of the                
              learning environment for minority science and engineering students             
              at all schools, 2) to substantially increase the number of minority            
              students graduating with degrees in science and engineering, and 3)            
              to develop and implement effective methods of attracting talented              
              minority students who would not otherwise choose science or                    
              engineering as a career.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The project will emphasize collaborative learning approaches,                  
              positive and sustained interaction with faculty, intensive                     
              interaction with other support persons, and hands-on research and              
              internship experience.  The Alliance will focus on developing and              
              implementing innovative methods for interesting community college              
              students in science and engineering careers and will concentrate on            
              the transition point to graduate school.
