Title       : 1993 Conference on Science Education for Persons with Disabilities; Kansas City,
               MO; March 29-31, 1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1992    
File        : a9255269

Award Number: 9255269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Costello L. Brown                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29741              (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg P. Stefanich stefanich@uni.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George R. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Iowa
	      1222 West 27th Street
	      Cedar Falls, IA  50614    319/273-2311

NSF Program : 7440      CAREER ACCESS OPPOR IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9260,
Abstract    :
              This project will convene a two-day conference prior to the 1993               
              National Science Teachers Association (NSTA) Convention in Kansas              
              City, Missouri.  The purpose of the conference is to educate                   
              science teacher educators, science teachers, and professionals                 
              providing services and/or equipment to persons with disabilities               
              as to what resources and strategies are effective in providing                 
              science education for students with disabilities.                              
                                                                                             
              General goals of the conference are:                                           
                                                                                             
                   o    to assess the current state of conditions concerning                 
                        science for persons with disabilities and to provide                 
                        recommendations to Federal, state, and local agencies,               
                        institutions and organizations concerning science                    
                        education for disabled students; and                                 
                                                                                             
                   o    to increase awareness of technological advances and                  
                        contributions which can enhance and contribute to the                
                        learning and participation of disabled students.                     
                                                                                             
              The conclusions and outcomes developed by participants in working              
              groups will be synthesized and shared with all attendees.  A                   
              position statement along with recommendations for improved                     
              practice will be communicated to the participants and their                    
              responses will be solicited.  Suggestions in areas of career                   
              concerns, teacher education, methods, materials/programs                       
              dissemination, evaluation and assessment, and educational                      
              organizations and agencies will be compiled and from the basis of              
              the document which will summarize conference proceedings.                      
                                                                                             
              Conference participants will be asked to complete a questionnaire              
              assessing the effectiveness of the conference.  A follow-up                    
              questionnaire will be mailed to all participants one year                      
              following the conference.  The purpose of this survey will be to               
              determine what changes have taken place in the participants'                   
              schools or regions to improve the quality of education and                     
              services for students with disabilities.
