Title       : Young Children's Explorations of Chance and Probability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1992 
File        : a9255398

Award Number: 9255398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond J. Hannapel                     
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19606              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen E. Metz kmetz@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of the proposed Research Planning Grant is to                         
              structure a substantial three-year program of research on                      
              young children's learning of chance and probability.  I                        
              propose to focus on chance and probability because of the                      
              richness of the ideas themselves, the connections that                         
              chance and probability make possible between mathematics and                   
              science, and the powerful vision of mathematics that such a                    
              focus could convey to young children.  The research program                    
              investigates primary grade children's explorations of chance                   
              and probability from the perspective of collaborative                          
              problem solving instruction.  It also examines the effects                     
              of learning these concepts in different situations, because                    
              of the growing recognition of the influence of context on                      
              knowledge-construction.  Activities of the Research Planning                   
              Grant include completion of literature reviews, refinement                     
              and extension of instructional interventions, implementation                   
              of two pilot research cycles, drafting of a theoretical                        
              framework to capture the multiple aspects of children's                        
              conceptual development in this domain and their effect on                      
              problem solving, and the preparation of the full grant                         
              proposal.  The first pilot research cycle focuses on pairs                     
              of second graders engaged in a series of chance and                            
              probability tasks, involving prediction, empirical                             
              investigation, extrapolations and explanation.  The second                     
              pilot cycle extends the research to small group learning and                   
              also begins to explore the entailments of different                            
              situations for children's understanding of chance and                          
              probability.  All sessions are videotaped to enable                            
              microanalysis of children's thinking and the effectiveness                     
              of the activity sequence.  The research aims to construct                      
              and refine powerful models of problem solving instruction in                   
              the domain of chance and probability, as it uses these as a                    
              vehicle to closely examine young children's knowledge-                         
              construction.
