Title       : RCMS: University of Michigan Research Careers for Minority Scholars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1995      
File        : a9255164

Award Number: 9255164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $772027             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren C. Whatley   (Principal Investigator current)
              John Jonides  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Erdogan Gulari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9132,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Horse H. Rackham School of Graduate Studies, the College of                
              Engineering, and the College of Literature, Science, and the Arts              
              at the University of Michigan hereby apply for $1,149,642 under the            
              Research Careers for Minority Scholars Program.  These funds will              
              be used to conduct the University of michigan Research Careers for             
              Minority Scholars (UM-RCMS) Programs, a program of undergraduate               
              research, faculty mentoring, and related support activities to                 
              identify highly talented students who are from minority groups                 
              underrepresented in science, engineering, and mathematics and                  
              encourage them to pursue doctoral study in these fields.                       
                                                                                             
              The UM-RCMS program will annually appoint twenty students as UM-               
              RCMS Scholars.  Ten of these students will be from the Ann Arbor               
              Campus undergraduate program; the others will be visitors invited              
              from Historically Black, Hispanic-serving, or Native American-                 
              serving Universities, or from colleges and universities serving                
              large proportions of students from these underrepresented                      
              populations.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              A unique aspect of the proposed UM-RCMS program is the Scientific              
              Executive Committee, composed of a distinguished group of minority             
              faculty with exceptional science research credentials and Associate            
              Deans from the three sponsoring units.  The Scientific Executive               
              Committee, will oversee the RCMS Scholars Program and engage in all            
              decisions regarding its execution, including selection of the                  
              students who will be designated as UM-RCMS Scholars each year and              
              selecting research mentors most appropriate for these students.                
                                                                                             
              The primary direct benefits will be an increase in research and                
              mentoring opportunities for talented students.                                 
                                                                                             
                   1.   Um-RCMS will provide a forty percent increase in the                 
                        available placements for visiting students in our Summer             
                        Research program, most of which are now directed toward              
                        SEM field.                                                           
                                                                                             
                   2.   UM-RCMS will permit a doubling of the full year                      
                        placements available for University of Michigan                      
                        undergraduate students in Science, Engineering and                   
                        Mathematics, and the opening of such positions for the               
                        first time to juniors and seniors in SEM fields such as              
                        Geology, Astronomy, Biology, and Economics.                          
                                                                                             
                   3.   UM-RCMS will enable the University to make a significant             
                        increase in the duration and quality of the research and             
                        mentoring experience available to the most talented                  
                        students in the SEM fields.                                          
                                                                                             
              Extended benefits will be realized by faculty and students at the              
              University of Michigan, by the University as a whole and the                   
              communities it serves, and by colleges and Universities which have             
              joined in partnerships with the University in order to increase the            
              diversity of this nation's academic and scientific community.
