Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems Phase II: Real-Time Promising for Authority Domains
               Operating in a Build-to-Order Mode
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0122082

Award Number: 0122082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499784             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Moses moses@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Floyd H. Grant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Le Gruenwald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. Simin Pulat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,9147,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Scalable Enterprise Systems Phase II grant funds an investigation of
              scalable techniques for real-time order promising by discrete build-to-order
              environments facing dynamic order arrivals.  The algorithms to be developed in
              this project for calculating due dates accurately consider current time-phased
              availability of resources and materials, prior order commitments, and the
              current system state.  The presence of various alternates (resource paths or
              material sources) creates combinatorial complexity.  To increase performance,
              the promising algorithms will integrate (1) theoretically sound heuristic
              techniques developed through research, (2) scalable optimal algorithms such as
              shortest path, and (3) computational technology.  One of the heuristics to be
              examined is based on a novel, even controversial, idea-- for the purposes of
              promising, the time when a resource will be available to process an operation
              can be estimated with sufficient accuracy by considering only a partially
              ordered task plan.  Current support for this principle is based on practical
              experience but little scientific evidence.  A key tenet of this project is that
              the results be highly scalable.  Consequently, joint research occurring at the
              intersection of Industrial Engineering and Computer Science is both necessary
              and synergistic in this project since the algorithmic aspects of promising and
              advanced computational approaches for technological realization are intertwined
              when research is performed in a large-scale systems context.  Algorithms will
              be implemented in an object-oriented, event-driven, memory-resident,
              multi-threaded architecture for detailed study and empirical evaluation. 
              

One of the most important short-term customer service decisions is making
              accurate promises in response to requests from customers or business partners. 
              Surprisingly, very little research has been done in this area.  While a vast
              body of literature exists on scheduling to meet prescribed due dates, very
              little work addresses how due dates that are tight yet achievable may be
              assigned.  Results of this research will increase the accuracy and speed with
              which these due date promises can be made, which in turn will have a very
              significant impact on revenues, operating expenses, and customer satisfaction. 
              This research is directly applicable to manufacturers that increasingly are
              selling built-to-order products direct to customers via the Internet and to a
              future where collaborative commerce freely occurs among dynamically recombinant
              business partners.

