Title       : Collaborative Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0122994

Award Number: 0122994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395830             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Santoianni psantoia@sinclair.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vickie Lair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sinclair Cmty College
	      444 West Third Street
	      Dayton, OH  454021460    937/512-2525

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is creating a scholarship program for Computer Information Systems,
              Engineering and Industrial Technologies, and Mathematics majors at the
              associate degree level. Faculty and staff are working together across
              institutional divisions to meet students' educational needs and facilitate
              their success. The program builds upon a current Sinclair NSF project aimed at
              increasing participation in engineering technology programs: Image and
              Marketing of Engineering Technology Education (DUE 0071103).

The program is
              increasing the number of students obtaining associate degrees or transferring
              to four-year institutions in the areas of computer science, computer
              technology, engineering, engineering technology, and mathematics (CSEMS). It
              also support students entering the workforce in CSEMS disciplines. The program
              has three primary goals:
1. To increase the success of CSEMS students through
              scholarships and the provision of
support services that promote full-time
              enrollment and the attainment of Associate
Degrees in CSEMS disciplines.
2.
              To assist student transfer to four year institutions to continue their
              education in a CSEMS
discipline.
3. To increase the participation of
              low-income, academically talented students in CSEMS
careers, especially
              students of underrepresented groups.

The project is meeting a growing demand
              for entry-level technicians in computer science and engineering disciplines. It
              is being led by a collaborative team of faculty from the Computer Information
              Systems Division, the Division of Engineering and Industrial Technologies
              Division, and the Mathematics Department. To support these efforts, these
              faculty are drawing upon the expertise of four Senior Personnel of the
              Financial Aid Office, Student Support Services Program, and Academic Counseling
              Services. 


