Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems Phase II: Discrete Event System Specification (DEVS)
               as a Formal Modeling and Simulation Framework for Scaleable Enterprise Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0122227

Award Number: 0122227
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard P. Zeigler zeigler@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,9147,9218,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Scalable Enterprise Systems Phase II project will develop the Discrete
              Event System Specification (DEVS) Formal Framework for Scalable Enterprise
              Design and extend earlier-developed DEVS-based modeling and simulation
              environments to support several real world test cases.  As the Internet expands
              toward 1 billion nodes forming a highly interconnected and computationally
              powerful medium, and companies increase specialization and horizontal layered
              organization, new complexity and dynamics are emerging.  Scalability, the
              ability to avoid performance degradation and system breakdown as the scale of
              activity greatly increases, is one of the urgent global problems that needs to
              be addressed.  This research will seek to enhance scalability at three
              inter-related levels of abstraction: the Enterprise Architecture level, the
              Information Technology Infrastructure level, and the Modeling and Simulation
              level.  Earlier research developed a theoretical foundation for architecting a
              major responsibility of enterprise systems -- to ensure that the right
              information about the enterprise is available to decision makers at the right
              time. Having extended the DEVS formalism to express time-critical behaviors in
              enterprise data management, the researcher proposes to implement the extended
              DEVS functionality by suitably extending the distributed real-time execution
              environment previously developed in NSF-sponsored research.  This environment
              will be tested by two diverse applications: a small scale but complete and real
              factory automation test bed and a large-scale web-hosting service for
              e-business.  
 
The Integrated Manufacturing Technology Initiative (IMTI)
              sponsored by the primary governmental funding agencies (NIST, DOE, NSF, and
              DARPA) states that modeling and simulation are emerging as key technologies to
              support manufacturing in the 21st century.  This research will attempt to fill
              in some of the gap between the current state of the art and the IMTI vision of
              the future. In this vision enterprise processes, equipment and systems are
              linked via a robust communications infrastructure that delivers the right
              information at the right time; and integrated enterprise management systems
              that ensure that decisions to be made in real-time and on the basis of
              enterprise-wide impact.  Achieving scalability in M&S and IT infrastructure
              will enable a wide array of M&S studies and implementations, as well as
              supporting the scalability of the future M&S-based networked, extended and
              distributed enterprise systems envisioned by IMTI.


