Title       : CEDAR: Studies of Trapped, High Frequency Acoustic-Gravity Waves near the
               Mesopause
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2002  
File        : a0122772

Award Number: 0122772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Hecht James.H.Hecht@aero.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Rudy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Walterscheid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Aerospace Corporation
	      
	      Los Angeles, CA  90009    /   -

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Two sets of related measurements are proposed that build upon the PI's previous
              work in studying small-scale, fast atmospheric acoustic-gravity waves.  During
              the past year and a half, a new Aerospace built infrared (1.5 - 1.7 um
              wavelength) airglow imager has operated at the Starfire Optical Site in New
              Mexico.  It is now proposed to move this new fast imager to Maui to take
              advantage of the placement of the lidar at that site.  Previous work has shown
              the existence of acoustic waves in time series spectra from a Hawaii based IR
              spectrograph.  The emphasis here will be on studying the as yet poorly explored
              short period (< 5 minute observed period) acoustic-gravity waves, and the very
              small scale (a few km horizontal wavelength) instabilities.  These results will
              complement the studies of the longer period gravity waves undertaken by other
              investigators using their imaging instruments at Maui.

Further, there is
              strong experimental evidence that small-scale waves seen in airglow images are
              ducted from a source region in the troposphere that could be located a thousand
              kilometers or more from the observation site.  Previous data suggest that the
              waves seen over Adelaide, Australia around summer solstice are ducted from a
              source region of strong convective activity well to the north perhaps as far
              away as the north coast.  The PIs propose work in wave sources and propagation
              enabled by a unique capability for imaging and by the fortuitous nature of the
              climate and topography of Australia.  Specifically, they propose to obtain data
              from two airglow imagers; one located at Adelaide and another at Alice Springs,
              Australia about 1500 km to the north.  These will be part of a four imager
              chain, to begin operating in late 2001, that extends from the northern to the
              southern coast of Australia as part of the Darwin Wave Experiment (DAWEX) in
              late 2001.
