Title       : Geoscience Education in Public Parks: Harriman State Park, NY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2002  
File        : a0122011

Award Number: 0122011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74936              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander E. Gates   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1733      GEOSCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Geoscience Education in Public Parks: Harriman State Park,
 New
              York
A universal model is being developed for Geoscience education in public
              parks near urban centers. This phase of the project will be to develop an
              educational videotape and a website. The model is being developed in the 75,000
              acre Harriman-Bear Mountain-Sterling Forest State Park, 25 miles to the north
              of New York City in the Hudson Highlands. The park now
receives 4.2 million
              visitors annually including a large proportion of groups who are traditionally
              underrepresented in the sciences. Outstanding roadside and trailside rock
              exposures beautifully illustrate fundamental principles of Geology, Mining,
              Environmental Science, and Civil Engineering. Through them, visitors will be
              provided with an exciting, hands-on science education experience. 

One area
              of geology that is especially well illustrated is that developed during the
              Rodinian tectonic cycle. An ongoing research project on this aspect of the
              geology involves five researchers from different schools and their students.
              The results of these ongoing investigations will be integrated into both the
              videotape and website. The videotape will be made using new footage from the
              park as well as film resources donated by ABC Inc. and will be widely
              distributed to participating museums,schools, and recreational groups.
              Interlinks within the site will explain the science and scientific data that
              leads to the explanations presented. Topics for field trips will be largely
              based upon NJ and NY Science Educational Standards for ready use in K-12
              curricula.

