Title       : Partnership for Advancing Technology in Housing: Extruded Fiber-Reinforced
               Cement Composites for Residential Construction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0122045

Award Number: 0122045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Surendra P. Shah s-shah@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1624,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              EXTRUDED FIBER-REINFORCED CEMENT COMPOSITES FOR RESIDENTIAL
              CONSTRUCTION

PROPOSAL ABSTRACT
Concrete can be stronger, more durable, more
              fire-resistant, and perform more consistently than wood, making it a good
              material for residential construction.  However, plain concrete is relatively
              brittle and heavy.  Those drawbacks can be overcome with special processing
              techniques and fiber reinforcement.  Recently extrusion technology has been
              adapted for the production of high-performance, fiber-reinforced composites at
              Northwestern University's ACBM Center.  In this process, a highly viscous
              mixture of cement paste and micro-fibers is forced through a die of desired
              cross-section.  Extruded compositions are stronger, more ductile and more
              impervious to water than conventional concrete.
	The objective of this
              proposed research is to develop extruded, high-performance composites suitable
              for residential construction, particularly advanced panel systems.  The
              composites will be designed to accomplish the PATH goals of improved
              durability, reduced maintenance costs, and reduced risk of life, injury, and
              property destruction from natural hazards.  Different cross-sections, with a
              focus on cellular construction, will be developed for the production of
              lightweight elements and advanced panel systems.  Collaboration with the
              Chicago Board of Housing and suppliers to the construction industry will
              provide avenues to introduce these products to builders and contractors.  

