Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program (CSEMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0122672

Award Number: 0122672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137504             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Melvin tmelvin@ac.cc.md.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Debra Phebus  (Principal Investigator former)
              Steven Robinett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Allegany Community College
	      12401 Willowbrook Road, SE
	      Cumberland, MD  215022596    301/784-5000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project is designed to award scholarship assistance to full-time students
              in the Computer Science degree program who are academically talented, but who
              may be at high risk due to financial need. The goal of this program is for each
              of the students participating to succeed in the associate degree program in
              computer science. These skilled graduates are then becoming employed in the
              Information Technology (IT) industry or transferring to a bachelor degree
              program at a four-year university.

The program objectives are to: 
1)
              Recruit 10 full-time students in the Computer Science degree program each year
              to receive scholarships.
2) Assess the academic skills and weaknesses of all
              selected program participants and prepare an Individual Educational Plan for
              each scholarship student. 
3) Provide all participants with access to all
              available computer software and hardware as well as the technical and
              instructional guidance in order to help them succeed academically; 
4) Provide
              instruction, learning community experiences, tutoring, mentoring and other
              support services to all program participants. 
5) Provide participants with
              intensive career advising and job placement services designed to ensure that
              they either enter the job market or continue to pursue a bachelor's degree
              program upon graduation. 

The student support structure of the project is
              providing a wide range of specific mentoring and advising services, special
              academic intervention, peer and professional tutoring, learning community
              experiences, and increased involvement with faculty and IT representatives. In
              addition, work-based learning opportunities provide students with hands-on
              experience and an increased understanding of the workplace and learning
              environment.


