Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Reevaluating the Social Complexity of
               the Palenque Culture: Archaeological and Ethnohistorical Survey in Eastern
               Venuzela
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2001    
File        : a0122857

Award Number: 0122857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11910              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Isbell huari@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. William H. Isbell, Mr. Rodrigo Nararrete will
              
conduct archaeological and ethnohistorical research in Venezuela, collecting
              
data for his doctoral dissertation.  His primary objective is to gain a
              
better understanding of the nature and development of complex human
              
societies, focusing on a perplexing Native American example.  Cultures of the
              
Caribbean region have long been recognized as superb examples of what
              
anthropologists call "chiefdoms," political systems intermediate between
              
simple bands or tribes, and complex state governments.  Indeed, it is
              
believed that the "chiefdom" represents humanity's first experiment with
              
complex social organization.  Consequently, if we are to understand the
              
evolution of social complexity, chiefdoms must be studied and comprehended,
              
and the Caribbean offers an exceptional laboratory using archaeology and
              
ethnohistory.  

Venezuela's Unare River Basin is an important area that
              probably provided an 
avenue of migration between riverine Amazonian lowlands
              and the Caribbean 
Coast.  It could shed light on debates about differences in
              social complexity 
between the Amazonian and the Caribbean culture areas, but
              early descriptions 
of the cultures occupying Venezuela's Unare River are
              curiously 
contradictory.  Sixteenth and early seventeenth century chroniclers
              describe 
complex Carib societies.  But eighteenth century chronicles describe
              only 
simple cultures like the Cariban Karinas.  How is this to be understood?
               
Should these descriptions be considered historically accurate, fostering
              
questions about the conditions in which societies experience cultural
              
collapse.  Alternatively, do these descriptions reflect changes in the way
              
Europeans viewed and described the "other," as well, perhaps, as changes in
              
the political goals that colored European perceptions and accounts?

The
              way to definitively resolve this is to compare ethnohistorical accounts 
with
              archaeological information.  Navarrete has completed a study of the
              
chronicles.  Funded by NSF he will conduct the first systematic
              
archaeological survey in the Unare Depression, employing a
              
transects-and-shovel-test-pits strategy appropriate for heavily vegetated
              
environment.  The survey is designed to reveal material correlates of social
              
complexity as well as materials correlates of cultural simplification.  The
              
results will reveal the history of social complexity in the Unare Basin, and
              
their implications for the ways changes in European philosophy and politics
              
influenced conceptualizations of natives and their social conditions.  The
              
dissertation will also establish valuable foundations for more comprehensive
              
archaeological investigations of the Venezuelan past. 



