Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Early Postclassic Period Households At
               Rio Viejo, Oaxaca, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2001   
File        : a0122226

Award Number: 0122226
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  2001   
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11857              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary A. Joyce rajoyce@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stacie M. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research examines household social organization and economic activities at
              the Early Postclassic (A.D. 800-1100) site of Rio Viejo in coastal Oaxaca,
              Mexico, through a meticulous examination of micro-residues.  The project not
              only serves as one of the first major studies of Early Postclassic period
              households in Oaxaca, but should also prove useful for archaeologists working
              in other regions and other parts of the world who are interested in applying
              micro-scale methods to household research.  Household archaeology
              conventionally uses architecture, burials, and artifacts to reconstruct
              domestic activities.  But artifacts present problems for understanding
              household activities, because they are normally recovered in trash deposits or
              fill, potentially far removed from where they were used.  Micro-residues,
              including microscopic plant remains, fine-scale changes in soil deposition, and
              chemical residues of organic debris, in contrast, are less likely to have
              traveled from their locations of use.  The techniques of paleoethnobotany,
              micromorphology, and soil chemistry detect food processing and cooking
              activities, which are important because sharing food often defines membership
              in household social groups.  At Rio Viejo, excavations of twelve buildings in
              two neighborhoods of modest, single-roomed houses revealed similarities in
              artifacts and architecture that suggest "commoner" status, yet burial practices
              and other features differ in each area.  The research will address questions
              about similarities and differences in the organization of domestic activities
              that traditional data alone cannot answer.  Uniformity in artifacts and
              architecture could mask real differences between the two areas, and the
              distribution of food-related activities might better reflect household
              divisions than the buildings themselves.  Also, since productive activities in
              residential settings are linked with larger-scale political and economic goals,
              this project will consider how Rio Viejo's Early Postclassic occupants
              cooperated economically within a newly reconceived political framework
              following the "collapse" of urban centers.
