Title       : Partnership for Advancing Technologies in Housing: Engineered Wood Frame Wall
               Panel System Integrating Prefabricated Truss Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0122069

Award Number: 0122069
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89822              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert N. Emerson emersrn@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1624,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              NSF Proposal 0122069
Engineered Wood Frame Wall Panel System Integrating
              Prefabricated Truss Technology

PI: Robert N. Emerson

Abstract

An
              engineered wood frame wall panel system will be investigated that integrates
              prefabricated metal plate connected truss technology with conventional wood
              frame wall construction.  The wall panel system will appear and handle like
              conventional walls and be readily adaptable to current construction techniques
              and applications.  However, the engineered wall panel system will be more
              affordable, durable, safer, and have less environmental impact than
              conventional site built wood frame construction.

Conventional wood frame
              walls are designed by prescriptive guidelines. They are typically constructed
              of dimension lumber framework connected together with nails and then sheathed
              with structural panels (plywood & oriented strand board), insulation panels, or
              finishing panels (drywall).  An engineered wood frame wall panel system will be
              developed using conventional materials but the dimension lumber framework will
              be connected with toothed metal plate connectors instead of nails.  These
              moment resistant connections will transform the framework into moment resistant
              frames that will increase resistance to lateral loads.  In addition to the
              increased structural performance the innovative wall system will gain the
              benefits of engineered and prefabricated construction.

The prefabricated
              metal plate connected truss industry employs computer-aided design to rapidly
              engineer custom roof and floor trusses for residential and light-commercial
              construction.  These trusses are then constructed at a factory, shipped to the
              job site and erected into place.  The whole process lends itself to improved
              efficiency, worker safety, and environmental friendliness. 

Current
              prefabricated metal plate connected truss technology will be integrated into a
              wall panel system that will originally use conventional building materials but
              will be readily adaptable to new materials.  The design and behavior of the
              engineered wall panel system will be investigated for the proposed research.  
              The technical research will consist of the following phases.

1. Integrating
              the toothed metal plate connector design process into moment resistant frame
              design.
2. Behavior and comparison testing between conventional framework and
              moment resistant framework. 
3. Developing design methodology for combining
              the lateral resistance provided by moment resistant frames with that provided
              by the conventional sheathing effect.

