Title       : Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering
               Mentoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2001  
File        : a0122778

Award Number: 0122778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marilyn J. Suiter                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert J. Rosa AROSA@DUCAIR  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1593      PRES AWDS FOR EXCELL IN SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Engineering at the University of Denver established, "The
              Making of an Engineer," as an engineering experience course for high-school
              students fourteen years ago. The summer program works to engage the interest of
              capable "second tier" students in engineering fields, and the follow up program
              supports them in their academic and career development. The program provides a
              good balance of research activities, group work and individual exploration with
              faculty and student role models, all based on a central element: a three-week
              college-level course in problem solving. 

The quality and outcomes of a
              well-articulated quantitative and qualitative evaluation program are
              impressive. The program surveys indicate that eighty-two percent of the student
              participants chose to attend college, with sixty-one percent majoring in
              engineering. The program in 2000 included 68 participants, of which forty-four
              (sixty-five percent) were members of groups underrepresented in science and
              engineering: three were African-American, ten were American Indians, and
              thirty-one were Hispanic/Latino. The strategy of recruiting capable students
              from diverse regions across the United States and its protectorates, including
              Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and American Samoa, makes it a truly exceptional
              approach reflecting awareness of the need to broaden opportunities in SMET
              fields beyond identifying those traditionally participating. The program
              components reflect incorporation of the recommendations from research
              literature on best practices in human resource development. The program has
              become well integrated into the heart of the institution, now needing no
              additional staff beyond those who are tutors and mentors.

