Title       : Partnership for Advancing Technologies in Housing: Designing Panelized Systems
               to Minimize Impact on Indoor Air Quality in Tightly-Sealed Buildings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0122165

Award Number: 0122165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Little jcl@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1624,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Designing Panelized Systems to Minimize Impact on Indoor Air Quality
in
              Tightly-Sealed Buildings

John C. Little

The use of Structural Insulated
              Panels (SIPs) to create very tight building envelopes will help achieve PATH's
              goals of simultaneously reducing the environmental impact and improving the
              energy efficiency of new and existing homes.  Typically, SIPs use oriented
              strand board and rigid foam in a multi-layered, sandwich-like structure. 
              Although environmental advantages make these panelized systems very attractive,
              the tighter building envelope construction may degrade indoor air quality.  For
              example, formaldehyde, other aldehydes, and terpene hydrocarbons are commonly
              found in new manufactured and site-built houses, and these compounds are
              associated with strong sensory irritation.  The release of these contaminants
              must therefore be taken into account when designing homes constructed with
              SIPs.  A diffusion model that predicts emissions from single-layer materials
              has recently been developed and successfully validated.  A logical and very
              promising extension of this approach is to apply the model to predict emissions
              from multi-layer systems like SIPs.  This research will characterize emissions
              from the individual layers used in the fabrication of SIPs; independently
              measure the model parameters for the different material layers; validate the
              single-layer model by comparing predicted emissions to observations obtained in
              experimental chamber studies; extend the single-layer model to a composite
              multi-layer model with boundary conditions appropriate for SIPs construction;
              validate the multi-layer emissions model for SIPs, with and without the
              presence of an installed barrier material; and use the multi-layer model to
              optimize the position and properties of barrier materials that can be used to
              significantly reduce emissions from other advanced panel systems.

This
              research builds on an existing and successful partnership with Alfred Hodgson,
              of the Environmental Energy Technologies Division at Lawrence Berkeley National
              Laboratory, and forges a new collaboration with Dr. Daniel Dolan, Professor and
              Director of the Center for Integrated Systems in Housing at Virginia Tech,
              thereby ensuring rapid translation of fundamental research into practical
              applications.

