Title       : Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering
               Mentoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2001  
File        : a0122848

Award Number: 0122848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marilyn J. Suiter                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bharati Mehrotra   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tougaloo College
	      
	      Tougaloo, MS  39174    601/956-4941

NSF Program : 1593      PRES AWDS FOR EXCELL IN SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Bharati Mehrotra has an exemplary record of mentoring and encouraging
              African-American students through college and into graduate or professional
              schools in the sciences that spans thirty years of her academic career at
              Tougaloo College. She has served as chair of the Department of Biology for more
              than twenty years, she is credited with improving the curriculum and increasing
              the enrollment of biology majors. 
Mehrotra has been the director of the
              Minority Access to Research Career (MARC) program since 1977. More than one
              hundred twenty-eight students have completed the program; twenty-eight have
              completed graduate school in the sciences, with fifty percent of the remainder
              en route to doctorates or medical degrees. As director of MARC, Mehrotra has
              worked to develop a supportive learning environment by bringing experts to
              campus and visiting research universities, motivating talented students to
              complete their degrees. She goes yet farther, establishing linkages with
              graduate institutions to facilitate her students' access to post-graduate
              opportunities. She maintains contact with those she has mentored long after
              they have graduated, and her students attest to a large number of successes
              directly related to her mentorship.
She was particularly commended for
              implementing these activities while rigorously pursuing an active and credible
              research program, all under challenging circumstances of limited institutional
              resources.

