Title       : ITR Large: MALACH: Multilingual Access to Large spoken ArChives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0122466

Award Number: 0122466
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Griffin                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sam Gustman sam@vhf.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas W. Oard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Byrne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas Greenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bhuvana Ramabhadran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Suv of the Shoah Vis His F
	      100 Universal City Plaza
	      Universal City, CA  91608    818/777-4907

NSF Program : 1688      ITR LARGE GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1655,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The project proposes to advance the state of the art in automatic
speech
              recognition by detecting emotional and highly accented speech
and differences
              based on age and gender, and then optimizing the
acoustic model for those
              conditions. It will apply long-term
adaptation techniques to improve
              robustness, and will implement
an innovative second-pass decoding technique to
              improve accuracy
by using side information such as thesaurus terms
              and
human-prepared summaries.

The techniques to be developed will
              dramatically improve the efficiency
of professional catalogers, leveraging
              automatic segmentation to
suggest topic boundaries in interviews, using
              domain-tuned
classification algorithms to recommend thesaurus terms,
              and
providing automated tools to support generation of event
              timelines.
Volunteers will help assign metadata and provide
              transcripts.
Efforts will be made to automate transferring capabilities
              developed
originally for English to other languages.  Access to
              multilingual
materials will be done by combining knowledge-based and
              corpus-based
techniques to extend existing thesauri to new languages and by
              supporting
cross-language searching of manually prepared
              segment-level
summaries and automatic speech recognition transcripts.

Each
              component will be evaluated and user studies done to measure
the overall
              impact on support for cataloging, search and exploration.
This will produce
              significant impact, both through improved access
to our cultural heritage and
              through the application of the techniques
to other important problems.

The
              collection of spoken material used in this project will be the 116,000
hours
              held by the Survivors of the Shoah Visual History Foundation, a
set of already
              digitized video recordings of great historical importance.
