Title       : Planning Activities: Development of a Strategic Plan for the Trinity College
               Field Station at Church Farm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0122371

Award Number: 0122371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. Smedley scott.smedley@trincoll.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joan Morrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig W. Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. O'Donnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity College
	      300 Summit Street
	      Hartford, CT  061063100    860/297-2000

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
	A grant has been awarded to Drs. Scott Smedley, Joan Morrison, Craig
              Schneider, and Mr. Michael O'Donnell at Trinity College, Hartford, Connecticut
              to develop a strategic plan for the College's newly acquired field station. 
              The Trinity College Field Station (TCFS) at Church Farm, readily accessible
              from the College's urban campus, is a rural site of 256 acres (102 ha) in
              northeastern Connecticut, consisting of diverse terrestrial and aquatic
              habitats. TCFS's three-fold mission is to promote the area's use for research
              in the natural sciences, educational endeavors with an environmental emphasis,
              and conservation of open space.  A comprehensive strategic plan is crucial to
              fulfilling TCFS's mission.
	Development of the strategic plan will occur over
              eighteen months beginning in September 2001.  The planning process will be
              directed by the TCFS Advisory Committee, which includes, in addition to the
              project directors, other Trinity faculty, administrators, and a representative
              of the local land trust.  A survey of environmental researchers and educators
              in the Northeast will identify external stakeholders.  Site visits to other
              field stations will permit examination of their infrastructure, programs, and
              management, with the aim of adopting successful models.  Three planning
              workshops will provide additional opportunities to consult with relevant
              experts. The first two, with outside participants drawn largely from regional
              field stations, will focus on TCFS's research and educational programs,
              respectively.  The final workshop, with outside participants drawn nationally,
              will focus on the integration of these two programs and will consider inherent
              operational issues.  Findings from the surveys, site visits, and workshops will
              all contribute to the strategic plan document, which will guide Trinity's
              administration towards development of a first-rate field station, particularly
              in these important early years.  Given that TCFS currently lacks physical
              structures for its research and educational programs, the strategic plan will
              be critical to Trinity's efforts to design, finance, construct, and manage a
              facility.
	Besides providing opportunities for field research and
              environmental education previously unavailable to Trinity, the field station is
              significant in several other respects.  Located within the National Parks
              Service's Quinebaug and Shetucket Rivers National Heritage Corridor, TCFS is
              well positioned to study this rare rural remnant within the Boston-Washington
              megalopolis. Occupied by Europeans since 1715, TCFS is among few field stations
              with such a long recorded land-use history and can thus contribute to our
              understanding of how previous human activities have influenced today's
              environment.  Finally, Trinity College hopes that TCFS can benefit other
              educational institutions.  Southern New England has one of the highest
              concentrations of colleges and universities in the nation, yet most lack a
              field station. Through Trinity's sponsorship of the Learning Corridor (a new
              complex of K-12 schools serving Trinity's inner-city neighborhood) and through
              its consortial affiliation with Hartford-area colleges and universities, the
              College has excellent opportunities to engage minority students in research and
              education at TCFS.

