Title       : Partnership for Advancing Technologies in Housing: Microcellular Polymers
               Processing for Lightweight and Energy Efficient Advanced Panel Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0122055

Award Number: 0122055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vipin Kumar vkumar@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wei Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1624,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PATH: Microcellular Polymers Processing 
for Lightweight and Energy Efficient
              Advanced Panel Systems

Abstract

This award supports a PATH research
              project to explore the manufacture of thick sheets of microcellular polymers
              for load-bearing applications such as advanced panel systems for house
              construction. Microcellular Plastics refer to closed-cell thermoplastic foams
              with a very large number of very small bubbles. Typically, the cells are of
              order of 10 micrometers in diameter, and there are 108 or more cells per cubic
              centimeter (cm3) of the foam. The microcellular polymers offer a number of
              unique advantages for house construction applications. For example, the
              microcellular structure can reduce the density, leading to a reduction in the
              weight of the panels. Lighter panels are more cost effective and promote safety
              during house construction. In addition, reducing material density leads to
              conservation of natural resources by only using what is truly needed. Further,
              the microcellular structure can reduce the thermal conductivity and thus
              improve the energy efficiency of the panel systems. 

The basic solid-state
              microcellular process is a two-stage batch process. In the first stage, the
              polymer is placed in a pressure vessel with a high-pressure and non-reacting
              gas. This step is usually conducted at room temperature. Over time, the gas
              diffuses into the polymer, and attains a uniform concentration throughout the
              polymer specimen. When the specimen is removed from the pressure vessel and
              brought to the atmospheric pressure, a "supersaturated" specimen that is
              thermodynamically unstable due to the excessive gas dissolved into the polymer
              is produced. In the second stage, the specimen is heated to what is termed the
              foaming temperature. This step is typically carried out in a heated bath with
              temperature control. The dissolved gas lowers the glass transition temperature
              of the polymer and the foaming temperature needs only to be above the glass
              transition temperature of the gas-polymer system in order for the bubbles to
              nucleate and grow. Since the polymer is still in a solid state, the foams thus
              produced are called "solid-state foams" to distinguish them from the
              conventional foams that are produced in an extruder from a polymer melt.
              

The funded research will explore the feasibility of producing thick
              microcellular specimens using a number of polymers, including PVC, a common
              plastic used in building materials today; PET, a polymer considered
              cost-competitive with PVC; and some of the more recently introduced
              high-strength polymers such as PEEK and PEI. A number of gases will be explored
              as a physical blowing agent. These gases include carbon dioxide and nitrogen.
              The research will advance the state-of-the-art of the emerging microcellular
              polymers technology by adding the new dimension of load-bearing applications.
              It will also provide an excellent opportunity for both undergraduate and
              graduate students to learn and grow in an environment of discovery and
              scientific understanding.




