Title       : ITR/SI: Societal Scale Information Systems: Technologies, Design and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0122599

Award Number: 0122599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500001            (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Demmel demmel@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan Rabaey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randy Katz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory L. Fenves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. Shankar Sastry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1688      ITR LARGE GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1656,1657,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

ITR/SI: Societal Scale Information Systems: Technologies, design and
              applications

James Demmel, University of California,
              Berkeley
0122599




Information technology (IT) is transforming society
              at an accelerating pace, but critical research is needed to realize IT's
              potential for solving complex societal problems, including energy, disaster
              response and education. We are establishing the Center for Information
              Technology Research in the Interest of Society (CITRIS) to sponsor
              collaborative, IT-focused research to find solutions to grand-challenge
              societal problems affecting the quality of life of individuals and
              organizations. CITRIS is a multi-campus center, including UC Berkeley, UC
              Davis, UC Santa Cruz and UC Merced, with many industrial partners.  CITRIS's
              driving applications include (1) boosting efficiency of energy production and
              consumption, and (2) saving lives and property and establishing emergency
              response IT infrastructure in the wake of disasters, among others. The
              solutions to these applications share a need for highly-distributed, reliable,
              and secure information systems that can evolve and adapt to radical changes in
              their environment, delivering networked information services and up-to-date
              sensor network data stores over ad-hoc, flexible and fault tolerant networks
              that adapt to the people and organizations that need them. We call such systems
              Societal-Scale Information Systems. Our research and outreach partner is UC
              Merced, a new research campus to be constructed, with a special mission to
              expand participation of underrepresented, first generation college-going, low
              income and rural students.


