Title       : FSML: Renovation and Expansion of Salt Water Life Support Systems at Hawaii
               Institute of Marine Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2001  
File        : a0122395

Award Number: 0122395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103899             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim N. Holland kholland@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Dr Kim Holland of the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology (HIMB), University of
              Hawaii, has received a grant from the National Science Foundation to renovate
              and expand the salt water life support system at HIMB's Coconut Island
              laboratory.   HIMB is a leading tropical marine biology research facility, and
              a reliable supply of high quality seawater is central to its research and
              education missions.  The existing seawater pumping and distribution system is
              several decades old and does not serve many of the newer buildings at the lab. 
              This grant will also help underwrite the construction of a new large seawater
              tank that will be used to hold large marine fish such as sharks and tuna.
              

The current inefficient maze of saltwater feeder pipes will be dismantled
              and replaced by an entirely new distribution system which will be more
              efficient and environmentally friendly.  The new system will feature dual
              parallel pipes to all use locations and will be constructed so that the pipes
              can be automatically cleaned without disruption of supply.  The more frequent
              cleaning possible in this new system will eliminate the discharge of heavily
              silt-laden effluent.  Similarly, the installation of modern pumps and pump
              controls will allow a better supply of seawater while reducing the amount of
              electricity consumed.  A forty-foot by twenty-foot reinforced fiberglass tank
              will be constructed on an existing concrete pad.  This tank will be fed by the
              new seawater system and will hold seawater to a depth of five feet.  The tank
              will be surrounded by a catwalk that will be used for experimental observations
              and service access.

The University of Hawaii has identified marine science
              as an area of excellence to be emphasized as the university enters the
              twenty-first century.  This emphasis is reflected in the recent construction of
              new laboratory facilities and funding for four additional faculty positions. 
              The renovation and expansion of Coconut Island's seawater system will be
              crucial to the success of the university's initiative.   Because of its
              location, HIMB can play a leading role in areas such as coral reef biology and
              the study of large tropical species such as sharks and tunas.  HIMB is a major
              destination for scientists from all around the world who wish to work on these
              topics.  This NSF grant will greatly assist HIMB in providing modern facilities
              for its faculty and visitors.

