Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: A Diachronic Analysis of the Valley of
               Oaxaca Economy from the Classic through the Postclassic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  2001   
File        : a0122090

Award Number: 0122090
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  2001  
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11453              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Douglas Price tdprice@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	Under the direction of Dr. T. Douglas Price, Mr. Lane Fargher will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation.  The research problem is the nature of the
              household economy in prehispanic Mexico.  He will continue work on a study of
              economic activities at a series of prehispanic settlements located in the
              Valley of Oaxaca, Oaxaca, Mexico.  These sites include San Juan Guelavla, a
              32.8 hectare site that was occupied between AD 700 and AD 950, and Santa
              Cecilia Jalieza, a 26.6 hectare site that was occupied between AD 250 and AD
              500.  These sites are important because they are both located in areas that
              have limited agricultural potential, making non-agricultural activities
              (handicraft production; i.e., pottery production, stone tool production,
              basketry, or cloth production) important for the survival of site occupants. 
              In order to understand how site inhabitants supported themselves economically a
              combination of archaeological survey and microscopic analysis of artifacts
              collected during survey will be used at each site.  This information will be
              refined through the use of ceramic and lithic petrography to identify the
              source of raw materials used in handicraft production and, in the case of
              ceramics, to collect information on mass production of vessels.  
	Currently
              some scholars argue that prehispanic households, in Mexico, were
              self-sufficient (i.e. households produced everything needed for survival within
              the house), while others argue that the prehispanic economy was specialized
              (i.e. households intentionally overproduced a limited number of handicrafts
              that were exchanged for other items required by the household, including food).
               However, known examples of specialization are relatively few in number. As a
              result, the degree to which specialized economies supplanted self-sufficient
              households, and how households organized handicraft production in relation to
              agricultural production between AD 300 and AD 1521 remains unknown.  Mr.
              Fargher's research will provide important new data relating to the nature of
              the prehispanic economy of Mexico.  
	This research is also important because
              it will provide data on small and medium sized settlements which have generally
              been ignored by Oaxacan archaeologists working on issues related to the later
              prehispanic era. Finally, as modern population expands in the Valley of Oaxaca,
              archaeological sites are destroyed by construction and looted as people attempt
              to support themselves.  Therefore, Mr. Fargher's research will help preserve
              the cultural heritage of Mexico and save important scientific information. 
              


