Title       : Partnership for Advancing Technologies in Housing: Moisture Control - Convective
               Drying in Residential Wall Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0122062

Award Number: 0122062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149770             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric F. Burnett efburnett@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1624,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Moisture Control in Walls
Moisture constitutes a hazard for buildings and their
              occupants.  There are at least two good reasons to ensure that the presence and
              movement of moisture across the enclosure of buildings is controlled,
              especially the exterior walls of houses; first, to avoid the health hazards
              (mold, etc.) and, second, to avoid deterioration of the materials within the
              wall.  To control moisture requires knowledge of how wetting, storage, and
              drying occurs and some idea of the performance thresholds for the materials
              involved.  For many building professionals and educational institutions, this
              is a new science.  
This project is directed at understanding, modeling, and
              evaluating the potential for ventilation and convective drying within various
              wall systems.  Houses with pitched roofs commonly make use of the circulation
              of air to remove moisture from the attic space; hence the familiar vented roof
              with both soffit and ridge vents for letting cold, dry air in and warm, moist
              air out in the winter.  The contribution of convection to the drying of walls
              needs to be much better understood..  This project will contribute to improving
              the durability and the safety of wall systems in houses, leading to reduced
              maintenance and repair costs.  The project meets more than one of the stated
              PATH goals.
The most important involves computer modeling and the
              investigation of a number of design and development issues.  Practical concerns
              are sizing the flow chamber, assessing the contribution the of sheathing
              membranes (house wrap, building paper); venting strategies and how best to
              transfer the technology to the various target audiences: namely the
              researchers, the design professionals and manufacturers, and the house builder
              community.  

An applied R and D project awarded to Eric Burnett of the PHRC
              by NSF, under the PATH program.  



