Title       : Planning Grant for the Lake Louise Field Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 1,  2002    
File        : a0122282

Award Number: 0122282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Bechler dbechler@valdosta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Pascarella  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Valdosta State University
	      1500 North Patterson Street
	      Valdosta, GA  316980429    229/333-5952

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
A grant has been awarded to Drs. David L. Bechler and John B. Pascarella at
              Valdosta State University, Valdosta, Georgia, to bring in consultants for the
              purpose of  assessment and improvement of the Lake Louis Field Station. In
              December 1995, the field station was acquired from Mars Hill College.  The
              station, which is relatively undeveloped, is unique in that within its 173.1
              acres there exists a 14-acre sinkhole lake feeding the Floridian Aquifer,
              extensive wetlands, a mixed deciduous forest, and remnants of an upland pine
              forest.  The station lies 8 km south of the City of Valdosta, and 20 km north
              of the Florida State line.  Residential movement out of Valdosta has resulted
              in some housing development around the property. Currently, the station is
              being used as a natural laboratory for field based science classes and
              research.  VSU wishes to develop a comprehensive five-year plan and mission
              statement that will allow the university to gain maximum benefit from the
              station while preserving as much of its original natural environment as
              possible.
	In order to best utilize the Lake Louise Field Station, VSU
              proposes to bring in independent consultants to examine the station and produce
              a report advising the university on the best way to utilize the station for
              teaching, research, and public outreach.  Specifically, they wish to have the
              consultants examine and advise them on the following key points: (1) How to
              best utilize existing natural habitats without damaging them. (2) The
              applicability of converting the upland pinelands from slash pines to its
              original longleaf pines.  (3) The advisability of purchasing additional land to
              expand specific habitat types and serve as a buffer around the station.  (4)
              Applicability, structural layout, and best location of a proposed
              classroom/laboratory complex for teaching and research. (5) The practicality
              and feasibility of the current five-year mission statement for the field
              stations use and development.
	Development of the station is important for
              several reasons.  The station is the only field station in the southern half of
              the state owned by a state educational institution that is available for
              teaching, research and public outreach.  Its location close to the City of
              Valdosta and major roads in the southern portion of the state make it easily
              accessable for VSU as well as local school districts and community
              organizations.  Most importantly is its value as an educational center for the
              citizens of South Georgia. Many of VSU's 8,820 students are first generation
              college students.  The citizenry of South Georgia has for generations viewed
              the environment as something to exploit, but not necessarily preserve and
              renew.  By expanding the facilities at the station so that it can be more
              readily used for teaching, research and public outreach, VSU will be better
              able to fulfill its mission of public education and service to the South
              Georgia community


