Title       : Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering
               Mentoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2001  
File        : a0122804

Award Number: 0122804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marilyn J. Suiter                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Max L. Warshauer max@swt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas State U
	      
	      San Marcos, TX  78666    512/245-2111

NSF Program : 1593      PRES AWDS FOR EXCELL IN SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Max L. Warshauer has worked with students in grades K-12 as well as his
              undergraduate and graduate students for the past 22 years. He has worked to
              recruit students, and uses innovative but sound pedagogical techniques to
              mentor and motivate a diverse range of students to achieve and excel in
              mathematics. 

Warshauer developed the Honors Summer Math Camp at Southwest
              Texas State University twelve years ago; it is a program for high-school
              students which is recognized as one of the top programs of this type in the
              country. Six years ago he developed the Junior Summer Math Camp, which will
              engage one hundred twenty-five teachers and more than twenty-five hundred
              students at six sites to improve their skills in algebra and other areas of
              mathematics where they experience difficulty.

Those he has mentored include
              underrepresented minority students (ethnicity and/or socio-economic status) in
              science and mathematics fields. Approximately half of his students are women,
              and he encourages all to explore research as a part of the learning process.
              His mentor programs, particularly the summer math camps, are nationally known,
              and he has a strong reputation for continuously refining his programs and
              building replicable models that can be used by other mentors and other
              universities.

