Title       : Physics of Transition Metal Oxides and Related Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0122523

Award Number: 0122523
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elbio R. Dagotto dagotto@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adriana Moreo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1652,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports theoretical research with a computational emphasis, on
              colossal magneto resistance materials, high temperature superconductors, and
              other correlated transition metal materials.  The research has several aims:
              (1) A complex mixed-phase paramagnetic-insulating state arises from the
              competition between metallic and insulating phases; the idea that this colossal
              magneto resistance also arises from this competition will be investigated. (2)
              Charge ordering in models for manganites will be analyzed with emphasis on the
              unexplored region of intermediate hole densities where correlated polaron
              physics has been revealed in recent experiments.  The possibility of pseudogap
              formation in this region will be explored. (3) Physics common to the cuprates,
              manganates and other transition metal oxides in the inhomogeneous states will
              be examined. Stripes and superconductivity will be explored in the copper
              oxides using advanced methods to search for pairing and models that reproduce
              known experimental results reasonably well. These large-scale structures appear
              to be part of the common physics in cuprates and manganates.  (4) Models for
              dilute magnetic semiconductors, Mn-doped GaAs semiconductors, will be studied.
              It is anticipated that the electronic properties of these materials will have
              features in common with those of the mixed-phases in the manganese oxides.
              
%%%
This award supports theoretical research with a computational emphasis,
              on colossal magneto resistance materials, high temperature superconductors,
              ruthenates and doped magnetic semiconductors. Colossal magneto resistance
              materials show an enormous change in resistivity with the application of modest
              magnetic fields and like the doped magnetic semiconductors, may be important in
              the emerging field of spintronics. These transition metal materials with strong
              electronic correlations can exhibit exotic electronic states, including
              large-scale structure or striped phases and the appearance of a pseudogap in
              the electronic excitation spectrum. In one thrust of the research, the PIs will
              use state of the art Monte-Carlo methods to investigate whether these phenomena
              share a common physical basis. The PIs will also investigate the common
              features of manganates and materials useful for spintronics applications, and
              elucidate the physical origin of the complex phase diagram of Ca2-x Srx RuO4
              which includes paramagnetic, ferromagnetic, and antiferromagnetic
              phases.
***


