Title       : ITR/SY+IM+AP: Center for Applied Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0122581

Award Number: 0122581
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5655274            (Estimated)
Investigator: Guy E. Blelloch blelloch@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lenore Blum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel D. Sleator  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramamoorthi Ravi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1688      ITR LARGE GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1658,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Algorithms are the basic procedures by which computers solve problems. With the
              explosion in the use and connectivity of computers, and in the sizes of the
              data sets being used, the performance of algorithms is becoming increasingly
              important.  Being able to solve a problem ten times faster, for example, could
              mean designing a drug next year instead of several years later, or reducing the
              cost of developing a new space structure by allowing faster and more extensive
              computer simulations.  Over the past 30 years there have been significant
              advances in the basic theory of algorithms.  These advances have led to a "core
              knowledge" concerning algorithms and algorithmic techniques that has now been
              applied across an amazing diversity of fields and applications---surely more
              broadly than calculus is now applied.  

The problem, however, is that there
              is a large gap between ongoing theoretical research, and the current use of
              algorithms in applications.  It often takes more than ten years for the core
              ideas in a new algorithm to make it into an application, and ongoing
              theoretical research often does not properly address the needs of the
              applications.  The purpose of the Center is to bridge this gap so that
              efficient and effective algorithms can be deployed more rapidly.  This will be
              achieved through (1) a set of Problem Oriented Explorations (PROBEs), (2)
              developing an extensive set of web resources on algorithms, and (3) educational
              activities including holding workshops for educating teachers.  The PROBEs will
              bring together algorithm designers and domain experts to rapidly deploy new
              algorithmic ideas within a specific domain.  

