Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Event-Related Potentials Tracking Reading
               Experience, Lexical Quality, and Text Comprehension in an Artificial
               Orthography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0122007

Award Number: 0122007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Perfetti perfetti+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Ms. Hart and her advisor Dr. Perfetti
              will conduct a year long investigation of the hypothesis that reading
              comprehension problems are caused by poor quality lexical representations. 
              Much research has been undertaken to find the causes of reading comprehension
              problems.  For example, it is well known that college age readers who have
              trouble comprehending what they read have smaller  vocabularies, more trouble
              making inferences, finding main ideas, and maintaining motivation. While all of
              these factors are correlated with reading comprehension, it is plausible that
              they are manifestations of a deeper source - that of poor quality lexical
              representations.  A single word in the mental lexicon is composed of
              phonological, orthographic, and semantic information.  In order to support good
              reading comprehension, these representations must be reliable (one input
              connects to one lexical entry) and coherent (e.g. phonology and orthography
              code for the same lexical entry).  When reliability and coherence break down,
              comprehension suffers.  In the present project, Hart and Perfetti aim to
              describe the lexical basis of comprehension skill by equating skilled and less
              skilled comprehenders on reading experience. Subjects learn an artificial
              language under conditions where experimenters have control over subjects'
              experience with the language and over properties such as word frequency and
              homophony.  At early and late stages of mastering this language, subjects
              receive language tests and have the electrical potentials at the scalp measured
              (using ERP methods) while reading the artificial language.  The hypothesis
              being tested predicts that when tested after little experience, all subjects
              will behave like less-skilled comprehenders do in other experiments, and after
              extensive experience, all subjects will behave like skilled comprehenders.

              
The findings from this study are expected to clarify the nature of reading
              comprehension problems.  Explaining comprehension difficulties at a lexical
              level has implications for interventions designed to improve reading
              comprehension.

