Title       : Scalable Enterprise Systems Phase II: Emergent Organizational Structures in
               Multi-Agent Scalable Enterprises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0122173

Award Number: 0122173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $608225             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abhijit V. Deshmukh deshmukh@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jin Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ana Muriel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victor R. Lesser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith M. Whipple  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1604,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Scalable Enterprise Systems Phase II project's primary goal is to develop
              models of emergent enterprises that capture the independent behavior of the
              organizations involved, as well as the effects of interactions among individual
              organizations, in order to accurately predict dynamics of the emergent
              enterprise and  performance of the system in the long run.  Participants in the
              enterprise can use these results to select appropriate operational strategies
              in order to improve local performance measures such as profit or cash flow over
              a fixed planning horizon.  In addition, these models will provide insight into
              the mechanisms that result in effective alliances and organizational designs. 
              The modeling approach has three steps.  First, a representation scheme is
              developed for capturing characteristics of individual participants that
              incorporates task information, organizational relationships, local and system
              level goals, and possible changes in the environment.  An enterprise is thus a
              collection of several of such detailed representations for each organization
              and the interactions between these organizations.  Second,  a micro-macro
              modeling approach is developed, where the details of each agent's tasks
              (represented in the micro-level simulation framework) are aggregated into a set
              of interaction parameters at the macro-level. The macro-level enterprise model
              is formulated as an interacting particle system. Finally, the third step
              involves validation of the theories developed using field data. Field data will
              be collected from different industries that have large number of participants
              in the supply network, such as the food industry and  the automotive industry,
              to construct practical agent representations and to verify the theoretical
              performance estimates. Large-scale simulations using a multi-agent simulator
              will also be used to empirically estimate the performance of a given 
              organizational configuration. 

This research will  allow planners to
              estimate a priori the overall enterprise performance under different operating
              conditions, and eventually, design optimal emergent societies. Moreover,
              systems composed of distributed decision-makers are encountered in various
              application domains, such as traffic on highway networks, air traffic
              management systems, design teams composed of dispersed designers, distributed
              sensor networks, multi-agent systems, etc. The fundamental advances made in
              this research will have significant impact on our ability to predict the
              performance of such systems, and therefore devise appropriate planning and
              control strategies.

