Title       : FSML: Research and Facilities Planning Workshops at the Angelo Coast Range
               Reserve, Mendocino, California, 2002-2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0122303

Award Number: 0122303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24482              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Power mepower@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward M. Luby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	A grant has been awarded to Drs. Power and Luby at the University of
              California, Berkeley, to conduct two planning workshops at the University's
              Angelo Coast Range Reserve, located in Mendocino County, California.  These
              workshops will supply the campus with expert assessments of the facilities at
              the reserve for conducting research in how ecosystems function, how habitats
              become degraded, and how best to conduct research within the framework of
              governmental rules and regulations that protects endangered species.  These
              workshops will allow the campus to plan the future of the Reserve in a careful
              and informed manner, just as a new, $1.2 million "Center for Environmental
              Science" is built there, with support from the 
Goldman fund.
	In order to
              ensure the success of the reserve's research initiatives, experts in three
              specific research areas will be invited to Angelo to participate in the two
              different planning workshops.  Experts will evaluate reserve facilities, and
              assess whether or not they are 
adequate to support research in river and
              watershed studies, tree canopy biology, and sediment/habitat degradation
              studies.  Researchers for the UC Berkeley campus would also attend.  Both
              groups would make presentations, examine the facilities, meet campus
              administrators, and participate in facilitated discussions.  The central
              question asked of the group would be the following: "Given the current
              facilities, and the specific research directions that have been proposed, are
              the facilities at Angelo adequate, and if not, what do you recommend be done to
              improve them?"  In the end, the visiting experts would submit a written report
              in which they offered an assessment of the adequacy of the facilities for
              implementing these research initiatives and recommendations for
              improvements.
	The Angelo Coast Range Reserve contains the largest tract of
              unlogged coastal conifer forest remaining in the state of California, as well
              as the entire watersheds of two salmon-bearing tributaries of a major river. 
              As natural reserves become more and more isolated in the andscape, with
              pressure from development, they increasingly serve as "lifeboat" refuges for
              certain species.  Understanding how ecosystems function, change, and become
              degraded is important for protecting and managing these species, as well as for
              species residing in more threatened settings outside the borders of reserves. 
              Funding for the planning workshops will therefore support efforts to continue
              the global influence of scientific studies conducted at Angelo, and involve
              researchers, educators, and government representatives in efforts to
              investigate pressing environmental threats.



