Title       : FSML: Strengthening the Research and Educational Capabilities of the Virgin
               Islands Environmental Resource Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  2001   
File        : a0122353

Award Number: 0122353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  2001   
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Nemeth rnemeth@uvi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of The Virgin Islands
	      2 John Brewer's Bay
	      Charlotte Amalie, VI  00802    340/693-1202

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Richard S. Nemeth at University of the Virgin
              Islands (UVI) to develop a plan for the renovation of the Virgin Islands
              Environmental Resource Station (VIERS) located on St. John, US Virgin Islands.
              Although VIERS has provided 35 years of continuous service as a learning center
              for environmental education and research, the outdated laboratory facilities
              currently limit the use of this facility.  Nestled within the pristine
              environment of the Virgin Islands National Park, VIERS offers a wealth of
              biological diversity and tremendous potential as a modernized field station.
              The primary goal of modernizing the VIERS facility will be to stimulate
              teaching, research, and outreach activities, which, in turn, will facilitate
              the exchange of information and ideas between visiting scientists, educators,
              students and the surrounding Virgin Islands' community.  During this planning
              effort, UVI intends to gather information from expert sources and incorporate
              the best features of a variety of marine labs into the VIERS facility.

A
              local planning committee will be established and will focus on assessing
              criteria in five core areas: (1) integrating goals with the Virgin Islands
              National Park vision, (2) defining the basic functionality of a modern marine
              facility, (3) determining needs of research scientists, (4) determining needs
              of educational institutions, (5) developing facility infrastructure including
              housing, education and research space, and (6) integrating information
              technology for data processing and communication.  The planning committee will
              assemble a team of marine lab directors or individuals intimately involved in
              the management of such facilities.  Information will be solicited from past,
              present and potential future researchers from institutes of higher education
              and government on basic and specialized research equipment and information
              technology requirements. Faculty leading college courses at VIERS will be
              interviewed for ways to improve the educational resources. Researchers and
              educators who cannot be interviewed on site will be consulted via a written
              survey.  Architects will provide plans for facility design to maximize the
              efficiency of structures and ensure that they are integrated into the natural
              surroundings.  The final step will be to complete and submit a grant proposal
              for funding from the NSF Field Stations and Marine Laboratories Improvement
              Program for upgrading the VIERS facility.

The University of the Virgin
              Islands' Center for Marine and Environmental Studies (CMES) has launched an
              initiative to strengthen UVI's marine science program with the goal of
              expanding the opportunities in education and research for the culturally
              diverse student body at UVI.  Improving the facilities at VIERS will facilitate
              teaching and research and, through community interaction with VIERS' outreach
              activities, will increase public interest and involvement in their natural
              resources.  Because of the close proximity of all representative terrestrial
              and coastal marine environments, VIERS provides significant opportunities for
              both researchers and educators.

