Title       : Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering
               Mentoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2001  
File        : a0122815

Award Number: 0122815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marilyn J. Suiter                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Earlene Armstrong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1593      PRES AWDS FOR EXCELL IN SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Earlene Armstrong has clearly encouraged young minority students during her
              twenty years on faculty at University of Maryland at College Park. She has
              served as the primary advisor to undergraduate students in the Department of
              Entomology, formally advising more than one hundred students each year.
              Armstrong has served as the director of the Prefreshman Academic Enrichment
              Program, which prepares and retains "at risk" students during their first year
              at Maryland, focusing on strengthening their skills in mathematics and science.
              Armstrong is noted for taking a personal interest in working with students, and
              for helping the student to develop important practical skills, such as good
              time management and study habits. As a result, the program's students earn
              higher grades, have a retention rate of eighty-seven percent and a fifty-five
              percent retention rate in the sciences. Those mentoring relationships remain
              active long after the students graduate from the university.

Armstrong's
              success with her students is reflected in honors she has received, such as the
              Faculty Minority Achievement Award from the University of Maryland President's
              Commission on Ethnic Minority Issues, the Outstanding Advisor of the Year Award
              from the University's Parents' Association.

