Title       : Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering
               Mentoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2001  
File        : a0122835

Award Number: 0122835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marilyn J. Suiter                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore R. Williams williams@acs.wooster.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Wooster
	      
	      Wooster, OH  44691    216/263-2000

NSF Program : 1593      PRES AWDS FOR EXCELL IN SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Theodore Williams began mentoring undergraduate students in the late 1950's
              at Wooster College (Ohio) as a member of the chemistry department faculty. The
              independent study program he implemented has resulted in thirty-four
              individuals earning doctorates in SMET. A summer research program for
              undergraduate students has resulted in seven medical doctors and another
              seventeen doctorate degrees. In addition, Williams has developed and
              implemented programs for junior high school girls in science (100 students
              participate annually), a targeted career development program, high-school
              student mentoring (about 25 students annually) and provided science workshops
              to elementary schools. He has also served as the research advisor for many
              students.

 Williams adopted a very personal style of advising in the early
              part of his career, as was feasible with the small number of minority students
              at Wooster College. His method of advising has changed with his increased
              expertise and with changing circumstances, including an increased number of
              minority students.
Williams mentions that he has "continually honed his
              mentoring skills with improved approaches for the student in the 21st century."
              The professions and commentary of his former students clearly demonstrate the
              very positive interactions that have occurred between Williams and his mentees,
              such as the famous "walk around the campus" talks that changed their lives.

