Title       : Department of A Scholarship Program for Computer Science, Engineering, and
               Mathematics Students: An Industry-Academia Partnership Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0122950

Award Number: 0122950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore W. Hodapp                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171869             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Russomanno drussmnn@memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hank Javan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Olfa Nasraoui  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Palazolo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Regina Hairston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary
A Scholarship Program for Computer Science, Engineering, and
              Mathematics Students:
An Industry-Academia Partnership Approach

This
              program provides 25 undergraduate students $3125 per academic year provided the
              students are within two years of graduation. The program is managed to
              especially encourage applications from underrepresented groups and transfer
              students. All engineering majors as well as computer science and mathematics
              majors are eligible for scholarships. The program strengthens existing
              resources, as well as partnerships with community colleges and industry. The
              primary goal of the program is to supplement existing resources within the
              University to facilitate a life-altering, environmental change for financially
              disadvantaged, upper-division undergraduate CSEM students with academic
              potential. The goal is achieved by providing twenty-five, two-year scholarships
              supplemented with summer industry or research internships between the junior
              and senior years.

The program has the following supporting objectives, each
              with specific, measurable outcomes, which are analyzed and serve as feedback to
              continually improve the program:
1) Increase the graduation rate of CSEM
              students particularly minority and female students
2) Decrease the average
              time to degree completion for CSEM students
3) Decrease the number of CSEM
              students working in non-intellectually engaging jobs by increasing
              opportunities for students to work on a faculty member's funded research or
              through approved co-op or summer internships with industry partners of the
              program
4) Improve employment placement in highly sought-after positions
5)
              Increase the number of CSEM graduates who enroll in graduate school
The
              objectives are achieved through a unique combination of student environment
              modifications, scholarships, retention and intervention, professional
              development and research activities, industrial collaborations, and academic
              support while leveraging and not replacing existing resources.

