Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Community and Commodity in the Pueblo III World:
               Exchange and Integration in the Yellow Jacket Community, A.D.1150-1300
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0122317

Award Number: 0122317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9331               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle Hegmon michelle.hegmon@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Michelle Hegmon, Ms Jannette Mobley-Tanaka will
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. Using ceramic analysis she will
              reconstruct social organization in a prehistoric southwest USA Pueblo
              community.
        Analysis of community interaction has been critical to
              archaeologists' understanding of the abandonment of the Mesa Verde region
              (southwest Colorado) around AD 1300.  Communities - important places on the
              landscape - persisted for generations, even as individuals and households
              shifted residences frequently, thus these communities were much more than
              groups of individuals. Communities also became larger and more densely packed
              over time, and eventually controlled access to agricultural lands and served as
              units of defense and conflict.  This picture, while fascinating, is based
              almost exclusively on analyses of the interaction among communities, rather
              than the social dynamics within communities. 

        Mobley-Tanaka's
              research will fill this gap, utilizing data from the large Yellow Jacket
              community in southwest Colorado to analyze intra-community interaction.  
              Archaeologists rarely are able to undertake such detailed analyses, but they
              are possible in this case because of (1) many years of research at Yellow
              Jacket;  (2) deposits that are clearly associated with individual residences;
              (3) the identification of three pottery-making kilns at the site.  These
              circumstances will allow Mobley-Tanaka to determine where households obtained
              their domestic goods - information that can be used to trace patterns of
              consumption and exchange at the intra-community level.

        NSF funds
              will support analyses concerning the production and distribution of pottery. 
              Petrographic analysis will allow identification of where the pottery was made
              and thus how it was distributed across the community.   These data can answer
              questions about the nature of inter-household interaction within the community:
              Were households relatively independent or strongly interdependent?  Were there
              various networks of interacting households?  Results regarding intra-community
              dynamics will be combined with extant understandings of inter-community
              interaction to illuminate the role of communities in the abandonment of the
              Mesa Verde region and to better understand the nature of community in the past.
              They will also increase understanding of an important aspect of US prehistory
              and assist in training a promising young scientist.


   


