Title       : ITR/SI+AP: A Mobile Sensor Web for Polar Ice Sheet Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0122520

Award Number: 0122520
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5490000            (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Prasad Gogineni gogineni@eecs.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor S. Frost  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Braaten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn E. Prescott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher T. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1688      ITR LARGE GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1652,1656,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0122520
Gogineni

Sea level has been rising over the last century.  Although
              the immediate impact of sea level rise may be less severe than other effects of
              global climate change, the long-term consequences can be much more devastating
              since nearly 60% of the world population lives in coastal regions.  Scientists
              have postulated that excess water is being released from polar ice sheets due
              to long-term, global climate change, but there are insufficient data to confirm
              these theories.  Understanding the interactions between the ice sheets, oceans
              and atmosphere is essential to quantifying the role of ice sheets in sea level
              rise.  Toward that end, this research project involves the innovative
              application of information technology in the development and deployment of
              intelligent radar sensors for measuring key glaciological parameters. 

Radar
              instrumentation will consist of a synthetic aperture radar (SAR) that can
              operate in bistatic or monostatic mode.  One important application of the SAR
              will be in the determination of basal conditions, particularly the presence and
              distribution of basal water.  Basal water lubricates the ice/bed interface,
              enhancing flow, and increasing the amount of ice discharged into the ocean. 
              Another application of the SAR will be to measure ice thickness and map
              internal layers in both shallow and deep ice.  Information on near-surface
              internal layers will be used to estimate the average, recent accumulation rate,
              while the deeper layers provide a history of past accumulation and flow rates. 
              A tracked vehicle and an automated snowmobile will be used to test and
              demonstrate the utility of an intelligent radar in glaciological
              investigations.

The system will be developed to collect, process and analyze
              data in real time and in conjunction with a priori information derived from
              archived sources.  The combined real time and archived information will be used
              onboard the vehicles to select and generate an optimum sensor configuration. 
              This project thus involves innovative research in intelligent systems, sounding
              radars and ice sheet modeling.  In addition it has a very strong public
              outreach and education program, which include near-real-time image broadcasts
              via the world wide web


