Title       : Partnership for Advancing Technologies in Housing: Rigidified Pneumatic
               Composites: Use of space technologies to build the next generation of American
               Homes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0122022

Award Number: 0122022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Van Dessel vandes2@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Achille Messac  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1624,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Rigidified Pneumatic Composites: Use of space technologies to build the next
              generation of American Homes

Abstract

Rigidified Pneumatic Composites
              (RPC) structures are defined as thin flexible membrane structures that are
              pneumatically deployed. After deployment, these structures harden due to
              chemical or physical change of the membrane. Because of this change, such
              structures no longer require pneumatic pressure to maintain their shape or
              provide structural stability. As a result, a structural skin is obtained that
              can be used to construct a variety of three-dimensional structures. These
              include for example advanced panel systems, simple columns and beams, and
              complex truss systems. Current research related to RPC technology is mainly
              focusing on space structure design. The potential of this class of structures
              for achieving affordable space systems, robust deployment, very small-stowed
              volume, and low weight is recognized by an increasing segment of the space
              structure design community. Our previous studies have indicated that RPC
              technology might also be extremely beneficial for use in residential
              construction. RPC technology for example possesses many of the characteristics
              of wood light framing in that such structures are low cost, require no special
              tools, are extremely resource efficient, and are very versatile in terms of
              design flexibility. In addition, RPC technology lends itself very well to low
              cost manufacturing and streamlined technology delivery. Applications in
              residential construction
however differ significantly from space applications;
              no direct displacement is therefore possible. The research and development
              objective of this project is therefore to investigate the application of
              rigidified pneumatic composite technology specifically for residential
              construction. The project proposes to develop and demonstrate a design
              methodology that allows for rational comparison of Rigidified Pneumatic
              Composite (RPC) systems with alternate RPC designs and building systems. The
              long-term objectives of this grant are to develop commercially viable and
              environmentally conscious housing technologies that utilize state-of-the-art
              materials and manufacturing processes. The proposed research is expected to
              lead to the development of houses that are safer to construct, less expensive
              to build, operate, and maintain, and will use significantly less resources
              relative to wood light. 

