Title       : FSML: Molecular Biology Core Facility for Grice Marine Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  2001   
File        : a0122336

Award Number: 0122336
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101602             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig J. Plante plantec@cofc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis E. Burnett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Charleston
	      66 George Street
	      Charleston, SC  294240001    843/953-5673

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9117,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Craig Plante and Louis Burnett at the College
              of Charleston to establish a core facility for molecular/genomic research at
              the Grice Marine Laboratory.  The Grice Marine Laboratory (GML) serves as the
              primary facility in support of the undergraduate and the graduate programs in
              marine biology of the College of Charleston and the University of Charleston,
              SC.   As the College of Charleston student population has rapidly grown to over
              9500, the size of the Biology Department has increased from 20 to 32 faculty
              since 1993.  Reflecting the department's goal to offer more opportunities for
              research to its undergraduates, research success has been emphasized in these
              recent hirings to a greater extent than in the past.  Consequently, the scope
              and scale of research has expanded over the past decade, requiring a higher
              level of methodological sophistication.  These shifts have necessitated the use
              of more contemporary protocols, including modern molecular approaches.  This
              modernization will allow the GML to better fulfill its mission to support
              undergraduate and graduate student education; acquire and disseminate knowledge
              about marine organisms, processes, and environmental issues; and encourage
              collaborative interdisciplinary marine research among academic and other marine
              research facilities.  

Acquisition of an automated DNA sequencer, image
              analysis system, thermal cyclers, PCR work station and additional versatile
              equipment will make available new and exciting capabilities for scientists and
              students at the College of Charleston and beyond.  Projects of the nine
              resident GML faculty and their students include study of microbial diversity in
              marine sediments, molecular mechanisms of immune responses in fish and shrimp,
              patterns of paternity in sea turtles, antibiotic-resistant pathogenic bacteria
              in aquaculture, and phylogenetic studies of marine invertebrates and
              fish.

This shared-use facility will benefit faculty and student research,
              undergraduate and graduate students, and a broader group of visiting scientists
              and summer interns at the GML.  Furthermore, these resources will be available
              to our partners in the larger community at the Fort Johnson research complex,
              which includes scientists at the laboratories of the South Carolina Marine
              Resources Research Institute, the Marine Biomedical and Environmental Studies
              Program of the Medical University of South Carolina, and the Charleston
              laboratories of the National Ocean Service and the National Institute of
              Standards and Technology. 

