Title       : Exploring Savanna Chimpanzee Ecology and Prospects for Long-term Research in
               Senegal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2001    
File        : a0122518

Award Number: 0122518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16688              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill Pruetz pruetz@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This high risk project is designed to assess the feasibility of habituating a
              new population of chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes verus) to the presence of human
              researchers in southeastern Senegal.  This population of savanna chimpanzees
              inhabits perhaps the hottest, driest, and most open habitat used by chimpanzees
              today -   a habitat similar to the one in which early humans are thought to
              have evolved.  A long-term goal of the project is to examine savanna chimpanzee
              behavior and ecology in comparison to chimpanzees at forested sites.  In
              Senegal, humans and chimpanzees co-exist in some areas, and chimpanzees here
              are used to human presence.  In addition to monitoring the process of
              habituating chimpanzees to the presence of human researchers, another immediate
              goal is to understand the success of the chimpanzee population in areas
              inhabited by humans.  The findings can be applied to the conservation of
              chimpanzees elsewhere.  As human populations continue to increase across
              Africa, understanding how humans and chimpanzees can peacefully co-exist will
              be a major contribution to conservation biology.  Understanding the ecology of
              savanna chimpanzees can help shed light on the behavioral ecology of humans who
              used similar environments, and this project initiates the difficult habituation
              process necessary to study these endangered primates.

