Title       : Enhancement of the Anheuser Busch Coastal Research Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0122334

Award Number: 0122334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308533             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce P. Hayden bph@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda K. Blum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for the construction of a laboratory, a housing unit
              and a conference center at the Anheuser Busch Coastal Research Center (ABCRC)
              of the University of Virginia in Oyster, VA.  This field station, located close
              to the point at which the Chesapeake Bay joins the Atlantic Ocean at the
              southern tip of the Delmarva peninsula, provides researchers and students
              access to an area where they can investigate the ecological, chemical and
              geomorphological processes that regulate coastal systems and landscapes. Until
              recently, the station has had relatively little physical infrastructure.  An
              expanding research user base and the need to develop educational facilities
              have motivated a facilities development plan of which this project is the first
              stage. Although a relatively new station, the ABCRC has a strong history of
              supporting research and training. The proposed improvements will foster a
              fundamental change in the use of the ABCRC site. Existing facilities are able
              to support only a short-term presence by researchers at the station. With the
              proposed laboratory, housing and commons facilities, researchers will be able
              to spend more time on site, leading to more productive use of field research
              time. Additionally, graduate and undergraduate courses can be offered at the
              station once space is available for class and laboratory activities. The
              planned construction consists of a laboratory (5,000 sq. ft.), accommodations
              (4,750 sq ft.) and an education and conference building (a 3,500 sq. ft.). The
              total cost of construction of the three buildings is  approximately $1.5
              million; the institution will provide the funds required in addition to those
              provided by the NSF. 
