Title       : Equipment to Enhance Genomics Research at the Hollings Marine Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2001   
File        : a0122393

Award Number: 0122393
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  2001   
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99795              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric R. Lacy lacyer@musc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory W. Warr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294250001    843/792-0211

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9117,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Eric R. Lacy at the Medical University of South
              Carolina to fund equipment for studying the genetic responses of marine
              organisms to environmental stress.  Increased pressure on the coastal
              environment has focused attention on how marine organisms respond to this
              stress. It has long been known that animals defend themselves against
              environmental insults through hundreds if not thousands of molecular and
              cellular responses.  Until recently scientists had to laboriously measure each
              response of individual animals to various environmental challenges to try to
              understand which physiological systems (e.g., immune, respiratory,
              reproductive) were protected and which had failed.  With the advent of
              molecular genetics, scientists have new tools to look at genes and determine
              which ones are turned off and turned on when the animals are environmentally
              stressed. 

However, there are tens of thousands of genes and examining them
              manually, a few at a time, would take years to get the answers needed. The gene
              arrayer and reader obtained from this grant will be used by the Marine Genome
              Project in Charleston, SC, to simultaneously examine thousands of genes from
              shrimp, oysters, dolphins, stingrays, corals, and algae.   The experimental
              goals of this group are to use "functional genomics" (changes in gene
              expression correlated with changes in marine environmental stress) to:  1) find
              early genetic markers of stress in marine organisms, 2) use the genetic
              information to diagnose and predict the particular stress or infection the
              animal may have, 3) identify new genes that might protect these marine animals
              from infection and stress, and 4) detect interactions among genes. Expressed
              genes are isolated from target tissues in the animals before, during and after
              stress. Then a comparison is made for each animal to see which genes are turned
              on and which are turned off under each of these conditions. 

The results of
              these studies will show which genes are important in an animal's defense
              mechanisms. These findings have broad implications for environmental and human
              health because the two are intimately linked. For example, early genetic
              changes in an organism may predict changes occurring in the environment that
              cannot be monitored in any other way. This information also should help
              selective marine animal breeding programs for aquatic food suppliers.
              Furthermore, the information from this study should assist scientists in better
              understanding the mechanisms of the current world-wide decline of coral reefs. 
              The equipment purchased under this award will reside in the newly constructed
              Hollings Marine Lab, an inter-institutional lab that houses all partners of the
              Marine Genome Project and the College of Charleston.  Students at all levels
              (high school, undergraduate and graduate) will be trained to use this equipment
              through internships.

