Title       : CEDAR: Ground-Based Optical Imaging of Sporadic Sodium Clouds Near the Summer
               Mesopause, Using Resonantly Scattered Sunlight
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0122995

Award Number: 0122995
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181515             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Collins   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Conde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 4202      UPPER ATMOSPHERIC FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 1323,9150,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will develop a new method to obtain two-dimensional images of
              sporadic clouds of mesospheric sodium.  These images will be constructed by
              combining data from a sodium lidar and an optical spectrometer obtained during
              arctic summer months.  The project involves minor modifications to existing
              instruments at Poker Flat, Alaska, and the development of analysis and
              calibration software to perform the two-dimensional imaging with high
              reliability.  The mesopause region hosts persistent layers of neutral and
              ionized metallic atoms that are replenished by the ablation of meteors.  These
              metal layers can be used as tracers of the thermal, chemical, and dynamical
              conditions near the mesopause.  Although the altitude distribution of these
              layers have been studied using various techniques, the horizontal structure of
              the layers remains unknown.  This investigation aims to observe the
              two-dimensional structure of metallic layers using the sun to illuminate sodium
              atoms, and sensitive instrumentation to detect the scattered sunlight.  The
              simultaneous lidar measurements will provide information about the altitude
              distribution of the layers.  Various models have shown that the temperature
              structure in the mesopause may be a sensitive indicator of global change. 
              Understanding the distribution of sporadic layers in the mesosphere is
              important in studying processes that heat and cool the middle atmosphere.
