Title       : Dept. of Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics Scholarships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0122988

Award Number: 0122988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore W. Hodapp                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $386380             (Estimated)
Investigator: Enrique Villamor villamor@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Armando B. Barreto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Kraynek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philippe Rukimbira  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kandell Bentley-Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY
This program provides finical aid and academic support for
              talented low-income students majoring in Computer Science, Engineering or
              Mathematics. There is a strong recruitment plan for Hispanic students that
              attend surrounding high schools and community colleges. The program actively
              seeks Hispanic students but does not discriminate against other minority or
              non-minority students. The program has developed partnerships between Coral
              Park Senior High School (CPSHS) and Miami Dade Community College (MDCC) that
              helps to identify candidates in terms of need, well roundedness and
              scholarship. However, the program is not limited to these students. Indeed,
              information of the program is mailed to all the Miami Dade High Schools and
              Florida Community Colleges. The goal of the program is for the entering first
              year students to graduate with a Bachelors degree in 4 years and for the
              community college transfer students to finish their Bachelors degree in 2
              years. A counseling program is in place with the purpose of providing the
              scholars with the adequate support mechanisms to make the above goals
              successful. As part of the retention effort, tutorial assistance and an
              internship program are in place. There also is a group of specialists to assist
              the scholars in coping with the everyday problems they face during their
              college experience.

