Title       : Microstructure Evolution in Solids with External Constraints and Defects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0122638

Award Number: 0122638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Long-Qing Chen lqc3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports theoretical and computational research and education to
              study the evolution of microsctructure in solids. The main scientific objective
              of this proposal is to understand the effect of external constraints on phase
              transformations and microstructure evolution, and the mutual interactions
              between phase and defect microstructures. The PI will investigate two specific
              problems using the phase-field approach in combination with mesoscale
              elasticity theory. The first problem is concerned with phase transformations
              and domain structure evolution in ferroelectric thin films constrained by a
              substrate.  A phase-field model will be developed for ferroelectric domain
              evolution in single-crystal films. The model will include long-range elastic
              and electric dipole-dipole interactions, and the appropriate mechanical and
              electrical boundary conditions. The initial focus will be on a number of
              important oxides, PbTiO3, BaTiO3, PbZrxTi1-xO3, for which there have been
              extensive experimental measurements and theoretical thermodynamic analyses. 
              The PI will systematically investigate the effect of substrate constraints and
              film thickness on transformation temperatures, volume fractions, and the size
              of each orientation domain. The focus will be on the temporal evolution of
              ferroelectric domain structures during nucleation, growth and coarsening, as
              well as during the domain-wall motion and polarization switching under an
              electric field. The effect of internal defects, both immobile and diffusive, on
              domain-wall mobility and ferroelectric/dielectric responses will be studied.
              The second problem involves the mutual interactions between phase and
              dislocation microstructures in advanced alloys. Based on recent advances in
              phase-field modeling of dislocations, a comprehensive model for the
              simultaneous temporal evolution of phase and dislocation microstructures will
              be developed, incorporating both elastic anisotropy and elastic inhomogeneity.
              The PI will study the local phase equilibria, solute segregation kinetics, and
              nucleation and growth processes around both static and moving dislocations, by
              varying the solute-solvent size mismatch, elastic inhomogeneity, and the
              relative solute diffusivity and dislocation mobility. A major effort will be
              devoted to modeling the influence of solute segregation and second-phase
              precipitates on the dynamics of both isolated and an ensemble of dislocations
              under applied stresses. In particular, for a given strain rate, the effect of
              solute concentration, solute diffusivity, precipitate size and shape,
              precipitate-precipitate spacing, lattice mismatch, and elastic inhomogeneity,
              on the critical yield stress of an alloy will be systematically studied.
              Financial support for two graduate students is requested. The PI will interact
              closely with experimentalists for validation of theoretical predictions. He
              also plans collaborations with other theorists to link electronic structure
              calculations and mesoscale phase-field simulations for modeling phase
              transformations and microstructure evolution.
The proposed research will
              impact graduate education in materials, as phase-field simulations of phase
              transformations and microstructure evolution are being incorporated into a
              graduate course as part of an educational program on thermodynamics and
              kinetics. User-friendly software with graphical interfaces will be developed
              and distributed to other institutions for educational purposes. The proposed
              project will also result in new computational tools that can potentially be
              applied to industrially important materials problems as evidenced by the
              existing collaborations between the PI and industry.
%%%
This award supports
              theoretical and computational research and education to study the structure of
              materials on length scales between the atomic and the macroscopic, the
              microstructure, its role in phase transformations, and its evolution in the
              presence of external constraints and internal defects.  This is a difficult
              fundamental problem which directly impacts materials processing. The PI will
              use phase field methods and focus on evolution of domains in ferroelectric
              materials and the mutual interactions between phase and dislocation
              microstructures in advanced alloys. Dislocations play an important role in
              diffusion processes and phase transformations of solids. Ferroelectric
              materials have applications in sensors and optical components
***


