Title       : Lodging and Meeting Accommodations for Visiting Scientists and Students at the
               Black Rock Forest Field Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0122378

Award Number: 0122378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Schuster schuster@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Black Rock Forest Cons.Inc
	      129 Continental Road
	      Cornwall, NY  12518    914/534-4517

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. William Schuster at The Black Rock Forest
              Consortium, a group of eighteen New York-area academic institutions, to
              construct accommodations for visiting scientists and students to complete its
              new research and training Center at its Field Station, the 1530 hectare (3785
              acre) Black Rock Forest. The Forest is located in the Hudson Highlands, 80 km
              (50 miles) north of New York City, and possesses a wide variety of terrestrial
              and aquatic habitats for study. It has been carefully protected and managed for
              nearly a century, and has been utilized by the Black Rock Forest Consortium
              since 1989. The Forest has become a focal point for scientific field studies
              and education for thousands of students and faculty from Consortium
              institutions. In the past three years, the Consortium has produced a Master
              Plan, raised over $2.5 million for construction costs, and has completed and
              begun operations from the Center for Science and Education. 
Despite many
              natural features that make it an excellent location for scientific fieldwork,
              the Black Rock Forest has lacked until now suitable facilities to support
              on-site research, training, and education. Over the past few years an increase
              in scientific activity has occurred due to a suite of factors that include the
              creation and development of the Center for Environmental Research and
              Conservation (CERC) at Columbia University. Black Rock serves as CERC's primary
              facility for local scientific research and intensive field training. Expansions
              of programs in ecological and environmental sciences are also underway at
              several of the Black Rock Forest Consortium's other member institutions.
The
              Consortium now will construct and equip a 500 sq.m  (5500 sq.ft) lodging and
              meeting facility. This Lodge will house up to 50 visitors at a time and will
              complete the Consortium's facilities Master Plan. This grant will allow the
              Consortium to successfully complete the construction of what is becoming an
              intensively used facility for scientific research, training, and education at
              all levels. The gathering space will enable meetings, seminars, and
              presentations for large groups. The Consortium anticipates at least 4000
              visitor nights per year in the first few years, and the development of new
              programs such as summer institutes, residential field courses, and science
              camps. Thus the grant will allow completion of construction of basic facilities
              for what is becoming an intensively used facility for scientific research,
              training, and education.

