Title       : NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences - Mathematical Methods
               in Nonlinear Wave Propagation - May 13-17, 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2001  
File        : a0122208

Award Number: 0122208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dominic P. Clemence clemence@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Guoqing Tang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Mathematics Department at North Carolina A&T State University will host an
              NSF/CBMS Regional Research Conference, May 20-24, 2002, on "Mathematical
              Methods in nonlinear wave propagation". The proceedings of the five-day
              conference will be anchored by ten lectures delivered by Professor J. Kenneth
              Shaw on the following topics: Overview of fiber optics; Mathematical models;
              Pulse propagation in fibers; Mathematical modeling and simulation; Optical
              solitons; Phase modulation and solitons; Optimization Problems; Planar
              waveguides and Elliptical core fibers; Pulse design in fibers; Retrospective,
              review  and
research directions. In addition to these lectures, there shall be
              semi-structured discussion
sessions led by other leading research
              mathematicians and engineers in nonlinear mathematics
and fiber optics.
              

The chosen topic, motivated by the study of the propagation of pulses
              through nonlinear optical fibers, underlies a fertile and briskly active
              interdisciplinary area, rendering it particularly timely in applied mathematics
              research. By providing a focal point to an otherwise diverse set of specialized
              mathematical areas, the topic creates opportunities for collaboration amongst
              mathematicians of different specialties, while at the same time laying a
              foundation for interdisciplinary collaboration. This conference is in
              particular intended as an effort to introduce new researchers to this exciting
              field, with a focus on HBCU/MI faculty, whose activities are normally confined
              to teaching.  

While participation is mainly expected from within North
              Carolina and the Southeastern-Atlantic region, other participants are expected
              from the wider mathematical sciences community. An intended outcome of the
              conference is that it will act as an incubator for mathematical and
              interdisciplinary collaborative activities among established and new
              researchers, thus serving to stimulate research activity in applied mathematics
              at minority serving institutions.
