Title       : NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences-"Structure and
               Decomposition of Graphs"- June 18-22,2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  2001   
File        : a0122278

Award Number: 0122278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra Knisley knisleyd@etsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anant P. Godbole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Tennessee State Univ
	      P O Box 70565
	      Johnson City, TN  37614    423/232-5640

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conference, Structure and Decompositions of
              Graphs, to be held during the period August 12--16 2002 at East Tennessee State
              University (ETSU), will:

feature ten keynote lectures by one of the most
              prominent researchers in structural graph theory;

allow mathematicians at
              ETSU to utilize their past experience with CBMS and other conferences to offer
              a very high level of organization;

bring together a diverse collection of
              researchers into a communion of learning; and

attract a group of scientists
              with primary interests in a variety of fields.

The Principal Lecturer (PL)
              Robin Thomas of the Georgia Institute of Technology will deliver ten cohesive
              lectures that build bridges between various  fields; expose the audience to
              dominant themes and trends in graph theory; and lay the foundation for many
              research partnerships.   A dedicated and inspirational researcher, Robin's
              impact on future generations of mathematical talent is already evident.  His
              dynamic lectures are well known for their organization and easy availability.  
               
 
The conference lectures will survey major ideas and recent results in the
              area of graph structure and decompositions.  Topics to be covered in depth
              include graph planarity; tree decompositions; the graph minors project; spatial
              embeddings of graphs; Pfaffian orientations; and a tantalizing set of
              possibilities for directed graphs.  

The PL has agreed to deliver to the
              CBMS a monograph entitled "Structure and Decompositions of Graphs" by June 1,
              2003; it will subsequently be published by the AMS.  He will give two lectures
              on each of the five days of the conference.  Several leading authorities will
              be present at the conference, and there will be four invited auxiliary talks
              that put the keynote lectures in an even wider perspective.  

Lectures will
              be held in a multi-media classroom in the D.P. Culp Student Center on the ETSU
              campus.  Three classrooms will be set aside all week for informal discussions
              between participants.  Attendees will stay in single efficiency-style
              apartments on campus; eat three meals in the Culp Center cafeteria; have full
              access to the ETSU athletic and library facilities; and have accounts in the
              Departmental Technology Lab.  Several organized social activities will be
              planned, including sharing the region's beauty on a three hour hike of the
              Appalachian Trail.

A conference website will be created and updated
              regularly as attendees reap the benefits of Thomas' lectures by starting
              research projects; publishing papers, etc.

