Title       : Presidential Awards for Excellence In Science, Mathematics and Engineering
               Mentoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2001  
File        : a0122834

Award Number: 0122834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marilyn J. Suiter                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clinton H. Dixon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fort Valley State College
	      1005 State University Drive
	      Fort Valley, GA  310304313    478/825-6397

NSF Program : 1593      PRES AWDS FOR EXCELL IN SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Clinton Dixon has been actively engaged in mentoring students at Fort Valley
              State University since he joined the faculty in 1972. He has focused on
              developing and maintaining support from early contact with pre-college students
              through to their graduate degrees and careers, and was noted for his high
              standards, personal involvement, and extending himself outside the classroom.
              In 1995, Dixon established the program, "Increasing Minority Admissions and
              Enrollment in Health Professions," which has provided mentoring and program
              support to Georgia's African-American youth. In six years, that program has
              involved more than four hundred thirty-one high-school students in activities
              that focused on their preparation for college through Scholastic Aptitude Test
              preparation workshops, rigorous academic curricular activities, computer
              literacy sessions, and field trips/site visits. At least twenty-seven
              participants have enrolled in graduate degree programs. More recently, the
              program has been extended to include middle-school students. 

Dixon's
              activities with college students feature peer mentoring, with students
              assisting in taking science activities to middle schools, and assisting in
              judging science fairs. Undergraduates also present papers in national
              scientific meetings and participate in monthly seminars that support their
              transition to graduate and professional schools.

Dixon was also commended
              for disseminating his mentorship model to his faculty at FVSU, who have also
              developed skills in working well with students and supporting their
              development, as they award-winning scientists.

