Title       : Oncogene and Transgenic Correlates of Cancer Risk Assessments to be held in
               Greece, April 29 to May 3, 1991.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1991   
File        : a9023039

Award Number: 9023039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Constantine Zervos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The past twenty years have witnessed explosive advances in molecular           
              biology and molecular genetics.  Prime examples are the discovery of           
              oncogenes and the construction of transgenic mammals.  As a consequence        
              many now believe that the basic biological disciplines have begun to           
              unravel the mysteries of the causes and evolution of cancer.  The same         
              period has witnessed accelerating use of cancer risk assessments by            
              government and industry officials responsible for the protection of            
              the public health from potentially carcinogenic chemicals.  Great              
              disparity exists in technical and scientific sophistication between            
              the cancer risk assessment methods currently in use and methods                
              potentially available as a result of oncogene and transgenics                  
              research.  This award provides partial funding for an International            
              5-day Advanced Research Workshop (ARW), funded principally by the              
              Scientific Affairs Committee of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization         
              (NATO).  It will be held in the Hotel Meliton, Sithonia, Halkidiki,            
              Greece from April 28, till May 3, 1991, to explore recent advances in          
              oncogene and transgenics research for potential short and long term            
              contributions toward the improvement of cancer risk assessment methods         
              currently in use by public health protection authorities in the                
              industrialized world.
