Title       : Emulsion and Dispersion Polymerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1993   
File        : a9023240

Award Number: 9023240
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249827             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary W. Poehlein gary.poehlein@oip.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                  Emulsion polymerization is one of the most important                      
              commercial processes for converting unsaturated monomers into                  
              synthetic polymers.  Billions of pounds of latex are produced                  
              annually for a broad range of applications such as: surface                    
              coatings, synthetic elastomers, adhesions, binders for non-                    
              woven materials, high-impact plastics, additives for                           
              construction materials and fluid property modifiers.  Small                    
              volumes of latex products are also used in biomedical and                      
              scientific applications.                                                       
                   Conventional emulsion polymerization involves the                         
              dispersion of a hydrophobic monomer, or monomers, into water                   
              with an oil-in-water emulsifier, followed by polymerization                    
              with a water-soluble initiator.  Although the droplets in the                  
              monomer emulsion are usually 2 to 10 m, the diameters of the                  
              polymer particles in the final product are almost always in                    
              the submicron range.  Hence, the reaction includes particle                    
              nucleation rather than simply polymerization in the monomer                    
              droplets.  These systems exhibit characteristically high                       
              reaction rates and a high degree of polymerization.  The                       
              product is comprised of colloidal polymer particles in a                       
              stable suspense, referred to as a latex dispersed in the                       
              aqueous phase.                                                                 
                   Dispersion polymerization is a process in which the                       
              continuous phase us a solvent for the monomers but not the                     
              resulting polymer formed is generally stabilized by block or                   
              graft copolymers.  Resultant polymer particle size is many                     
              microns in diameter-the lower end of the suspension                            
              polymerization range.                                                          
                   This research  is aimed at obtaining a better knowledge                   
              of the reactions in the separate phases in heterogenous free                   
              radical polymerization systems.  The main thrust is to examine                 
              the impact of reactions in the continuous phase when monomers                  
              with different solubilities are polymerized and when polymeric                 
              stabilizers are used with conventional monomers.  Work in                      
              emulsion and dispersion polymerization will be done.                           
                   The research will consist of both experimental and                        
              theoretical work.  The experimental work will involve                          
              measurement of reaction rates, reagent concentrations,                         
              particle size distributions, copolymer compositional                           
              parameters and molecular weights.  Model simulations will be                   
              used to evaluate the data and to extrapolate to new operating                  
              conditions.  The results will be used to help custom design                    
              new molecules and products for specific high-value                             
              applications.  The increased understanding of continuous-phase                 
              phenomena will also lead to improvements in existing products                  
              and processes.***                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   //
