Title       : Neural Models of Adaptive Behavior in Market Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1991   
File        : a9023055

Award Number: 9023055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98647              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Rassenti   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vernon L. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley S. Reynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ferenc Szidarovszky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research program will bring together elements of neural                   
              networks, stability analysis, and experimental economics.  The                 
              purpose of this research is to develop and test theory for the                 
              evolutions of decision-making in dynamic oligopoly environments.               
              Imagine that agents learn about each other and their environments              
              through repeated institutional interactions, and adapt their                   
              decisions in light of the information they acquire.  So guided by              
              institutional rules and informational restrictions, an                         
              agent's decision provides a local gradient to make predictions                 
              about statistical regularity of decisions made.  Such neural                   
              network models can be shown to be generalized versions of dynamic              
              oligopoly models based on adaptive decision-making rules.  A set               
              of appropriate experiments with human subjects to validate and/or              
              aid in amending the theory will be carried out.                                
                                                                                             
              This project will focus on simple quantity setting or price setting            
              oligopoly environments.  Each agent involved in the learning                   
              process makes a simple decision and gets information and a reward              
              before making  another decision.  These environments are simple                
              enough that the computation of theoretical equilibria (e.g.,                   
              noncooperative Nash equilibria) is achievable (though sometimes                
              requiring numerical methods), and is testable through controlled               
              experimentation with cash motivated human subjects.  Understanding             
              the dynamics of decision-making in these simple,environments                   
              portends the successful examination of more complex scenarios where            
              policy issues may be at stake.  For example, how do long term cost             
              reduction (R&D) investments interact with short term pricing                   
              decisions; how can a few influential (large) buyers alter the                  
              decision-making influence the evolutions of market concentration               
              and the distribution of market shares?
