Title       : The Scientific and Industrial Culture of the First European Entrepreneurs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1992    
File        : a9023411

Award Number: 9023411
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38540              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret C. Jacob   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New School Univ
	      66 West 12th Street
	      New York, NY  100118603    212/741-5600

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The relationship between science and commerce plays a crucial but              
              little understood role in modern society.  For much of its life as             
              a nation, the US entrepreneurs "imported" scientific work from                 
              European nations to develop American industry.  Currently, Japanese            
              entrepreneurs are said to be taking advantage of scientific and                
              technological knowledge produced in the US and Europe.  But how do             
              entrepreneurs take advantage of scientific developments in order               
              to establish commercially profitable technological enterprises?                
              One way to get at this issue is to examine the historical record               
              and this is what Professor Margaret Jacob is proposing to do.                  
              Professor Jacob is exploring the feasibility of undertaking a major            
              research effort to rediscover the mental universe of the first                 
              generation of European industrial entrepreneurs during the first               
              industrial revolution, that is from about 1770 to 1820.  She is                
              seeking to discover their education in applied as well as                      
              theoretical science, to examine the role played in their thinking              
              by mechanical imagery and analogy, by the ideology of science in               
              relation to discipline and work, order and design, progress and the            
              control of humankind and nature.  While examining the differences,             
              she is seeking by means of a comparative approach that will focus              
              upon archives in English, French, Dutch, Flemish and German, to                
              understand the common assumptions of European entrepreneurs, that              
              is the knowledge and values they shared, as well as what was                   
              distinctively national, regional and individual.  Under this                   
              exploratory grant, Professor Jacob and a graduate student will be              
              determining whether they can in fact achieve this understanding                
              with the archival data available in Britain, Belgium, the                      
              Netherlands, France and Germany.
