Title       : Alkaloids of Importance in Plant-Insect Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1993  
File        : a9023608

Award Number: 9023608
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank R. Stermitz frslab@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9156,
Abstract    :
              This research will focus on hemiparasitic species of the plant                 
              family Scrophulariaceae. It will emphasize the alkaloid and                    
              iridoid glycoside chemistry of the plants, how these                           
              metabolites may affect insect herbivores whose larvae consume                  
              the plants, and how some of the isolated iridoid glycosides can                
              be utilized in the laboratory as chiral synthons. The plant                    
              species to be studied are parasitic on the roots of host plants                
              which contain alkaloids. These alkaloids are transferred into                  
              the parasites and may themselves affect insect herbivores.                     
              Utilization of the alkaloids by the parasites as herbivore                     
              defenses will be studied as will specificity of the parasites                  
              for certain host plants and alkaloid transport from the host                   
              into the parasite. Since insect herbivores which utilize                       
              alkaloid- and iridoid-containing plants sequester and /or                      
              metabolize the compounds, a study of chemical transformations                  
              in insect metabolism of alkaloids and iridoids will be made.                   
              Relationships between iridoid glycoside structures and their                   
              ease of conversion to pyridine alkaloids will be investigated                  
              because, in some plants, iridoids are converted to pyridine                    
              monoterpene alkaloids, but pyridine monoterpenes expected from                 
              several iridoids found in very high plant concentration have                   
              never been isolated. Finally, since iridoids are readily                       
              available in multigram quantities from some of the plants under                
              investigation and can be converted in high yield in a one-pot                  
              reaction to chiral, pentasubstituted cyclopentanes, a study                    
              will be carried out to convert these products to                               
              enantiomerically-pure carbocyclic nucleosides.                                 
                                                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
                                                                                             
              With this award the Synthetic Organic Program of the Chemistry                 
              Division will support the research of Dr. Frank R. Stermitz of                 
              the Department of Chemistry at Colorado State University. This                 
              research will focus on hemiparasitic species of the plant                      
              family Scrophularicaeae whose members are parasitic on the                     
              roots of host plants which contain alkaloids. These alkaloids                  
              are transferred into the parasites and may themselves affect                   
              insect herbivores. Utilization of the alkaloids by the                         
              parasites as herbivore defenses will be studied as will                        
              specificity of the parasites for certain host plants and                       
              alkaloid transport from the host into the parasites. These                     
              latter two studies have important implications for the                         
              biodiversity question that is becoming of crisis proportions as                
              the earth's rainforests are being threatened because simply                    
              preserving the genetic pool of plant species may not be enough                 
              if secondary metabolite composition is also dependant upon host                
              species.
