Title       : U.S.-Poland Physics Research on Order, Chaos, and the AtomicNucleus (Maria
               Sklodowska-Curie Joint Fund)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1991     
File        : a9023418

Award Number: 9023418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : September 1,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Williams D. Myers   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wladyslaw J. Swiatecki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lawrence Berkeley Lab
	      1 Cyclotron Road
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/486-4000

NSF Program : 5933      US-POLAND MARIE CURRIE JNT FND
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this US-Poland research                               
              project under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie Joint Fund                            
              between Dr. William D. Myers, Lawrence Berkeley                                
              Laboratory, and Dr. Jan Blocki, Polish Institute for                           
              Nuclear Studies, is development of a quantitative theory                       
              of nuclear dynamics.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The work will examine both classical and quantized                             
              particles in 1) potential wells of finite or infinite                          
              depth and possessing sharp or diffuse surfaces, 2) the                         
              wells undergoing periodic or aperidic shape changes of                         
              various multipolarities, and 3) fission-like deformations                      
              that span regimes of regular and chaotic nucleonic                             
              motions.  These studies, in addition to advancing the                          
              theory of collective nuclear dynamics, are expected to                         
              contribute to our knowledge of the quantal behavior of a                       
              classically chaotic system.                                                    
                                                                                             
              This project in nuclear dynamics fulfills the program                          
              objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling                        
              leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe                        
              to combine complementary talents and pool research                             
              resources in areas of strong mutual interest and                               
              competence.
