Title       : Development of an Efficient and Intense Cooling Technique Using
               Electrostatically Charged Sprays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1991   
File        : a9023417

Award Number: 9023417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 1,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52719              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyung-Jin Choi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Efficient and intense heat removal from a hot surface is of                    
              great importance in various engineering problems, such as                      
              nuclear power plant emergency cooling, continuous material                     
              casting processes, design of compact heat exchanges, etc.                      
              Spray cooling has been widely used in various industries and                   
              thermal management due to its convenience of use, low cost of                  
              operation, and more importantly high intensity of cooling                      
              rate.  However, the conventional spray cooling process cannot                  
              reach its full potential until its shortcomings, i.e.,                         
              inefficient utilization of coolant and non-uniform                             
              distribution of heat dissipation rates over a hot surface can                  
              be remedied.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research involves the use of electrostatically charged                    
              liquid sprays in the cooling process.  Preliminary experiments                 
              conducted at the University of Illinois at Chicago revealed                    
              that electrically charged water droplets dissipate heat about                  
              40% greater than the uncharged conventional case.  In                          
              addition, various interesting effects of charged droplets were                 
              observed, i.e., increased critical heat flux (CHF), extended                   
              CHF temperature, and increased heat dissipation in the film                    
              boiling region of the coolant.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Effects of charged droplets, namely, electric charge density,                  
              droplet size, droplet number density, liquid properties, and                   
              heater surface temperature are being investigated by both                      
              experimental and hybrid-analytical methods in this study.                      
              Using specially designed experimental apparatus and recently                   
              developed instruments, visualization tests of droplet                          
              impaction and heat transfer experiments will be performed.  In                 
              the heat transfer experiments, two different boundary                          
              conditions for a hot surface, i.e., a transient surface                        
              temperature and a constant temperature boundary conditions,                    
              will be tested in order to see whether a boiling hysteresis                    
              exists in charged spray cooling heat transfer.  In addition to                 
              the laboratory type of heat transfer experiment, real scaled                   
              experiments will be conducted by using commercially available                  
              electrostatic spray atomizers.  All the information obtained                   
              through these tasks will serve as a sound data base for future                 
              development of an efficient and high intense cooling                           
              technique.
