Title       : Assessment of Requirements for a Database for Arabidopsis and Other Plant
               Genomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1992       
File        : a9023371

Award Number: 9023371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter W. Arzberger                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl A. Price   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory H. Hamm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Intl Soc Plant MolecBio
	      Department of Biochemistry
	      Athens, GA  30602    404/542-3360

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1107,9237,
Abstract    :
              There is widespread interest within the international scientific               
              community in the mapping and eventual sequencing of the nuclear                
              genome of Arabidopsis thaliana.  Sufficient progress has been                  
              made in isolating specific genes, in the construction of an                    
              overlapping series of genomic clones, and in the identification                
              of a saturating set of RFLPs, that we should now consider the                  
              organization of the data that can be expected to flow from this                
              effort.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              Significant efforts in the mapping and partial sequencing of                   
              other plants.  Part of the interest in Arabidopsis is in the                   
              expectation that fundamental discoveries made with this organism               
              will be applicable to other species, especially those of                       
              commercial significance.  In addition to establishing a database               
              for the Arabidopsis genome, it is also important, therefore, to                
              establish a system in which molecular information obtained among               
              a variety of plants can be readily compared.  An obstacle to such              
              comparisons is the disparity in systems of notations for similar               
              genes cloned from different plants.                                            
                                                                                             
              To assist in meeting these needs, the present project will:                    
                                                                                             
              Assess the requirement for representation, storage and                         
              access of data suitable for the mapping and sequencing of                      
              Arabidopsis.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Assess the requirement for representation, storage and                         
              access of data suitable for the interchange of molecular                       
              information between Arabidopsis research and that on other                     
              higher plants.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              Organize a commission for developing a common notation for                     
              plant genes.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Collate information on current projects on the mapping and                     
              sequencing of Arabidopsis and other plant genomes throughout                   
              the world.  The data would be circulated among interested                      
              agencies, with summaries published in the Plant Molecular                      
              Biology Reporter.
