Title       : Spatial Properties of Configurational Knowledge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1991     
File        : a9023047

Award Number: 9023047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75735              (Estimated)
Investigator: Reginald G. Golledge golledge@geog.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Many geographers, psychologists, and other cognitive scientists           
              have conducted research on the ways that people acquire knowledge about        
              spatial patterns and relationships.  Researchers disagree about the            
              process by which people gain knowledge of more complex spatial                 
              principles like distance, connectivity, regional structure, and spatial        
              stratification.  Some contend that this type of knowledge is acquired          
              through aggregation of insights gained through single experiences.             
              Others argue that such knowledge is more quickly and completely                
              obtained through direct exposure to media like maps that directly              
              present spatial information in configurational formats.  This project          
              will test the validity of these two contentions through a set of               
              comparative experiments.  Subjects will be separated into two groups.          
              People in one group will be shown series of slides that represent              
              ground-level views along routes that those individuals might travel.           
              People in the other group will be shown maps covering the same routes.         
              Members of both groups will be asked to conduct a series of tasks that         
              test their abilities to recognize spatial patterns and distributions,          
              to reconstruct routes, to recognize the proximity of locations, and to         
              identify regional and hierarchical relationships.  The accuracy and            
              speed of answers will be measured and tested to determine whether those        
              who acquire information through the "bottoms up" approach replicated by        
              viewing the slides retain gain as much configurational knowledge as            
              those who have the "birdseye" perspectives from viewing maps.                  
                   This project will directly test hypotheses about the efficacy of          
              different means of obtaining spatial information.  The results of these        
              experiments will significantly enhance our knowledge of how people form        
              spatial understandings, of why they behave as they do in different             
              spatial contexts, and how geographic education might be altered to             
              become more effective.
