Title       : Firm Age and Wages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1992      
File        : a9023022

Award Number: 9023022
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185249             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Brown charlieb@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Medoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Although a great deal is known about how the characteristics of                
              individuals and economic outcomes are related, much less is known              
              about the association between characteristics of firms (other than             
              size and unionization) and labor market phenomena. A key                       
              characteristic of firms is their age. This project will focus on               
              the  age related differences in the survival-relevant                          
              characteristics of firms as well as attributes such as firm size               
              or industry.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The project begins with an analysis of firm age and wages,                     
              including the size and sign of the relationship on average and                 
              checks for departures from this norm across settings. An attempt               
              will be made to explain why such differentials exist and how they              
              can persist in reasonable competitive product markets.                         
                                                                                             
              Existing data sets will be utilized for the analysis, including the            
              Minimum Wage Employer Survey and the British Workplace Industrial              
              Relations Survey. However, a major part of the project will involve            
              matching estimates of age of employer to observations in data files            
              which lack an explicit measure of employer age but have large                  
              samples and more detail on worker characteristics. Specifically,               
              the Dun and Bradstreet or the Bureau of Economic Analysis County               
              Business Patterns  which obtain information on average age of firm             
              by industry size and region will be matched to individual records              
              in the Current Population Survey. In addition, a supplement to the             
              Survey of Consumers would include questions which would enable                 
              worker characteristics to be controlled for. This new data set                 
              would be made available through a data archive for other                       
              researchers in economics.
