Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Laplacians on Reimannian Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  1993    
File        : a9023875

Award Number: 9023875
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Glazebrook                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46602              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Rosenberg sr@math.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
               The principal investigator will analyze the geometry and topology            
              of manifolds by comparing different partial differential operators             
              defined on the manifold. It is known that there is a relationship              
              between certain invariants of a partial differential operator and              
              the geometry of the space on which the operator is defined. The                
              principal investigator will use heat kernel methods to approximate             
              the invariants associated to the differential operators. He will               
              use this approach to try to find an index theorem for a Laplace                
              operator which was originally introduced to study certain problems             
              in physics. The index theorem is the main tool used to link the                
              topology and geometry of a space to the differential equations                 
              defined on the space. Hence if the investigator can find an index              
              for this particular Laplace operator he will have established a                
              method which can be applied to the study of the geometry of the                
              space. It will be important to understand                                      
              the role of curvature in such an index theory.                                 
                A manifold is the mathematical object which formalizes our                   
              understanding of form, shape, and distance; a curved surface is an             
              example of a two dimensional manifold. Partial differential                    
              equations are the equations used to describe most physical                     
              phenomena. The study of the solutions of these equations is a major            
              branch of mathematics in itself. The principal investigator will               
              study problems which involve both of these topics and the                      
              relationship between shape and solutions of partial differential               
              equations.        //
