Title       : FAW: The Evolutionary Significance Of Physiological and Morphological Plasticity
               in Plantago lanceolata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1995  
File        : a9023389

Award Number: 9023389
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johanna M. Schmitt Johanna_Schmitt@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 0000,1123,1176,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                      A critical question in plant population biology is how                 
              phenotypic plasticity affects response to natural selection to                 
              heterogenous environments.  A classic example of physiological                 
              plasticity is the production of sun or shade leaves under different            
              light conditions.  One particularly interesting question is whether            
              there is a trade.off between fitness within an environment and                 
              capacity for plastic response across environments.                             
                      In this research, the investigator proposes to examine                 
              physiological, morphological and life history traits in Plantain               
              (Plantago lanceolata) to address four questions:                         
              . Is there genetic variation for norms of reaction within and                  
              between natural populations?                                                   
              . How does the strength and direction of natural selection on these            
              traits vary with light environment?                                            
              . What is the relationship between plasticity and fitness within               
              and across environments?                                                       
              .Is there short.term evolutionary response to microgeographic                  
              heterogeneity in selective pressures?                                          
                      The investigator will clonally replicate plants that have              
              experienced different selective pressures for many generations.                
              These clones will be planted and subjected to different shade                  
              regimes.  Periodically, a variety of morphological and                         
              physiological measurements will be taken to examine the plants'                
              physiological reactions.  These data will permit the examination               
              of genetic variation within and between populations for plant                  
              traits and for response of these traits to environmental variation.            
              Fecundity and survivorship will be measured to determine the                   
              strength and direction of natural selection on the traits of                   
              interest in each environment.                                                  
                      To test the hypothesis that local variation in selective               
              pressures can lead to microgeographic evolutionary response,                   
              experimental mowing regimes will be continued for five years.  Each            
              year, a random sample of the seeds produced in each plot will be               
              grown under uniform conditions to determine whether character means            
              shown to be under differential phenotypic selection in the                     
              different treatments change in the predicted directions in                     
              successive offspring generations.                                              
                      This study will integrate ecological genetics and                      
              physiological ecology, and will thereby provide valuable                       
              information  about the genetic basis and evolutionary consequences             
              of phenotypic plasticity in natural populations.
