Title       : Wonders and the Order of Nature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1991   
File        : a9023744

Award Number: 9023744
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharine Park   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A major task for the history of science is to understand how                   
              science rose and became such a driving force in the transformation             
              of our culture.  This project makes it clear that the rise of                  
              modern science in the Scientific Revolution was not simply a                   
              phenomenon connected to the rejection of the Ptolemaic system and              
              its eventual replacement by the Newtonian theory of gravitation.               
              The revolution went beyond this narrower scientific achievement to             
              lay the foundation for a systematic study of nature.  Such a study             
              required the observer of nature to search for regularities and                 
              natural laws.  Dr. Park, with her collaborator, Dr. Lorraine J.                
              Daston, are seeking to document and analyze changing views of                  
              natural law and natural order in Western culture during the period             
              broadly defined as the Scientific Revolution.  They are tracing the            
              shift in scientific writing from a view of nature that emphasized              
              the anomalous and the bizarre (monstrous births, celestial                     
              apparitions, unusual meteorological phenomena, exotic plants and               
              animals) to a view that privileged the typical and the regular.                
              They argue that the former view, which grew out of both the new                
              discoveries of the age of European exploration and the focus on                
              portents and prodigies associated with the religious struggles of              
              the Reformation, represented--despite its unfamiliarity--a critical            
              phase in the consolidation of the new science.  Their principal                
              sources are the works of sixteenth and seventeenth century writers,            
              but they are also drawing on non-scientific sources--literary,                 
              legal, and artistic--to relate these developments to other aspects             
              of contemporary culture.
