Title       : Faculty Awards for Women Scientists and Engineers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1996     
File        : a9023600

Award Number: 9023600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angelica M. Stacy stacy@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1762,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The NSF Faculty Awards for Women Scientists and Engineers                 
              recognizes the high quality of the awardee's record in teaching                
              and scholarship, as well as potential for continued significant                
              contributions to scientific research, the academic profession,                 
              and the education of future scientists and engineers. Dr. Stacy's              
              research focuses on developing innovative methods for the                      
              synthesis of new classes of superconducting oxides.                            
                   The discovery of superconductivity in copper oxides above 77              
              K has captured our imagination with the potential to                           
              revolutionize technology; scientists anticipate that with these                
              materials it will be possible to provide cheaper power, high                   
              field magnets for medical applications, computers with higher                  
              speeds, and ultra-sensitive detectors. Unfortunately, all of the               
              known high temperature superconductors are difficult to process                
              into forms suitable for these applications. Because processing is              
              intimately related to applicability, it is essential that                      
              materials and synthetic methods be developed simultaneously with               
              the hope of finding new classes of superconductors which are                   
              easier to process. The goal of this research is to search for new              
              high temperature superconductors by developing methods for the                 
              synthesis of quaternary metal oxides. We have discovered that                  
              fused hydroxides are ideal for the preparation of cuprate                      
              superconductors at temperatures as low as 350 degrees Centigrade.              
              Among the many advantages of this new route are selective                      
              precipitation of the products at relatively low temperatures, and              
              simplicity in the formation of solid oxide materials. Moreover,                
              over a dozen new cuprates and bismuthates have been crystallized               
              by varying the solution conditions, such as concentrations of                  
              reactants, acidity, and temperature, and by varying the                        
              atmosphere over the melt. The characterization of these new                    
              compounds has made it possible to gain a better understanding of               
              the electronic properties of oxides. It is planned to continue a               
              systematic investigation of the use of hydroxide melts for the                 
              synthesis of new oxides, extend the work on cuprates and                       
              bismuthates to early transition metal oxides, and search for new               
              oxides containing niobium.  A wide range of hydroxides and                     
              conditions will be explored.  It is believed that as the                       
              chemistry of this synthetic method is elucidated, it will be                   
              possible to select conditions that favor particular structural                 
              features in the solids that are crystallized. The structures of                
              all new compounds will be determined by X-ray diffractions                     
              methods.  The magnetic and electronic properties will be measured              
              to test for superconductivity, and to gain a more thorough                     
              understanding of structure-property relationships.
