Title       : Structure and Rearrangements of Carbocations. The Isotopic Perturbation Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1993   
File        : a9023579

Award Number: 9023579
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Saunders ms@gaus90.chem.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With support from the Organic Dynamics Program, Dr. Saunders                   
              will employ an extension of his isotopic perturbation method to                
              clarify details of bonding and structure in carbocations. This                 
              approach, which takes advantage of the cooperative effects of                  
              multiple specific deuteration, affords information which cannot                
              otherwise be obtained via observations made on molecules that                  
              are substituted with a single isotopic atom. The experimental                  
              studies will be supplemented by relevant ab initio quantum                     
              mechanical calculations. This will be done to predict                          
              carbocation structures and energies and also to predict                        
              equilibrium isotope effect values that can be compared with the                
              corresponding values obtained experimentally. The operation of                 
              cooperative effects of multiple deuteration results in                         
              equilibrium isotope effects which are non-linear functions of                  
              the number of interacting deuterium atoms. Rapid processes,                    
              which can lead to non-linear isotope effects, include rotation                 
              around single bonds (which varies dihedral angles between                      
              carbocation orbitals and neighboring C-H and C-C bonds). The                   
              angular dependence of the isotope effects provides a highly                    
              sensitive probe of hyperconjugative distortion of carbocation                  
              structures.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Dr. Saunders' research project is designed to improve our                      
              understanding of carbocations, where partial bonding and                       
              stereospecific interactions of bonds with cationic centers                     
              (i.e., hyperconjugation) play important roles. In recent years,                
              a combination of new developments in experimental methodology                  
              and improvements in the quality of theoretical calculations has                
              provided new insight into structural details and energy                        
              surfaces for carbocationic rearrangement processes. The present                
              project focuses upon experimental extentions of Dr. Saunders'                  
              "isotopic perturbation method" (in which multiple deuteration                  
              results in cooperative effects that result in equilibrium                      
              isotope effects which are nonlinear functions of the number of                 
              deuterium atoms).
