Title       : History of Understanding of the Human Impact on Climate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1995       
File        : a9023424

Award Number: 9023424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62348              (Estimated)
Investigator: Spencer R. Weart   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Inst of Physics
	      One Physics Ellipse
	      College Park, MD  207403842    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
              The possible changes in global climate caused by human activities              
              are a matter of great scientific interest and also have grave                  
              implications for the world economy and social order.  Study of the             
              subject began in the mid-nineteenth century and continued                      
              intermittently for the next hundred years.  In the early 1950s, the            
              impact of human activity on global climate came under sustained                
              scientific investigation.  Further, this scientific study                      
              increasingly reached the eye of the public.  By the late 1980s,                
              when policy makers began to take an interest, there was a long and             
              rich history of research, achievement, and controversy.  This                  
              history has never been studied systematically and is largely                   
              unknown.  Dr. Weart is determining the main features of the history            
              of research into human impact on climate.  He is also studying how             
              this scientific work has related to public understanding of the                
              problem.  This study aims not only for publication of results in               
              historical and scientific journals, but also at preservation--for              
              use of future researchers--of materials documenting the subject--              
              materials now dispersed and liable to destruction.  This project               
              promises significant contributions both to the social scientific               
              study of human dimensions of global environmental change and to the            
              history of science and technology.  Consequently, this project is              
              being supported by the Division of Social and Economic Sciences and            
              the History and Philosophy of Science Program.
