Title       : Monitoring Institutional Change in the Soviet Union: Comparing Legislator and
               Citizen Perspectives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1991   
File        : a9023974

Award Number: 9023974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110218             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur H. Miller arthur-miller@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Reisinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Understanding the dramatic political, social and economic changes              
              currently underway in the Soviet Union and through out Eastern                 
              Europe is one of the most important challenges facing the social               
              sciences.  This award renews support for research designed to                  
              monitor public opinion in the Soviet Union and to study relations              
              between public opinion and political leaders as the Soviet Union               
              struggles with the process of democratization.                                 
                                                                                             
              Specifically this project builds on an 1990 survey of Soviet                   
              citizens by conducting a second set of interviews with Soviet                  
              citizens in three republics: the Russian Federation, Ukraine, and              
              Lithuania.  The interviews will measure the extent of public                   
              support or opposition to the institutional changes.  They also will            
              permit assessments of the nature and extent of ethnic and regional             
              divisions and other potential stumbling blocks to the establishment            
              of democratic processes.  In addition, interviews with members of              
              the Supreme Soviet in each of the three Republics and the elected              
              representatives to the USSR Congress of People's Deputies will                 
              provide the first systematic evidence of the leadership's personal             
              preferences and their perceptions of citizen needs and demands.                
                                                                                             
              When completed this project will provide systematic evidence of the            
              relations developing between Soviet citizens and their                         
              representatives.  This evidence will be invaluable in understanding            
              the global processes by which centralized, authoritarian states                
              evolve toward more decentralized, open, and democratic governments.
