Title       : Maternal Effect Locus Modulates Distal Bithorax-Complex Mutants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1991  
File        : a9023293

Award Number: 9023293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David T. Kuhn fdkuhn@ucf1vm  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              An underlying mechanism is being sought to explain the modulation              
              of the homeotic tuh-3 gene by maternal effect alleles.  Homeotic               
              mutants cause the appearance of normal anatomical structures in the            
              wrong location of the body.  The homeotic tumorous-head (tuh-3)                
              mutant in Drosophila melanogaster was selected for these studies.              
              It is located at the distal end of a complex of genes (bithorax-               
              complex, BX-C), which provides identity to some thoracic and all               
              abdominal segments in the fly.  Tuh-3 and other mutants at the end             
              of the complex are modulated by the tuh-1 maternal effect locus at             
              the base of the X-chromosome.  Tuh-3 functions as a dominant mutant            
              in the presence of the recessive tuh-1h maternal effect, causing               
              genital expression in the head.  Head defects totally disappear and            
              tuh-3 acts as a simple recessive in the presence of the dominant               
              tuh-1g maternal effect allele.  In order to understand how this                
              genetic system works, we have cloned tuh-1 and are determining how             
              tuh-3 interacts with the mutants of the distal BX-C.  We now                   
              propose to prove that tuh-1 has been cloned by P-element                       
              transformation, determine which cells in the oocyte produce the                
              tuh-1 mRNA, follow its distribution pattern in the egg and embryo,             
              demonstrate the distribution profile for the tuh-1 protein and use             
              the inferred amino acid sequence to suggest a role for the protein.            
              At present we suspect that the tuh-1h allele yields no functional              
              gene product and therefore is incapable of suppressing mutant gene             
              activity in more anterior locations, making tuh-3 function like a              
              dominant mutant.  The proposed role of the wild type tuh-1g                    
              function is to suppress BX-C activity in the anterior of the                   
              embryo, causing tuh-3 to act as a simple recessive loss of function            
              mutant in the posterior of the embryo.  The proposed experiments               
              directly test this model.                                                      
                                                                                             
              Continued genetic studies of the interactions between tuh-3 and the            
              distal BX-C mutants should clarify the function of tuh-3 in the BX-            
              C, while continued physical mapping of these mutants will provide              
              insights into their BX-C functions and suggest where and how tuh-1             
              may modulate their function.***//
