Title       : Further Generalizations of Cointegration: Modeling Many Variables and
               Introducing Repellors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1992      
File        : a9023037

Award Number: 9023037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clive W. Granger cgranger@weber.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project makes an important contribution to the statistical                
              theory of the analysis of economic time series. It represents a                
              continuation of earlier work on cointegration, which is a way to               
              capture equilibrium relations among dynamic variables. A vector                
              time series xt is said to be cointegrated if a linear combination              
              of the levels of the elements of xt is stationary with finite                  
              variance.  Much empirical research in macroeconomics has shown that            
              economic time series data typically include non-stationary                     
              processes such as trends and are therefore linked together in the              
              long run. To gain any meaningful insight into the actual movements             
              of the variable in the economy, they must be purged of the                     
              influence of the non-stationary processes. Cointegration is a way              
              of doing this since the linear combinations of the levels of time              
              series variables are stationary, even if the underlying series are             
              not.                                                                           
                                                                                             
              In prior work, the linear combination is an attractor for the                  
              levels of the series. The extension of these concepts in this                  
              project involve the concept of a repellor, which is a region in the            
              phase space, away from which xt is relatively likely to move. The              
              concept of a negative strength of attraction is developed for a                
              repellor. Both attractors and repellors are related to stable and              
              unstable equilibria in deterministic models and the work in this               
              project will develop statistical tests for their presence.  The                
              goal is to provide a more general set of tools for studying short              
              memory economic processes, through attractors and varying strength             
              of attraction; and for modelling long memory processes, including              
              trends, with repellors.                                                        
                                                                                             
              A second part of the project involves work on the dimensionality               
              problems in linear systems of cointegrated time series. The economy            
              is divided into sectors and a common vector of each sector is                  
              estimated and analyzed. This will allow for an analysis with many              
              fewer variables than if all of the series are considered jointly.
