Title       : The Role of the Hippocampus in the Development of the HomingPigeon Navigational
               Map
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1992       
File        : a9023968

Award Number: 9023968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Verner P. Bingman vbingma@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The ability of animals and human beings to learn and remember is               
              an adaptation that permits organisms to change their behavior                  
              when confronted with changing environmental conditions.  The                   
              ability to learn and remember is a consequence of having a brain               
              that can change in response to new experiences.  One of the major              
              goals for researchers studying the nervous system is to identify               
              particular brain areas or structures that are important for                    
              specific kinds of learning and memory.  To do so, a variety of                 
              animals are studied.  In choosing an experimental animal, one                  
              generally looks for specialized behavior that may simplify the                 
              task of linking brain regions with particular functions.                       
                                                                                             
              Dr. Bingman's research tries to take advantage of the specialized              
              navigational skills of homing pigeons to identify brain regions                
              important for spatial learning and spatial memory.  The basic                  
              design of the research project is to surgically remove specific                
              brain regions and then examine what effect such treatment has on               
              homing-pigeon navigational behavior.  By examining homing-pigeon               
              behavior following surgical manipulation of the brain, one can                 
              begin to construct how various brain regions contribute to the                 
              spatial learning and spatial memory used by pigeons to navigate                
              home.  Dr. Bingman's research should result in a better                        
              understanding of the relationship between memory/learning and the              
              brain.  By clarifying how changes in the brain may lead to memory              
              impairments, this research may also help to enhance our                        
              understanding of memory disorders in humans.
