Title       : Faculty Awards for Women Scientists and Engineers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1995  
File        : a9023629

Award Number: 9023629
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine T. Faber k-faber@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 0000,1774,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The NSF Faculty Awards for Women Scientists and Engineers                 
              recognizes the high quality of the awardee's record in teaching                
              and scholarship, as well as potential research, the academic                   
              profession, and the education of future scientists and engineers.              
              Dr. Faber's research under this award is directed at                           
              understanding the mechanical behavior of brittle materials.                    
                   A ubiquitous feature of multiphase ceramics and ceramic-                  
              metal systems is residual stress.  Such stresses are present due               
              to thermal expansion mismatch strains that cannot be accommodated              
              by deformation during processing.  Such stresses in the extreme                
              may serve as a source of failure, or alternatively, may enhance                
              the fracture resistance of the material depending on the sign,                 
              the locale, and the magnitude of the stress.  Given the pivotal                
              role of residual stresses, it is essential to know both the                    
              magnitude and the profile of these stresses to aid in our                      
              understanding of fracture and toughening in multiphase materials.              
                   It is the aim of this study to characterize residual                      
              stresses in two ceramic-based systems, in particular, systems                  
              where residual stresses are altered through the application of an              
              external stress or a thermal treatment.  Two systems are                       
              proposed:  (1) a silicon carbide - titanium diboride composite in              
              which stress-induced microcracking and stress-relief on                        
              microcracking has recently been observed; and (2) zirconia                     
              thermal barrier coatings on metallic substrates in which the                   
              residual stresses change after high temperature exposure.  X-ray               
              diffraction and, when necessary, neutron diffraction will be the               
              primary tools used to measure residual stresses.  The residual                 
              stress profile and its change after stressing or heat treatment                
              will be correlated to measured mechanical properties.
