Title       : Substitution and Complementarity in Models of Growth with Many Goods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1993       
File        : a9023469

Award Number: 9023469
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Romer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is a continuation of research by the investigator on              
              the theoretical foundation of long run economic growth.  Previous              
              work emphasized bridging the gap between our microeconomic                     
              understanding of firms and industries on the one hand and our                  
              understanding of aggregate growth on the other.  More specifically,            
              aggregate growth theory is increasingly being forced to consider               
              the large numbers of distinct goods that are hidden by the familiar            
              univariate measures of capital or consumption.  Once one begins to             
              take seriously the enormous diversity of goods, one is inevitably              
              lead to reexamine existing assumptions about how these goods                   
              interact with each other.  Traditional aggregate theory makes the              
              implicit assumption that these goods are functionally identical in             
              the sense that there is an infinite elasticity of substitution                 
              between these goods.  An alternative assumption is that the large              
              variety of goods enter into production or consumption in a way that            
              is additively separable.  Virtually all of the work on aggregate               
              economics falls into one of these two categories.  This project                
              develops new tractable mathematical models that can allow for many             
              goods, for the introduction of new goods, and for complicated                  
              interactions between goods.  The motivation for constructing models            
              with richer sets of goods and interactions is to answer specific               
              questions about technology, economic growth, savings and trade that            
              can not be understood without this additional structure.                       
                                                                                             
              This project uses models of technological change in the presence               
              of many goods to address important and fundamental economic                    
              questions.  These questions include the following:                             
                                                                                             
                   1.  Is technological change responsible for the divergence in             
                   the rate of growth of wages for skilled and unskilled labor               
                   that has been observed in the U.S.?  Can technological change             
                   lead to stagnant or declining wages for unskilled labor?                  
                                                                                             
                   2.  Why is it that most trade takes place between countries               
                   at similar stages of development?                                         
                                                                                             
                   3.  How can it be that savings rates are high, rates of                   
                   consumption growth are high, and rates of return are low in               
                   some developing countries?
