Title       : Technology and Social Change: The Impact of Genetic Forecasting on Attitudes and
               Values
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1991     
File        : a9023024

Award Number: 9023024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41734              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eleanor Singer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              Scientific advance in genetics and its applications in genetic                 
              forecasting produce multiple issues of public policy; salient                  
              among these issues are prenatal testing and the use of genetic                 
              information in the workplace.  An understanding of relevant                    
              public attitudes and values and their formation can be valuable                
              to policy people, scholars addressing the social impacts of                    
              genetic technologies, and those concerned with education.  This                
              research, coupled with NSF-supported research recently completed               
              by the investigator, will provide a baseline "snapshot" of public              
              attitudes and values.  The investigator providently began her                  
              research early, before there was much media attention, so that                 
              initial awareness could be studied.  In this project, the                      
              investigator will extend the monitoring and analyze the data from              
              this and the earlier project.  By adding questions to the General              
              Social Survey, she will obtain additional data on attitudes to                 
              genetic forecasting that are embedded with other attitudes.  This              
              is a very economical strategy for enhancing our understanding.                 
              This project also prepares the way for future measurement of                   
              values and attitudes in this area.  Publication of the results in              
              appropriate journals and presentations at professional meetings                
              will provide wide dissemination.                                               
                                                                                             
              This proposal is a reasonable request for support to enable a                  
              highly competent investigator to carry out research which very                 
              usefully extends our understanding of the social implications of               
              new genetic technologies.  The institutional support is very                   
              good; the projected research is well planned to provide the                    
              baseline picture that is needed.  Dissemination will assure its                
              research appropriate audiences.  Support is highly recommended.
