Title       : International Conflict Among the Great Powers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1993     
File        : a9023067

Award Number: 9023067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48177              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul K. Huth phuth@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports an ambitious program of research to advance                
              understanding of the conditions likely to promote or discourage war            
              between major international powers.  A long standing assumption of             
              international relations, but one rarely tested systematically, is              
              that the structure of the international system significantly                   
              influences the probability of war.  In particular, it is held that             
              the probability of war increases with the level of uncertainty                 
              in the international system about the likely outcome of war. This              
              is linked in turn to the number and relative power of nations                  
              and alliances in the international system. This research develops              
              and tests a series of hypotheses about the probability of war which            
              derive from a theoretical model integrating the structure of the               
              international system with the propensity of national decision                  
              makers to take risks.                                                          
                                                                                             
              Systematic tests of these hypotheses will be undertaken using data             
              on the population of great power rivalries that have been                      
              catalogued since 1816.  In addition comparative case studies of                
              both typical and deviant cases will be undertaken to illustrate in             
              greater detail the results of the statistical analyses and to                  
              illuminate areas of weakness. Finally, the implications of the                 
              analysis will be explored for possible lessons for reducing the                
              likelihood of great power war in the contemporary international                
              system.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              When completed this research will strengthen our theoretical                   
              understanding of the effects of different international structures             
              or world orders on the likelihood of war and facilitate judgements             
              about the desirability about proposed changes in international                 
              structure.
