Title       : Measuring Minds: Henry Herbert Goodard and the Origins of American Intelligence
               Testing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1991   
File        : a9023486

Award Number: 9023486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leila Zenderland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Zenderland is examining the controversies which surrounded                 
              psychological tests of "intelligence" during the decade in which               
              they were first introduced into American society (1908-1918).                  
              She focuses on the work of psychologist H. H. Goddard, America's               
              first intelligence tester, as he disseminated these new mental                 
              measuring devices into hospitals, prisons, courtrooms, and                     
              schoolrooms in the years before World War I.  Her research is                  
              based on the published and unpublished papers of psychologists,                
              biologists, physicians, and educators most active in these early               
              testing debates.  She argues that the earliest American promoters              
              and critics of intelligence testing cannot simply be dichotomized              
              as believers in "nature" or "nurture";  instead, their work needs              
              to be explained within a multidimensional context emphasizing a                
              range of scientific, professional, and political controversies of              
              the progressive period.  To carry out this research, she is                    
              examining papers on this topic at the Archives of the History of               
              American Psychology.  The study resulting from this grant will be              
              both the first biography of Goddard and the first detailed                     
              examination of the intelligence testing movement in its early                  
              years in America.  As the debates about the nature of                          
              "intelligence" continue to this day, this project promises                     
              significant contributions in placing the debate's origins in                   
              proper perspective.
