Title       : U.S.-Malaysia Cooperative Research on the Chemistry of Mangrove Bark Tannins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1991 
File        : a9023743

Award Number: 9023743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19595              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elvin T. Choong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 5942      KOREA
Fld Applictn: 0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1933,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Elvin T. Choong,                    
              Professor of  Forestry, Louisiana State University, to pursue                  
              with Dr. Suminar S. Achmadi, Lecturer in Chemistry, Bogor                      
              Agricultural University, Indonesia, for a period of 24                         
              months, a program of cooperative research on the chemistry of                  
              mangrove bark tannins.  An acetone-water solution will be                      
              used to extract tannins from the bark of Bruguiera sp. and                     
              Rhizophora sp. - tree species from mangrove forests of                         
              Indonesia.  The crude tannin extracts will be fractionated,                    
              and the fractions will be characterized for structure,                         
              molecular weight distribution, and identification of                           
              constituent compounds.  These compounds will be further                        
              studied for potential uses as specialty chemicals.                             
                                                                                             
              The mangrove forests of Southeast Asia constitute a huge                       
              renewable resource of wood and bark.  With proper management,                  
              this resource could be exploited without affecting its                         
              essential role in estuary ecology.  Indonesia contains 20% of                  
              the world's mangrove forests.  The bark from mangrove trees                    
              is an important source of tannins which are used for                           
              leather manufacture and preservative treatment of cloth.                       
              Mangrove bark is also the source of reactive phenols which                     
              are useful in a wide variety of specialty chemical                             
              applications.  The collaborators will isolate, characterize,                   
              and identify tannins from mangrove trees.  The U.S. and                        
              Indonesian collaborators have a record of successful                           
              collaboration in the field of the proposal.  This project is                   
              relevant to  the objectives of the Science in Developing                       
              Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of                         
              cooperation between U.S. and developing country scientists                     
              and engineers through the exchange of scientific information,                  
              ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration on                     
              problems of mutual benefit.
