Title       : Evolutionary Game Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1991      
File        : a9023945

Award Number: 9023945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96766              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Friedman dan@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              How can intelligent agents in strategic interaction achieve                    
              equilibrium?  This equilibration question lies at the conceptual               
              foundations of game theory.  Orthodox opinion since the early                  
              1960's has been that agents are rational and can be presumed to                
              have sufficient endowments of common knowledge and sufficient                  
              computational ability to reach a Nash Equilibrium directly.  In                
              the last few years support for this orthodox view has begun to                 
              unravel, due in part to the inability of game theorists to find                
              compelling Nash Equilibrium selection procedures.  Many leading                
              game theorists now believe that the equilibration question is                  
              best thought of in terms of an evolutionary process.  This                     
              project represents a first empirical look at the new evolutionary              
              approaches to the equilibration question.  The empirical work                  
              will help identify those aspects of evolutionary game theory                   
              which do in fact show promise for positive economics.                          
                                                                                             
              This is an empirical study of the process by which Nash                        
              equilibrium (or other coherent behavior) may be achieved by                    
              intelligent self-interested agents in strategic interactions.                  
              Building on recent theoretical extensions of the biologists'                   
              evolutionary games, this project presents populations of 6-24                  
              undergraduate subjects with chosen payoff (or fitness) functions               
              which embody interesting sorts of strategic interactions.  Each                
              subject faces a given payoff function and interacts anonymously                
              with a fixed population of other subjects over 10 to 100 decision              
              periods.  In each period each subject enters his choice at a                   
              visually isolated computer terminal after viewing a computer                   
              display of the population distribution by all subjects in                      
              previous periods.  The actual time paths of population                         
              distributions are compared to various theoretical time paths                   
              proposed by biologists and economists.  In particular, the                     
              project looks for convergence to Nash equilibrium and to                       
              refinements of Nash equilibrium.  The results should add                       
              significantly to the empirical basis of modern game theory, with               
              eventual applications in diverse fields such as industrial                     
              organization and international economic policy.
