Title       : FAW: The Evolution of Lek Mating Systems From Resource Defense Territoriality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1997   
File        : a9023789

Award Number: 9023789
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine A. Toft catoft@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 0000,1123,9292,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      A conceptually new aspect of insect population biology                 
              studies is the bridging of theory on the evolution of mating                   
              systems and theory of population dynamics..which so far have been              
              developed independently.  Factors that ultimately affect the                   
              growth and dynamics of populations simultaneously determine                    
              behaviors involved in the mate search and resource defense.                    
                      Ecologists are increasingly taking a more mechanistic                  
              approach to explaining patterns in populations and communities.                
              That is,  they try to explain the "higher level" patterns in                   
              populations and communities, such as population dynamics or                    
              species diversity, by examining "lower level" phenomena, such as               
              behavior, physiology and morphology of individuals, which                      
              determine the individual's ability to survive and reproduce.  The              
              research program proposed here fits into this new trend in                     
              examining how determinants of mating behavior and an individual's              
              use of habitat and food resources relate to population structure               
              and dynamics and eventually to interspecific interactions.                     
                      The specific system of study comprises several species of              
              Lordotus bee flies.  Species in this genus have different                      
              morphologies related to mating behavior and presumably have                    
              different mating behaviors.  Preliminary studies of two congeners              
              at one site reveal that, indeed, they have different mating                    
              systems and populations structures although they occur                         
              syntopically and use the same resources.                                       
                      The proposed program will focus primarily on detailed                  
              population studies of these two species and will test hypotheses               
              proposed by Bradbury and colleagues on the evolution of lek                    
              mating systems from resource.defense territoriality.  This                     
              research plan will include detailed characterization of occupied               
              and randomly.chosen unoccupied sites, long.term monitoring of                  
              population densities, and experimental manipulation of sites and               
              population densities.  In the last two (of five) seasons, work                 
              will continue on the demography and mating system of L. miscellus              
              and pilot studies will be initiated on a parapatric species L.                 
              gibbus.  Together, detailed studies on these closely related and               
              ecologically similar species constitute a powerful comparative                 
              approach to testing hypotheses on the relations among resource                 
              distributions, mating systems, and population structures.
