Title       : Living Polyisonitrile Polymerization Catalysts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1993   
File        : a9023253

Award Number: 9023253
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce M. Novak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Organic Dynamics Program, Dr. Novak will                 
              investigate the design, preparation, and implementation of                     
              organometallic catalysts for the "living" polymerization of                    
              monomers known to yield stable, helical polymers. Specifically,                
              new Ni(I) and Ni(II) catalysts for the polymerization of                       
              isonitriles will be investigated. Detailed mechanistic studies                 
              will be performed in an effort to provide the information                      
              necessary to modify these new catalysts for specific                           
              applications. The basic premise of Dr. Novak's study is that                   
              organometallic complexes, which possess versatile coordination                 
              spheres and oxidation states, can be used to alter the                         
              reactivity of polymer endgoups in a predictable manner and with                
              a high degree of precision. Depending upon the requirements of                 
              the particular reaction, the organometallic species may be                     
              called upon to either activate or deactivate the polymer                       
              endgroup. Dr. Novak's study is designed to provide a means by                  
              which endgroups can be rendered unreactive toward all processes                
              other than the desired initiation and propagation steps that                   
              lead to polymer formation.                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              The ultimate polymerization catalysts for the controlled                       
              synthesis of well-defined macromolecules are "living". Living                  
              polymerizations can be used to synthesize macromolecules with                  
              pre-determined molecular weights, narrow chain-length                          
              distributions, and defined endgroups. In addition, living                      
              systems allow the precise synthesis of "block copolymers",                     
              which offer a combination of properties unobtainable from                      
              simple polymer blends or random copolymers. Dr. Novak will                     
              utilize this approach for controlled synthesis of polyiso-                     
              nitriles, an important class of soluble polymers. In addition,                 
              the living nature of his approach will be exploited in the                     
              preparation of novel di- and tri-block copolymers, which are of                
              interest as a new class of thermoplastic elastomers.
