Title       : United States-Malaysia Seminar on Innovation and Commercialization in Research,
               Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, November 12-16, 1990
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1992 
File        : a9023177

Award Number: 9023177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1990   
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43868              (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcolm G. McLaren   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Malcolm G.                          
              McLaren, Director, Institute for Engineered Materials,                         
              Rutgers University, to conduct with Dr. Ahmad Tajuddin Ali,                    
              Controller, Standards and Industrial Research Institute of                     
              Malaysia (SIRIM),the 1990 U.S.-Malaysia Seminar on                             
              Innovation and Commercialization of Research,                                  
              November 12-16, 1990, at Genting Highlands and Kuala                           
              Lumpur, Malaysia.  The joint seminar will involve eight                        
              U.S. participants, who, with a like number of Malaysian                        
              participants, will address several topics of mutual                            
              interest.  A limited number of other Malaysian, ASEAN,                         
              and African scientists/engineers will be invited to                            
              participate as observers.  The purpose of this seminar                         
              is to bring together for mutual benefit U.S. and Malaysian                     
              scientists/engineers to exchange ideas on innovation and                       
              commercialization of research and, within the scope of the                     
              seminar, to identify priority areas for future                                 
              U.S.-Malaysian research cooperation.                                           
                                                                                             
              The Malaysian economy has shown a sustained rapid growth                       
              and diversification for most of the period from 1965 to the                    
              present with the exception of a decline due to falling                         
              commodity prices in 1985 and 1986.  Manufacturing has                          
              replaced agriculture as the Malaysian economy's largest                        
              sector, but commodities account for 45 percent of that                         
              country's exports.  Through its "New Economic Policy"                          
              (NEP), Malaysia seeks to strengthen its economy and                            
              become more competitive by using its labor community in a                      
              value-added mode.  Toward this end, Malaysia seeks                             
              technology transfer and a broader use of science for                           
              development.  The joint seminar will provide a unique                          
              opportunity for U.S. scientists/engineers to gain an                           
              insight into the state of development in Malaysia and the                      
              official policies which are guiding that rapid                                 
              development.  It is expected that this seminar will be                         
              instrumental in fostering future collaborative research                        
              that will be beneficial to the United States and Malaysia.                     
              This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science                      
              in Developing Countries Program which seeks to increase the                    
              level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers                     
              and their counterparts in developing countries through the                     
              exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and                         
              techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual                     
              benefit.  Support of non-U.S. participants is provided from                    
              sources other than the National Science Foundation.
