Title       : FAW: Coordination Issues in Manufacturing Systems Design andControl
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1993     
File        : a9023674

Award Number: 9023674
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Ortega                            
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Candace A. Yano   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,1360,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Widespread concern about global competition in manufacturing              
              has led to an increasing need for better, more detailed                        
              coordination to improve the performance of manufacturing                       
              operations.  The research will examine these issues in three                   
              different ways.                                                                
                   First, the research will expand upon a line of research that              
              addresses coordination among the various stages of production                  
              within a single manufacturing facility.  Research in this area will            
              focus on the planning and control of systems whose elements have               
              become more tightly coupled because of inventory reductions                    
              resulting from the adoption of just-in-time policies.  These                   
              inventory reductions have created significant challenges to meeting            
              production goals and deadlines, especially in fabrication-assembly             
              systems.  In such systems, many parts must be produced or procured             
              in a carefully orchestrated manner to ensure that the parts can be             
              mated in the correct proportions, so that production goals are met.            
                   Second, the research will investigate coordination issues                 
              among distinct manufacturing facilities building on recent work on             
              establishing supplier delivery schedules and related transportation            
              contracts.  A key factor is how each customer's ordering pattern               
              affects the costs of production at the supplier, and how to define             
              ordering policies (at the customers), and, where applicable, order             
              acceptance or delivery date setting policies (at the suppliers)                
              which are mutually beneficial to all parties.                                  
                   Third, the research will concentrate on coordination issues               
              at the interface between manufacturing functions which                         
              traditionally have been dealt with separately, both in industry and            
              in the academic literature.  Although some of the past research                
              lies in these interfaces (e.g., the interface between production               
              scheduling and transportation logistics, the interface between                 
              quality control and production control), the research will focus               
              on the interfaces between operational and tactical control topics              
              and those dealing with capital investment decisions.  It is not                
              well understood how operational policies affect the realized                   
              capacity of existing manufacturing systems, nor how they should                
              influence choices for new systems.  Similarly, it is not well                  
              understood how the physical characteristics of existing or proposed            
              manufacturing systems affect the development of good, simple,                  
              operational controls.                                                          
                   Analytical models will be developed, some descriptive and                 
              others optimization-based.  The models will consider different                 
              levels of information availability (relative to both speed and                 
              detail) and practical performance evaluation methods.  This also               
              will allow assessment of the value of better information systems               
              and well-designed incentive policies where coordination is                     
              important in achieving improved manufacturing performance.
