Title       : Marine Biotechnology Fellowship: Genetic Exchange in the Marine Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1992  
File        : a9023844

Award Number: 9023844
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 30,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lita M. Proctor   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Gunsalus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The focus of this research is to study gene transfer among marine              
              microbial communities through the application of molecular                     
              techniques that avoid the selective process of isolation and                   
              cultivation.  Since genetic material can be transferred to                     
              receptive hosts without gene expression, this study will be                    
              designed to detect the presence of marker gene sequences                       
              transferred by phage transduction to recipient microbial hosts and             
              complemented with studies designed to determine the frequency of               
              subsequent gene expression of the marker sequences in recipient                
              hosts.  Biotintylated probes have been developed for visualizing               
              the presence of viral sequences in virus-infected cells and,                   
              because of its sensitivity and specificity, is the most appropriate            
              approach for tracking specific gene sequences in native microbial              
              communities.  This methodology will be applied to the study of                 
              plasmid DNA transduction by a generalized transducing vibriophage.             
              The ecologically important role of particulate organic matter on               
              the growth rate of the donor host, vibriophages, gene recipient                
              hosts, phage/host encounter rates, bacteriophage survival and gene             
              transduction frequency will be investigated.  The results of these             
              studies on gene transduction in vibriophages isolated from the                 
              marine environment will serve as a model for gene transfer in                  
              marine microorganisms and indicate the potential importance of gene            
              transfer in native marine microbial communities.
