Title       : RUI: Legal Pluralism and the Emergence of Legal Culture in Hawaii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1991   
File        : a9023397

Award Number: 9023397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102140             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally E. Merry smerry@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0303000   Conflict Resolution                     
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              Despite the central importance of law in legitimating colonialism,             
              there has been only limited work on the role of law in the                     
              colonization process.  This project examines processes of                      
              domination and resistance surrounding the imposition of American               
              law during the colonization of Hawaii in the nineteenth and                    
              twentieth centuries.  Colonialism is conceptualized as a struggle              
              among the interests of various foreign groups and those of                     
              indigenous peoples.  The struggle, located in the courts as well               
              as in the schools, the market, the churches, and the institutions              
              of government, will be analyzed in the context of the culture and              
              politics of the colonizer and the colonized.  The project includes             
              a comparison of New England lower courts to provide a contrast in              
              which cultural patterns are more similar and in which there is no              
              colonial heritage.  The analysis will examine differences between              
              Hawaii and New England, searching for the implications of the                  
              historical use of law as a mode of discipline and control by the               
              colonial government and the extent to which present patterns of                
              court law and forms of legal consciousness are the legacy of                   
              Hawaii's historical experiences with colonialism.                              
                                                                                             
              This research promises to advance our understanding of legal                   
              pluralism as a dynamic process.  In particular, the study should               
              illuminate the ways in which indigenous and imposed legal cultures             
              interact and transform one another and the relative influence of               
              coercion, ideology, and example in that process.  Also, the project            
              should contribute to the analysis of culture as a series of                    
              competing discourses or contradictory elements rather than an                  
              integrated or continuous entity.  Finally, since Hawaii posed a                
              continuing problem for the United States because it was both                   
              strategically valuable but culturally and racially different, this             
              study will provide an opportunity to explore the colonial discourse            
              of race, identity, cultural diversity, and law in the United                   
              States.
