Title       : Network Location Problems: Aggregation and Approximation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1993   
File        : a9023392

Award Number: 9023392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: F. Hank Grant                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Lowe Timothy-Lowe@UIOWA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Francis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,
Abstract    :
                   Network location problems occur when new facilities must be               
              located on a network such as a road network, and the network                   
              distances between new and existing facilities are important, due               
              to travel or transport between facilities.  Other networks of                  
              interest include air corridor or sea corridor networks, river                  
              networks, or electrical networks.  Such problems occur on a large              
              scale in urban, regional. or geographic contexts, where there may              
              be literally hundreds of thousands (or more) of existing                       
              facilities, in which case it is common to aggregate existing                   
              facilities, e.g., represent all the existing facility locations                
              within a zip code area by a single location.  This aggregation                 
              makes the size of the problem more manageable for data collection              
              and data processing purposes, as well as for purposes of analysis.             
              At the same time, this aggregation introduces errors, and results              
              in an approximating problem being solved instead of the actual                 
              problem of interest.  Currently there is very little theory for                
              doing aggregation, or for evaluating the results of aggregation.               
              Most approaches are based on experimentation or computational                  
              studies.  This is a project to develop theory to improve the means             
              available for doing aggregation.                                               
                   The project has the potential to enhance greatly the ability              
              to solve important facility planning problems that occur                       
              increasingly in our complex society.//
