Title       : FAW: Phonological Feature Interdependencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9023323

Award Number: 9023323
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana B. Archangeli   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1311,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Diana Archangeli will use a grant from the NSF Faculty Awards              
              for Women Program to continue her research in phonological                     
              theory, the theory governing the sound systems of natural human                
              languages.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Atomic elements of phonological theory are binary features, which              
              in sets characterize the nature of a sound segment.  Several                   
              decades of research have fairly well established the inventory of              
              such features in human languages around the globe.  The number of              
              features, however, is such as to permit many more combinations                 
              than there are actually possible sound segments in the world's                 
              languages.  Therefore in this respect phonological theory is                   
              inadequately constrained.                                                      
                                                                                             
              The aim of Dr. Archangeli's research is to explore the possible                
              applicability of one fundamental constraint on feature                         
              combination which she has proposed, which she calls the                        
              "Grounding Hypothesis".  The GH rests on the fact that although                
              the features are abstract entities, they arise from and denote                 
              certain physical factors about deformations of the oral cavity in              
              the process of speech.  The GH states that all possible formal                 
              conditions on feature combinations follow from the physical                    
              content of the factor which the feature denotes.  This is far                  
              from a self-evident proposition; in fact, it is controversial                  
              within the field.  Dr. Archangeli, however, has devised a                      
              research program to subject the GH to empirical tests across a                 
              wide range of phenomena.  Most immediately, the tests will                     
              involve studying the sound systems of a number of languages of                 
              Indonesia, which have interesting relevant phonological                        
              properties.  She will then expand the research to other                        
              languages, and to implications in such areas as language change                
              and language acquisition.                                                      
                                                                                             
              Dr. Archangeli is a committed and successful teacher, who is                   
              achieving a strong reputation for the number and quality of                    
              graduate students studying with her.  This FAW award will enable               
              her to support some of these students and involve them directly                
              in her research program.
