Title       : A Neural Network Model for Reaction Times
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1993    
File        : a9023283

Award Number: 9023283
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151836             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Anderson James_Anderson@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 1180,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Computers of any kind take time to produce an answer to a                      
              problem.  Mental operations also take time to produce answers.                 
              Psychologists have studied reaction time data for over a century               
              in an effort to infer from the observed patterns of reaction time              
              the details of the mental computation being performed.                         
                                                                                             
              The past decade has seen a resurgence of interest in "brain-like               
              computation" which attempts to capture in artificial systems some              
              of the computational power of the nervous system.  Such "neural                
              network" or "connectionist" models are potentially very powerful               
              and very fast, though it is not yet clear for what problems they               
              are best suited.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This project will study the behavior of neural networks with                   
              respect to the time they take to perform simple computations,                  
              with the primary objective of understanding the operations of the              
              human brain, comparing neural network simulations to human                     
              experimental data on the same tasks.  Different neural network                 
              architectures differ a great deal in the time it takes for a                   
              particular operation to be performed.  Parallel computers, for                 
              instance, generally exhibit reaction time patterns completely                  
              different from more traditional von Neumann machines, because                  
              they can perform many operations at the same time.  For example,               
              the most popular class of neural networks, multilayer feed                     
              forward networks, use completely parallel operations operating in              
              synchrony.  All computations take essentially the same time,                   
              although it is possible to build time dependencies into these                  
              models with additional assumptions.                                            
                                                                                             
              However, another class of parallel neural network models, non-                 
              linear dynamical system models, show very strong intrinsic time                
              dependencies.  Examples of such neural network models are                      
              Hopfield networks, the ART models, and the model to be used in                 
              this research, the BSB model.  Most of the interest in neural                  
              networks has been in their computational abilities, i.e., getting              
              interesting answers to problems.  But ideally, a model of a human              
              mental operation should do two things, compute the answer and                  
              take the same relative time to do it as humans.  Preliminary                   
              simulations using the BSB model for a simple task have shown a                 
              reasonable match to experimental reaction time patterns in the                 
              well-studied, simple problem of deciding whether two stimuli are               
              the same or different and responding appropriately.                            
                                                                                             
              Study of the reaction time patterns produced by neural network                 
              models for human cognition will begin with simple tasks and then               
              progress to more complex problems.  One example is application of              
              this model to the reaction time required to obtain the answers to              
              problems in simple arithmetic.
