Title       : A Control Sample of Reindeer Dental Heights and Annuli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1993     
File        : a9023662

Award Number: 9023662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59762              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Pike-Tay   (Principal Investigator current)
              Randall K. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Anne Pike-Tay will               
              study the teeth of nearly 1000 reindeer/caribou individuals which              
              were assembled by the Canadian Wildlife Service.  This is the                  
              largest and most statistically representative sample of a modern               
              reindeer population. The exact date of death, age in months, sex,              
              size, weight, reproductive condition, diet and geographic range                
              are documented for each specimen.  For each, she will measure the              
              crown height above the mandible and also section individual teeth              
              to study the cementum annuli.  These latter structures are                     
              usually deposited annually much like tree rings and serve to                   
              anchor the tooth in the jaw. Together these measures permit one                
              to estimate the age of an animal as well as the season of death.               
              Dr. Pike-Tay has two goals. The first is a quantitative                        
              evaluation of the biological and environmental factors which                   
              affect cementum deposition.  This will allow better seasonality                
              determinations.  Secondly, she will analyze the annuli and crown               
              height measurements to derive techniques for age estimation.                   
                                                                                             
              Reindeer provided an important source of food and other materials              
              such as antler and hide for prehistoric peoples in both North                  
              America and Europe.  Their bones are often found in                            
              archaeological sites and therefore constitute an important focus               
              for archaeological analysis.  In their attempts to reconstruct                 
              how prehistoric peoples lived, archaeologists try to determine                 
              how long and in what season individual sites were occupied.  They              
              also want to learn how animals were hunted. By knowing a                       
              reindeer's age of death and the season in which it was killed                  
              these questions can be directly addressed.  While many scientists              
              have recognized the potential of crown height measurements and                 
              annuli counts, the basic essential work which Dr. Pike-Tay has                 
              undertaken has never been done.                                                
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              an extremely valuable tool not only to archaeologists ,but to                  
              biologists and wildlife management specialists.  It will be                    
              applicable in a wide variety of situations.  Since a graduate                  
              student is included, the project will also serve a training role.
