Title       : Nonlinear Robot Compliance Control Using Neural Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1992    
File        : a9023395

Award Number: 9023395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119736             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry Asada asada@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to establish a new method for                     
              nonlinear compliance control using neural nets to explore new                  
              possibilities in machine learning and control for robots and                   
              telemanipulators.  Here, compliance is treated as nonlinear                    
              mapping from a measured force to a corrected motion and is                     
              represented by a multi-layer neural network, as well as by                     
              Gaussian networks.  The objectives of the proposed research are                
              three-fold.  One is to develop a new method for representing                   
              "compliance" to deal with highly nonlinear, such as by stiffness               
              and damping matrices.  The second objective is to develop a                    
              learning methods for the generation and teaching of compliance,                
              or force feedback strategies.  The neural network approach allows              
              us to teach a desired compliance from teaching data acquired from              
              a human operator.  It does not need explicit feedback laws and                 
              detailed task models such as those required for conventional                   
              analytic methods.  It is hoped that the new approach will also                 
              allow us to transfer human skill in compliant motion control to                
              robots and telemanipulators.  The third objective of the proposed              
              project is to develop a real-time, neural net controller that is               
              involved directly in the feedback loop of robot control system.                
              Efficient methods must be developed to analyze and design the                  
              nonlinear feedback system in order to accomplish smooth, stable                
              responses.  To achieve these goals, three subprojects will be                  
              conducted.  Their objectives are to:  1.  Establish a theoretical              
              basis for the neural net representation of nonlinear compliance.               
              2.  Develop techniques for acquiring teaching data, Processing                 
              the data, and training a neural network for learning a                         
              compliance, and 3. Develop a design method for real time, neural               
              net feedback control in order to accomplish desirable dynamic                  
              response.
