Title       : A Reprise of Size and R&D
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1991  
File        : a9023352

Award Number: 9023352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68821              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wesley Cohen wc02@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Klepper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Schumpeter and Galbraith hypothesized that larger firms experience             
              lower costs and greater returns from R&D and as a consequence would            
              be expected to perform a disproportionate share of innovative                  
              activity relative to their size. Numerous studies of the                       
              relationship between firm size and R&D effort have been conducted.             
              The findings are that within the modal industry, above a modest                
              size threshold, R&D effort does not rise proportionally with firm              
              size. Having apparently failed to support the Schumpeterian                    
              hypothesis, however, these stylized facts have been largely                    
              ignored. Initially assuming that firms exploit their innovations               
              through their own sales and that growth due to innovation is                   
              conditioned by current output, this project uses a simple model to             
              explain these stylized facts. The model is then used to explain                
              observed departures from the modal relationships as well. The                  
              objective is to explain how industry factors - particularly dynamic            
              factors and appropriability mechanisms within industries --                    
              condition the relationship between firm size and R&D. Using data               
              from the Federal Trade Commission's Line of Business Program,                  
              patent data compiled from Scherer and data from the Levin et al.               
              survey on technological opportunity and appropriability conditions             
              in U.S. manufacturing industries, the model is tested to see if the            
              correctly postulated factors that condition the relationship have              
              been specified.                                                                
                                                                                             
              The model used in the project provides a distinctive interpretation            
              of the proportional relationship betweeen R&D effort and firm size             
              among R&D performers. In the past, proportionality has been widely             
              interpreted to indicate that there are no particular advantages or             
              disadvantages of size in R&D. In this model, however, the                      
              proportional relationship  reflects the link between the expected              
              returns from R&D and the firm's ex ante output. It suggests that               
              larger firms will earn greater returns from any given R&D effort               
              than smaller firms, implying an advantage of size and R&D. Thus,               
              the stylized fact that led to the rejection of the Schumpeterian               
              hypothesis, namely the proportional relationship between R&D effort            
              and firm size, may actually reveal an advantage of size. An                    
              important implication of the argument is that the returns to                   
              innovation are an increasing function of firm size, implying an                
              advantage to firm size in R&D.
