Title       : Biocomplexity of Introduced Avian Diseases in Hawaii: Threats to Biodiversity of
               Native Forest Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a0083944

Award Number: 0083944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4188575            (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Duffy dduffy@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan I. Jarvi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Samuel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carter Atkinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Fleischer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1366      BIOCOMPLEXITY
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1366,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Biological invasions involve complex interactions over a wide range of temporal
              and geographic scales. These invasions are becoming more frequent, are widely
              distributed throughout the world, and can pose a significant threat to
              biological diversity. The Hawaiian Islands are particularly well suited for
              investigating these processes because of their relative isolation and because
              their complex topography creates wide variability in climate and habitats
              across limited geographic areas. These conditions facilitate studies of the
              interactions of a wide range of biotic and abiotic factors on the invasion
              process over spatial scales that are orders of magnitude less than in most
              continental areas. 

Accidental introduction of mosquito-borne avian malaria
              and pox virus to Hawaii is an outstanding example of how biological invasions
              can have a profound effect on endemic biota. The geographic distribution,
              density, and community structure of endemic Hawaiian avifauna has changed
              dramatically in the last century, in large part because of the spread of these
              diseases and their introduced mosquito vector. This disease system is dynamic
              and biologically complex, involving both direct and indirect interactions among
              endemic and introduced avian hosts, mosquito vector, parasites, and
              environmental conditions that extend across multiple temporal and spatial
              scales. Prior research, limited in scale, has focused on host-parasite and
              vector relationships at disparate locations in the islands. 

A holistic
              modeling approach will be used to study this complex system by integrating
              across scales ranging from the gene to the landscape. Integrated research
              projects will focus on demographic studies of exotic and endemic forest birds,
              mosquito vectors, and pox and malarial parasites using study plots that span a
              range of climate, hydrology, and vegetation patterns. Complementary laboratory
              studies will focus on genetic variation of hosts, vectors and parasites and
              epidemiological factors such as host susceptibility and resistance, parasite
              virulence and vector competency. Components of the study will be linked through
              a GIS based modeling approach to incorporate important spatial patterns (e.g.,
              homogeneous vs. fragmented landscapes), spatial complexity, and land use
              patterns. The model will be used to evaluate broad hypotheses about the
              dynamics of this system including how biocomplexity associated with biotic and
              abiotic components of the system at multiple scales affects the persistence of
              disease in forest bird populations, how changes in land use and environmental
              conditions affect the stability of the system, and how habitat changes and
              specific conservation strategies might alter long-term trends in the decline
              and extinction of the endemic Hawaiian avifauna. An important objective will be
              to identify weak links and determine the ecological scale that is necessary to
              facilitate future intervention in this disease system. In addition, specific
              hypotheses about how parasite virulence, vector susceptibility, and host
              resistance may be coevolving in this recent host/parasite/vector association
              will be investigated. 

The proposed study location is on the east flank of
              Mauna Loa on the island of Hawaii and encompasses major portions of Hawaii
              Volcanoes National Park, State Natural Area and Forest Reserves, small towns,
              and rural agricultural areas. Prior ecological studies of this region provide a
              wealth of background data that can be incorporated into the model. This
              approach will be applicable to a wide range of conservation issues both in the
              state of Hawaii and elsewhere in the world.

