Title       : Flowspace: The Space Spanned by Pathlines, Timelines, Streaklines.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0083792

Award Number: 0083792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274920             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon Erlebacher erlebach@csit.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Banks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Scientific visualization - that is, presenting computed or measured scientific
              data to human senses - is a vital area of research. Pictures are often the
              clearest and fastest way to give a scientist an intuitive feeling for an
              experiment or simulation. Unfortunately, visualization of time-dependent vector
              fields (such as velocity of a fluid at all points) is currently limited to a
              few basic techniques that originally came from experimental methods. Every
              technique is a variation on streaklines and timelines, both built from particle
              paths. Crude extensions to algorithms developed for steady flows have recently
              supplemented these. Most notable among these are the computation and display of
              streamlines, but these are only physically relevant for steady-state fluid
              flows.

This project will place these commonly used techniques within a
              general geometric and mathematical framework, and advance the notion that no
              single method is best suited for all flows. Therefore, it will study a more
              general class of algorithms, and will seek to match a vector field
              representation to the display of a desired time-dependent feature of the flow
              (e.g. vortices, eddies, or shocks). To explore this parameter space, the
              project will develop a suite of interactive vector field visualization tools
              using both software- and hardware-based techniques. The methods will be tested
              on prototypical unsteady vector fields, namely linear and quadratic fields in
              the spatial and temporal variables.

