Title       : Synthesis and Characterization of Novel Network Forming Biodegradable Oligomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0083128

Award Number: 0083128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $749386             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron D. Puckett apuckett@sod.umsmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mississippi Med Cen
	      2500 North State Street
	      Jackson, MS  392164505    601/987-3500

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, combining research expertise from University of Mississippi
              Medical Center (UMMC), University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) and University
              of Southern Mississippi (USM), and Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL),
              focuses on the synthesis, manufacture, processing, and characterization of
              network forming biodegradable oligomers and composites to produce bio-inert
              materials that mimic the natural environment and can be actively involved in
              growth and body repair.  Two different types of functional biodegradable
              oligomers will be synthesized for use in forming biocompatible matrices,
              incorporating carboxylic acid groups, and both carboxylic acid and olefinic
              functionalities.  This recommendation speaks to the current critical shortage
              of materials for bioengineering applications and implantable devices.  Because
              of the inherent liabilities associated with biomedical devices, major companies
              are no longer interested in supplying biomaterials, while others have been put
              out of business completely.  Recent advances in genetic and tissue engineering
              suggest the possibility of replacing or regenerating nerve tissue, blood
              vessels, skin, bone, cartilage, and even whole organs.  This technology
              requires the use of a biocompatible matrix or surface that can be seeded with
              cells, and "signal" molecules and growth factors that can support growth in or
              out of the body.  Unlike biomaterial applications that require bio-inert
              material, tissue-engineering materials must mimic the environment while being
              actively involved in the growth and repair process. Ideal matrix materials
              serve as a template for tissue regeneration and then disappear or actually
              become part of the tissue.  Consequently, biodegradable polymers such as
              polylactides and polygycolides are attractive precursors for these
              applications.  To overcome difficulties, this work will synthesize the two
              biodegradable oligomers that can be used to form biocompatible matrices under
              mild conditions.  In the collaboration, UMMC contributes expertise in
              biomaterial research, while UAB and USM contribute in synthetic polymer
              chemistry, and ORNL offers expertise in ceramic engineering. The project
              provides an ideal training environment, developing a broad perspective in
              biomaterial research.

