Title       : Mid-Atlantic Center for Mathematics Teaching and Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0083429

Award Number: 0083429
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John S. Bradley                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9041794            (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Fey jf7@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Hiebert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M.Kathleen Heid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia F. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0083429
FEY

The "Mid-Atlantic Center for Mathematics Teaching and Learning"
              (CMTL) is a consortium  led by members of the mathematics and education
              faculties of three research universities and three school-system partners --
              the University of Delaware, the University of Maryland, the Pennsylvania State
              University, the Delaware State Department of Education, the Prince George's
              County (MD) Public Schools, and the Pittsburgh (PA) Public Schools.  The
              University of Maryland is the designated grantee institution.  The CMTL
              addresses the shortage of mathematics education professionals through two major
              sets of activities:

*Design, operate, and evaluate an innovative prototype
              for doctoral and postdoctoral education of specialists in mathematics teacher
              education, curriculum, development, policy leadership and mathematics education
              research.
*Develop, evaluate, and disseminate models for mathematics education
              of pre-service teachers and professional development of in-service teachers in
              elementary, middle, and high schools.

The specialists training draws upon
              the combined resources of faculty and students from the three participating
              universities.  Courses, research experiences and field experiences are provided
              that go far beyond the capability of each institution separately.  The program
              for specialists is be characterized by three major elements:

* Breadth and
              depth of knowledge in mathematics and its applications. 
* Knowledge of
              mathematics teaching and learning.
*Scholarly Skills.

The education of
              pre-service teachers and the professional development of in-service teachers
              are a joint effort involving each of the universities and its school partner. 
              Mathematics and Education faculty at the University of Delaware work with staff
              from the Delaware State Department of Education to improve pre-service
              education for elementary and middle school teachers.  Mathematicians and
              mathematics educators at Penn State work with doctoral fellows and mathematics
              teacher leaders to develop college-level courses focusing on foundational ideas
              from secondary mathematics for prospective high school teachers.  These courses
              are revised with the help of teachers from the Pittsburgh Public schools to be
              suitable for courses for in-service teachers.  The University of Maryland and
              Prince George's County Public Schools cooperate to formulate and evaluate a
              model for professional development for middle school teachers that develops
              school-based leaders and evaluates their efforts to effect instructional change
              in schools.


