Title       : Simulation Studies of Macromolecular Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0083219

Award Number: 0083219
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel M. Kroll krolldm@msi.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0083219
Kroll
Complex fluids such as amphiphilic mixtures are characterized by
              structure on mesoscopic length-scales, ranging from nano-to micro-meters, and
              energy scales comparable to the thermal energy.   The mesoscale structures of
              these systems endow them with many interesting and unique features, and they
              are widely used in the processing, chemical, and energy industries.  The
              modeling of these systems requires the use of "coarse grained" or mesoscopic
              approaches that capture the essential physics of atomistic systems on the
              length scales of interest.

The mesoscopic structures which form in a wide
              range of self-assembling fluids consist of membranes which divide the material
              into distinct volumes.  Such two-dimensional assemblies can form a large number
              of thermodynamic phases, such as vesicles, lamellar or cubic crystals, and
              disordered bicontinuous networks.  They also determine the architecture of
              biological systems.  At the mesoscale, the elastic properties of these
              assemblies can be described using network models which consist of
              two-dimensional sheets of tethered particles.  These models have proven to be
              very versatile, and they can be used to model fixed connectivity surfaces, such
              as polymerized membranes, fiber mats, and thin elastic shells, dynamically
              triangulated surfaces, such as fluid membranes, and dynamically triangulated
              surfaces with fluctuating topology, such as microemulsions and sponge phases. 
              Monte Carlo simulations of network models have made a number of important
              contributions to our understanding of the equilibrium thermodynamics,
              structure, and phase behavior of these systems.  Experience gained using these
              simulations will be used to address new issues involving both the equilibrium
              and non-equilibrium behavior of these systems.  In particular, we will study
              the vesicle size distribution in dilute surfactant solutions, budding and
              vesiculation of clathrin coated membranes, and the shape, fluctuation spectrum,
              interaction, and dynamics of active membranes.

We will also develop and
              implement a new particle-based mesoscopic simulation technique for fluid flow. 
              This approach retains many of the attractive features of other mesoscopic
              simulation schemes such as the lattice-Boltzmann and dissipative particle
              dynamics methods while avoiding several of their shortcomings.  Since it is a
              particle method, collisonal coupling to embedded polymers, membranes and
              vesicles is straightforward.  A significant benefit of the method is the ease
              and efficiency with which it can be implemented on parallel computers.  Part of
              this work will involve the extension of this appoach to treat binary and
              amphiphilic mixtures, using Landau-Ginzburg models to describe the equation of
              state of the fluid, and part will entail simulation studies of the rheology and
              dynamics of vesicles in flow, using network models to describe the membrane
              degrees of freedom and the new mesoscopic simulation technique for the solvent
              degrees of freedom.  One goal of this research is to obtain a better
              understanding of the viscoelastic behavior of vesicles under capillary flow
              conditions.  This work will be a first step towards integrating simulation
              techniques for network models of membranes with mesoscopic solvent simulation
              techniques.  We anticipate that this approach will have significant modeling
              advantages over more traditional methods for simulating flows with dynamic
              interfaces.  Furthermore, this work will lead to advanced parallel algorithms
              for mesoscopic modeling which we believe will be competitive with appoaches
              based on continuum mechanics.
%%% 
This research will study the properties of
              complex fluids, such as those found in biological and polymeric solutions,
              using computer simulation techniques.  New simulation methods will be developed
              and applied using parallel computers.  The research has wide application.
***
              

