Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY--Incubation Activity: Development of an Integrated Research Plan
               for Analyzing the Viability of a Marine Reserve Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0083790

Award Number: 0083790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99966              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert DeSalle desalle@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Broad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig Dalhgren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. Palumbi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel R. Brumbaugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1608,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A series of three workshops will be held and are designed to develop an
              interdisciplinary study of the viability of coral reef ecosystems under strong
              anthropogenic stress. Using the establishment of a new marine reserve network
              in the Bahamas as a case study, an attempt will be made to determine which
              specific reserve implementations and additional zoning policies are most
              important for maintaining ecosystem function across the network. In doing so,
              the study of oceanographic and biological processes will be the basis for
              setting contextual limits, and investigation of resource use by humans will be
              used to model management options. Participants from such disciplines as
              statistics, oceanographic modeling, population genetics, marine ecology,
              theoretical population biology, anthropology, and economics will be brought
              together tol analyze ways to integrate theoretical and empirical information
              across important spatial and temporal scales. Based on the results of the
              workshops, a complete report of discussions will be created and distributed and
               educational materials (especially for Bahamian teachers and U.S. graduate
              students) will be developed. 
