Title       : A Statistical Evaluation of Repeated Events Models with an Application to the
               Study of the Democratic Peace
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a0083418

Award Number: 0083418
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53745              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet M. Box-Steffensmeier jboxstef+@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Scholars have long known that multiple events data, which occur when subjects
              experience more than one event, cause a problem when analyzed without taking
              into consideration the correlation among the events.  In particular, there has
              not been a solution about the best way to model the common occurrence of
              repeated events, where the subject experiences the same type of event more than
              once.  This research project will result in an assessment of whether one of the
              two main approaches for the study of repeated events, variance corrected or
              frailty, is better able to account for within-subject correlation.  Monte Carlo
              evidence will help determine whether and under what conditions alternative
              modeling strategies for repeated events are appropriate.  Next, the project
              will compare frailty and multi-level frailty models by examining the results of
              a standard hazard model with no correction for clustering, three single frailty
              effect models to allow for clustering, and finally a model based on a
              cross-classified frailty model that allows for clustering by all three levels. 
              Finally, the project will investigate the treatment of missing data in analyses
              of heterogeneity.  Simulations will be rerun comparing variance corrected and
              frailty models with the complication of missing data.  The statistical work
              resulting from this project will help resolve debates about political dynamics,
              such as the liberal peace, by commenting on the reliability of the different
              modeling strategies used to test those theories and applying the models
              discussed.  The fellowship period will allow me to deepen my understanding of
              event history models and acquire new skills in the areas of Monte Carlo
              simulations, Bayesian analysis, and computer programming.

The question as to
              the best modeling strategy for repeated events data is an important one.  Our
              understanding of political processes, as in all studies, depends on the quality
              of the inferences we can draw from our models.  There is currently little
              guidance about which approach or model is appropriate and so, not surprisingly,
              we see analysts unsure of the best way to analyze their data.  Given the
              dramatic substantive differences that result from using the different models
              and approaches, this is a problem that will be of interest across research
              communities.  This research is supported by the Methodology, Measurement, and
              Statistics Program and the Statistics and Probability Program under the
              Mid-Career Methodological Opportunities Fellowship Announcement.

