Title       : Biocomplexity Incubation Proposal for Lake Erie
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0083690

Award Number: 0083690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel L. Morrison Morrison@cfm.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan J. Randall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Culver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keith W. Bedford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey M. Reutter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1366,1608,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Great Lakes hold about 20 % of the world supply of freshwater and about 95 %
              of the supply of the United States, and are the world's largest and
              biologically diverse fresh water resource. Lake Erie, the smallest in volume of
              the Great Lakes, is the most complex lake (southernmost, shallowest, warmest,
              most biologically productive, highest level of nutrient/sediment/contaminant
              loading), and therefore provides an excellent laboratory from which to
              understand and model the complex interactions among the physical, biological,
              and social/economic systems which affect the lakes. The entire Lake Erie
              ecosystem is changing due to recent, human?induced impacts such as aquatic
              nuisance species, water diversions, and loading from nutrients, sediments, and
              contaminants. As a result the distribution, diversity, and abundance of aquatic
              species are declining alarmingly in some areas, and human activities along the
              coastline are being restricted. Unless a holistic system?wide approach is taken
              to understanding the interrelationships among biological, physical, and
              social/economic systems, this vital and unique ecosystem will be permanently
              damaged.

The ultimate goal of this project is the development of an
              integrated set of biological, physical, and social/economic models to
              describe/study the biocomplexity of the Great Lakes, and thereby improve
              management decisions in this complex system. Lake Erie will serve as the
              laboratory to study three aspects for improving the ability to understand the
              results of current modeling activities of the biocomplexity of the Great Lakes.
              Three areas have been identified that are possible impediments to our current
              capabilities: (1) the disparate spatial and temporal scales among the different
              models in use, (2) the need for the detailed coupling of physical, biological
              and social/economic models, and (3) inadequate application of new technology to
              our understanding of the causes of biocomplexity. Each area will be the subject
              of a workshop to help prepare for a longer?term study of the biocomplexity of
              the Great Lakes.

