Title       : Doctoral Disseration: Who's Related to Whom? Skeletal Kinship Analysis in
               Ancient Cemeteries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a0083366

Award Number: 0083366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3636               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Merbs charles.merbs@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Two methods will be tested for identifying family members within ancient
              cemeteries using inherited variation of the skeleton.  The first method
              involves analysis of data on inherited variation in hand bone lengths to
              identify individuals who are very close genetic relatives (e.g. siblings, their
              parents, and grandparents).  This method is an adaptation of a radiographic
              technique called metacarpophalangeal pattern profile analysis, which uses data
              on the lengths of the digital bones of the hand.  Since human pattern profiles
              have been shown to exhibit high correlations between close genetic relatives,
              skeletons that show highly correlated pattern profiles can be assumed to have
              been close genetic relatives.

The second method for identifying family
              members involves collection of data on inherited structural anomalies of
              individual bones to identify genetic lineages that often span many generations.
               Examples of such anomalies include unusually short thumbs, congenitally fused
              vertebrae in the neck, and extra bones in the feet.  Analysis of these
              structural variants will follow a method already developed for analysis of
              genetic kinship, except that inherited anomalies from throughout the skeleton
              will be used, rather than just anomalies of the skull and teeth.  For each
              cemetery of interest, the frequency of 48 skeletal anomalies will be determined
              and compared to the frequencies of these same anomalies in a reference sample
              from the same time period and geographic region.  If there is a statistically
              significant difference between the frequency of an anomaly in one of the
              cemeteries and in the reference sample, then the individuals sharing the
              anomaly in common within the cemetery have a high probability of being genetic
              relatives.

The subjects of this study will be approximately 1800 skeletons
              from medieval church cemeteries in Denmark.  Familial relationships will be
              investigated among 800 skeletons from the Black Friar and Gray Friar cemeteries
              in Odense, which date from around AD 1250 to the mid- 1500s.  These skeletons
              are curated at Odense University.  Another 1000 skeletons from several other
              medieval cemeteries in Denmark will comprise the reference
              sample.

Identification of genetic relatives will allow anthropologists to
              better estimate the number of lineages belonging to the two parish churches. 
              In addition, this information will permit anthropologists to address questions
              about the extent to which quality of life issues such
as social status, burial
              treatment, childhood mortality rates, general health, and susceptibility to
              diseases were affected by membership in a particular family or lineage, and how
              this effect may have changed over time.

