Title       : Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Terminal Classic to Postclassic Transition
               in the Belize Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0083122

Award Number: 0083122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10451              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Wyllys Andrews wandrews@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. E. Wyllys Andrews, Mr. Jim Aimers will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze ceramics from a series of Mayan
              archaeological sites located in the Belize Valley and shall visit museums in
              Toronto, Illinois and Belize which house excavated materials. The goal of the
              research is to understand changes in settlement pattern and social organization
              which occurred during the "Maya collapse" in Late Classic and Post-Classic
              periods when temples and monuments characteristic of the height of Mayan
              civilization were no longer constructed and large site centers were abandoned.
              While these latter periods were clearly different from the former, researchers
              do not agree how society was reorganized. Some believe that population
              significantly decreased while others hypothesize that people redistributed
              themselves and lived in smaller groups away from the earlier civic and
              ceremonial centers. It is unclear the extent to which the resultant society was
              hierarchically organized and whether smaller settlements were in fact
              interconnected into larger functioning entities. Mr. Aimers will examine
              ceramics from a number of sites in the Belize Valley to address these
              questions. During the Classic period when Mayans were organized into highly
              stratified regionally expansive groups, ceramic production was, many
              researchers believe, centrally controlled. Because of this types were highly
              standardized, highly decorated "elite" wares were clearly distinct from their
              utilitarian counterparts and pots made in single centers were distributed over
              a wide area. Thus a close relationship existed between social/political
              organization and the production and consumption of ceramic vessels. Relatively
              little work however has been conducted on Late Classic and Post-Classic
              ceramics and Mr. Aimers believes that similar insight can be gained into social
              and political organization through such an analysis. He will test a series of
              specific hypotheses against the museum data he will collect.

The Maya are
              one of the best known prehistoric New World peoples and the "collapse" of their
              civilization is both impressive and poorly understood. The data collected by
              Mr. Aimers will shed new light on this period. The project will also assist in
              training a promising young scientist.

