Title       : Mining Human Brain Data: Analysis, Classification and Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0083423

Award Number: 0083423
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $653997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fillia S. Makedon makedon@cs.dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew J. Saykin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vasileios Megalooikonomou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

	This multidisciplinary research effort develops methods for content based
              retrieval, analysis and visualization of probabilistic 3D spatial maps, in
              particular, the statistical parametric maps obtained from the fMRI (functional
              Magnetic Resonance Imaging) analysis of the brain. The approach is based on
              "activation signatures" which represent fMRI brain activations by size, shape,
              number (of foci), location, density, orientation, and other parameters. These
              signatures are used in providing automatic classification of activations into
              classes. Since fMRI brain imaging is a non-invasive technique it has attracted
              enormous interest in recent years because of its potential to solve fundamental
              problems explaining cognitive processes and to find relations between brain
              structure and function. The environment developed in this project can fully
              utilize fMRI's potential by enabling inter- and intra- studies and support
              large-scale mining of fMRI brain activations. The techniques can extract
              associations at multiple levels: among different activations for the same or
              different (groups of) individuals, between activations and tasks, between
              activations and ancillary data, and between tasks and ancillary data. Automatic
              characterization tools open the field to numerous new research opportunities,
              as they can offer common signature formats to do cross-modality brain data
              searches and correlation over multiple studies. In turn, the mined results can
              speed up discovery in the neuroscience field. The methods will be demonstrated
              on a prototype robust database of brain activations that includes scan data as
              well as biographical, clinical, historical and other subject-centered ancillary
              data. This database supports retrieval requests and subsequent analysis
              incorporating spatial statistics, classification, and visualization techniques
              and provides an evaluation of the system by the professional communities. The
              results of this work will be applicable to the analysis of other brain data
              such as brain lesions, Positron Emission Tomography (PET) scans, and MRI scans;
              thus helping to create tools for search across brain data formats. In addition,
              objects similar to brain activations appear in many other different domains,
              including cellular biology, tumor analysis, fluid dynamics, or financial
              records, therefore, the resulting techniques are expected to have broad
              impact.
http://devlab.dartmouth.edu/


