Title       : Inorganic and Organic Nitrogen Utilization in the Southern Ocean Mesoscale Iron
               Enrichment Experiment (SOFeX)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a0083394

Award Number: 0083394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305540             (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Cochlan cochlan@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raphael M. Kudela  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The results of mesoscale (in situ) and microscale (shipboard-bottle) iron
              enrichment experiments conducted in the high nitrate, low chlorophyll (HNLC)
              waters of the sub-arctic Pacific, equatorial Pacific and the Southern Ocean
              strongly suggest that the rate of phytoplankton growth and biomass accumulation
              are limited, at least in part, by the availability of iron. To directly assess
              this hypothesis without the restrictions of deck-board incubation experiments,
              an in situ mesoscale iron enrichment experiment will be conducted in the
              Southern Ocean - the largest HNLC region on Earth and arguably the most
              important area in regulating global climate. The SOFeX project, led by Moss
              Landing Marine Laboratories, will involve two iron enrichment experiments along
              the 170'W meridian during this austral summer (December-January). During one
              45-day cruise they will fertilize waters in the nitrate-rich and silicate-rich
              waters south of the Polar Front, and in the silicate-poor, but nitrate-rich
              waters north of the Polar Front.   This sub-project will investigate the
              nitrogen dynamics of the natural planktonic community in response to the iron
              enrichment. The 15 N stable isotope technique will be used to quantify nitrate,
              nitrite, ammonium and urea uptake within and outside of the iron-enriched
              sites, thus providing a direct and unambiguous measure of nitrogen uptake
              independent of anv observable changes in the ambient nitrogen concentrations
              within these waters. Since cell size is thought to be a major factor
              controlling the flux of material from the surface to deep waters (i.e. export
              production), the size- spectrum of nitrogen utilization (pico-, nano- and
              microplankton) will be determined by using different pore-sized filters to
              collect particulates after short-term 15 N incubations. To evaluate the factors
              controlling nitrogen preference (or inhibition) in this HNLC region, the
              activities of nitrate reductase (NR) and nitrite reductase (NiR) will be
              assessed, in concert with N uptake rate measurements, to determine if iron
              limitation directly regulates the ability of phytoplankton (both large and
              small) to assimilate ammonium versus nitrate and test whether iron-limited
              phytoplankton are Fe-nitrogen co-limited. Deck experiments are designed to
              determine the effects of irradiance on nitrate and ammonium uptake. During
              collaborative studies with MLML and Mark Brzezinski (UCSB), the scientists in
              this sub-project will determine the effects of various concentrations of iron
              and zinc on the growth of phytoplankton (in particular diatoms) and their use
              of nitrogen and silicate.

To ensure that the rates of nitrogenous nutrition
              are an accurate measure of new and regenerated production, the experimental
              design includes corrections for the effects of isotopic dilution from 14 NH4,
              losses from release of 15 N in dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) and N02, and
              competition from heterotrophic uptake. These N uptake experiments are a key
              component in the proposed SOFeX study and their results are critical to a
              comprehensive understanding of the ecosystem response to iron enrichment in the
              Southern Ocean. Modest phytoplankton growth and the lack of significant
              depletion of macronutrients are two fundamental observations common to HNLC
              regions and still remain to be explained in the Southern Ocean. This study will
              directly answer the question 'does iron stimulate the uptake and assimilation
              of nitrate, and if so, what group is stimulated?' all within the context of an
              in situ ecosystem response to iron enrichment.

