Title       : Data Mining of Digital Behaviour
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0083489

Award Number: 0083489
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $565128             (Estimated)
Investigator: Padhraic Smyth smyth@ics.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sharad Mehrotra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research project is to improve our understanding of how humans
              behave in information-seeking digital environments such as the Web. The
              approach consists of using massively large Web logs to infer patterns of
              behavior. New probabilistic models for modeling human behavior on the Web are
              under investigation including Markov and switching models, mixture models, and
              Bayesian hierarchical models. Adaptive statistical techniques form the basis
              for building up individual user models in an online fashion, automatically
              learning both the dynamic time-dependent patterns of a user as well as
              text-vector representations of their interests. Test data sets from large
              commercial Web sites are being used to develop, validate, and test the models.
              Data are anonymized to protect individual privacy. The statistical user models
              are in turn being used to develop two primary software tools. The first tool
              allows an analyst to explore, cluster, predict, and visualize Web logs with
              millions of entries, allowing an understanding of dynamic patterns of access
              and behavior in a manner that is not currently available in research or
              commercial tools. The second tool, WebMARS, uses adaptive user-models to
              enhance information retrieval algorithms by interpreting search queries in a
              personalized manner. More generally, the results from this project will provide
              tools and techniques to enable a better scientific understanding of modes of
              human behavior across a broad range of digital environments, with potential
              applications in wireless information appliances, medical informatics,
              scientific exploration of massive data sets, and so forth. 
