Title       : Biocomplexity: Polynomial Complexity Computation, Representation Construction,
               and the Genetic Code
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0083946

Award Number: 0083946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222920             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hillol Kargupta   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1366,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The gene expression process in nature evaluates the fitness of a DNA through the
              production of different proteins in different cells. The DNA sequence first
              produces the mRNA sequence.  Next, the mRNA produces the protein sequence by
              using a transformation called the genetic code.   Finally, the protein sequence
              folds into a 3D structure which determines the fitness of the genome.  This
              project derives from the observation that genetic code-like transformations
              introduce interesting properties to the representation of a genetic fitness
              function.  The PI recently showed that such transformations in binary sequence
              representations can convert some functions with an exponentially large
              description to an alternative form that is amenable to polynomial-size
              approximation under certain practical conditions.   This project will extend
              this preliminary finding and explore the computation in richer genetic
              code-like transformations for non-binary representations that are used in
              natural DNA, mRNA, and proteins.   The research will have the following primary
              components:   theoretical exploration of the class of genetic code-like
              transformations from the function induction perspective;   extension of the
              PI's preliminary findings for binary representation to non-binary
              representations;   extension of the analysis to orthogonal bases other than
              Fourier and Walsh, in particular exploration of the invariance of the
              properties of genetic code-like transformations across different basis
              representations, exploration of biologically meaningful choice of basis and the
              properties of genetic code-like transformations in those representations, and
              identification of the class of functions for which such transformations can be
              used to construct efficient representations;   development of a practical
              adaptive technique for constructing such representation transformations for
              non-binary representations.   Because there currently exists no known strong
              technique to induce functions with exponentially large representation to
              functions with only a polynomial number of terms, if successful this research
              will have significant impact on the theory of computation, machine learning,
              data mining, automated program induction, optimization, etc.
