Title       : Population Differentiation in the Neural Substrates of Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0083105

Award Number: 0083105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32340              (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Gilliam james_gilliam@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Godwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate the detailed nature of brain evolution. 
              Specifically, the part of the brain that mediates courtship behavior will be
              studied in contrasting populations of a well-studied fish species, the guppy of
              Trinidad. In nature, some guppy populations exist in the presence of other fish
              that are strong predators on adult guppies, while other populations above
              barrier waterfalls are free of those strong predators.  In the presence of the
              strong predators, males are drably colored and court relatively little, but in
              the absence of these predators, males are more brightly colored and court more.
               Because of earlier field transplant experiments, these characteristics are
              known to evolve rapidly when guppies are moved from a high-predation to a
              low-predation environment, but the brain changes that cause the change in
              behavior are not known.  To address the neural mechanism of this evolutionary
              change, the cells which produce a hormone (arginine vasotocin) that is critical
              for courtship in vertebrate animals, will be compared using molecular
              biological and neurobiological methods.  The specific goal is to assess a
              possible role for arginine vasotocin in adapting courtship behavior to the
              local predator environment.

The general goal of this research is to
              understand the detailed nature of changes in the brain that underlie
              differences in animal behavior.  The research approach taken here will help to
              link the progress in understanding the environmental factors shaping animal
              behavior with advances in our understanding of the functioning of the brain.
              Given rapid advances in our understanding of the genomic and neural bases of
              behavior, the knowledge generated by this project may also be useful in
              improving the reproductive performance of domestically grown fish.

