Title       : Divide and Conquer Methods for Machine Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0083292

Award Number: 0083292
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Dietterich tgd@cs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This project will develop machine learning algorithms, prototype tools, and
              supporting theory for solving complex machine learning problems.  Existing
              theory and algorithms have focused on learning simple classifiers that take a
              description of an object and assign it to one of a small number of classes
              (e.g., taking an image of a character and classifying it as one of the 26
              letters of the alphabet).   Emerging applications in science and industry
              require learning much more complex functions that map from complex inputs
              (e.g., 2D maps, time series, and strings) to complex outputs (e.g., other 2D
              maps, time series, and strings).   Despite the lack of theory covering such
              cases, many practical systems have been built that work well in particular
              applications.  These systems all employ some form of divide-and-conquer, where
              the inputs and outputs are divided into smaller pieces ("windows"), classified,
              and then the results are merged to produce an overall solution.   This project
              will develop a general formulation of machine learning for divide-and-conquer
              problems, a collection of algorithms for solving these problems, and a
              prototype tool kit for solving new learning problems via the divide-and-conquer
              approach.   In addition, theoretical models will be developed to understand the
              tradeoffs that affect the design of divide-and-conquer systems.  The resulting
              algorithms and theory will extend the range of problems that can be solved via
              machine learning methods and make it easier to construct new divide-and-conquer
              machine learning applications.  This will lead to improved performance of
              existing machine learning applications, for example, in text processing,
              intrusion detection, and the analysis of sensor data to signal alarms.
