Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY INCUBATION ACTIVITY: Earth System Regulation Through Biogenic
               Sulfur-Molecular to Global Interactions and Feedbacks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2000 
File        : a0083078

Award Number: 0083078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46302              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Matrai pmatrai@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,1608,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract: BIOCOMPLEXTIY INCUBATION ACTIVITY: Earth System Regulation Through
              Biogenic Sulfur - Molecular to Global Interactions and Feedbacks. 

While
              individual research projects have provided insight into various processes
              involved in the ocean/atmosphere cycling of DMS-related research, the reality
              of today's funding has forced this reductionism approach. It is time for a
              multi-disciplined approach given the complexity, apparent non-linearity, and
              feed-back-type of processes involved. Some combination of intensive,
              process-oriented, field studies, large-scale ocean surveys and comprehensive
              modeling will most likely be required to advance our understanding of the
              DMS-climate link. Unlike previous DMS research, we propose to study
              simultaneously all known processes that regulate DMS concentration in seawater,
              leading to its sea-air flux. Also novel will be the inclusion of modeling from
              the outset, the ultimate goal of which will be the refinement of a DMS submodel
              that can be included in comprehensive and predictive global climate-system
              models. An ecological DMS model already exists and global scale DMS modeling
              has been done with GCMs [Erickson et al., 1990] and data compilations [Kettle
              et al., 1999]; however, much more work needs to be done, especially if a "big
              picture" understanding is to emerge. 

Developing an effective, detailed plan
              of research will require the coordination of a diverse set of investigators and
              a comprehensive review of the state of DMS science. This is a request for
              incubation funds to support a review of our current understanding of DMS
              dynamics in seawater and a workshop on DMS dynamics in seawater. 

