Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: From Traveling to Cruising: British Ocean Liner
               Architecture and Technologies, 1870-1935
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0083844

Award Number: 0083844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11502              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arwen Mohun mohun@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              British transatlantic ocean liners of the late 19th century transported some
              bourgeois travelers, and many of the emigrants who fueled America's second
              industrial revolution; by the 1920s ocean liners catered almost exclusively to
              an expanding British and American middle class, the vanguard of consumer-driven
              economies. Throughout the late 19th and 20th centuries, the ocean liner also
              remained an important example of sites in which architecture, sophisticated
              technologies, and modern, "efficient" work organizations mediated the
              experience of its inhabitants. This makes it an ideal site to view
              technological and architectural changes as passengers, crew, and ship designers
              transformed the vessel from a vehicle of transportation to a site of
              consumption. Beginning with the assumption that a mutually shaping relationship
              characterized the vessel's physical environment-its architecture and
              technologies-and the social and work relations it mediated, the researcher of
              this dissertation research project will  examine the changing use and
              distribution of space and technologies among various categories of passengers
              and crew. A focus on technology and architecture can integrate a study of work
              relations with one of consumer behavior, building on the work of historians who
              separate these realms of inquiry in their examination of the transition from
              industrializing to consumer-driven economies. To facilitate an analysis of
              ocean liner architecture and technology, the researcher will create an
              historical typology of flagship ocean liners, charting the changing
              distribution, physical character, and experience of space among vessel
              inhabitants. The researcher will amass information about activities and
              interactions among crew and passengers into a database of records, tracking
              developments through such categories as ship size and compartment, "class"
              among passengers, department and rank among crew, and gender and age among all
              inhabitants. The database will draw on passengers' and crew members' written
              accounts of travel and work, published descriptions, and the activities
              companies prescribed in advertising and travel guides. Where possible, papers
              relating to ship design and operation will be used to analyze company managers'
              architectural and technological attempts to reconcile and harness developments
              among passengers and crew members in economic power, expectations, and use of
              space-the market of labor and passengers. The investigator seeks to illuminate
              connections among architecture, technologies, and experience in the transition
              from industrializing to consumer- and service-driven economies.

