Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY--INCUBATION ACTIVITY: Designing a Sustainable Southern California:
               Exploring Interdisciplinary Studies of Complexity in Natural and Human Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0083383

Award Number: 0083383
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Frederick Thompson                   
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99501              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail S. Tonnesen tonnesen@cert.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Lents  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Jury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael F. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1366      BIOCOMPLEXITY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,1366,1608,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0083383  Tonnesen  The objective of this Incubation Grant is to bring together
              faculty and researchers from various academic departments for development of an
              interdisciplinary research and education plan centering on Riverside County's
              unique ecology.  A critical challenge for humanity in the 21st century will be
              adapting our technology and lifestyle choices to live in harmony with our
              natural resource base and to protect the integrity of the earth's natural
              ecosystems.  For scientist and educators, this requires an understanding of the
              functioning of complex biological systems and of the dynamic interactions
              between human and natural systems.  It also requires the education of citizens
              so that they better understand the impacts of lifestyle choices and are
              empowered to adopt sustainable lifestyles.  Initially, the program will involve
              faculty from Conservation Biology, Soil Science, Engineering-Center for
              Environmental Research and Technology (a laboratory whose principal focus is
              air quality), Political Science and Anthropology.  As the program matures, it
              is expected that faculty encompassing the various physical sciences, social
              sciences and humanities will become involved.  This project will take the first
              steps toward identifying interdisciplinary research and educational
              opportunities relating to biocomplexity in Riverside County, which stretches
              from the outskirts of Los Angeles to the Arizona border.  It will provide the
              resources for investigators to share data sets and models, including data from
              the Riverside County Integrated Plan, for exploratory research into new
              approaches for modeling and analysis.  This grant will serve as a catalyst for
              development of an integrated approach to research and curriculum that will use
              Riverside County as a living laboratory to illustrate academic concepts and to
              provide opportunities for research.*** 

