Title       : Target-Based Document-Independent Information Extraction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0083127

Award Number: 0083127
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429549             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Embley embley@cs.byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen W. Liddle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deryle Lonsdale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas M. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yiu Kai Dennis Ng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              


Target-Based Document-Independent Information Extraction

	With
              ever-growing volumes of data in widely varying formats, there is a need to sift
              and funnel information to users to meet their own specific requirements. This
              project addresses the challenge of finding, extracting, and delivering
              appropriate data by developing a versatile framework that is target-based
              (i.e., based on a user's description of the desired information) and
              document-independent (i.e., robust, not failing whenever documents change or
              when new documents of interest are encountered). A combination of
              document-related clues regarding textual content as well as geometrical and
              organizational layout enables processing across various document formats.
              Developers and users specify areas of interest via descriptive ontologies
              (i.e., declarations of information types and concept relationships). These
              ontologies facilitate reformulating, matching, and merging retrieved
              information. The result of these efforts will be a comprehensive infrastructure
              to extract expertly, organize automatically, and summarize succinctly critical
              information in a queriable personalized view. An online repository will contain
              research results, downloadable software (including source code), and a Web
              interface enabling user access to the various tools and engines developed.
              Potentially, this technology can be embedded in personal agents; leveraged in
              customized search, filtering, and extraction tools; and used to provide
              tailored views of data via integration, organization, and summarization.
              http://www.deg.byu.edu 


