Title       : Biocomplexity Research: Emergence of Cooperation from Human-Environmental
               Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a0083524

Award Number: 0083524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Stephen Lansing jlansing@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dwight W. Read  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James N. Kremer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph C. Watkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael F. Hammer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1366,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A key question in the social and evolutionary sciences is the explanation of
              cooperation among human groups.  Current models explain cooperation either as a
              result of fitness benefits to kin or as a consequence of reciprocal altruism
              among individuals in small groups.  Both explanations are limited to small
              groups that are united by kinship ties' or reciprocal exchanges.  The purpose
              of this Biocomplexity research project is to improve general understandings of
              the role of the environment in the formation and dissolution of large-scale
              cooperative groups.  To accomplish this goal, an adaptive-agent simulation
              model will be created that can predict variation in cooperation as a
              consequence of processes that occur over historical time.  Among the changes to
              be examined are changes in population density, kinship relationships, and
              ecological feedback.  The model will also predict statistical patterns of
              biological kinship relationships among individuals and conflicts between social
              groups.  These patterns will be tested against observed data on conflict and
              cooperation among Balinese farming communities.

This project builds on prior
              NSF-funded research that showed how stable cooperative networks encompassing
              tens of thousands of farmers in Balinese watersheds can be explained through a
              model of self-organization through which ecological feedback rewarded
              cooperation with high harvest yields and reduced variance in yields.  In
              computer simulations, agents coalesced into cooperative groups as a consequence
              of ecological feedback, and these groups often coalesced into higher-level
              agents.  Calculated optimal structural patterns of cooperation bear a very
              close resemblance to observed patterns among the subaks.  But despite the
              ecological rewards for cooperation, it frequently breaks down.  Because the
              existing ecological model always predicts that cooperation will be rewarded, it
              cannot account for such failures to cooperate.  Detailed observations of 15
              villages over the past four years suggest that cultural rules of kinship and
              patterns of demographic change strongly influence both the emergence and
              dissolution of cooperative bonds among farmers.  The proposed adaptive-agent
              simulation model will enable simulation of these historical processes.  The
              model will predict specific patterns of demography, kinship relationships, and
              levels of cooperation for particular villages.  These predictions will be
              tested against observed data.  The model will be constructed and tested using
              data from Bali, but it will be designed to facilitate a search for similar
              processes and dynamics in other societies.

