Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Class Stratification and Ceramics in
               Colonial Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a0083274

Award Number: 0083274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen D. Morrison k-morrison@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Kathleen Morrison, Mr. Enrique Rodriguez-Alegria will
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. To examine the changes in pottery
              production and utilization in early colonial Mexico City, he will examine
              relevant collections there, study archival material in Spain and assist in
              neutron activation analysis of clay at the University of Missouri reactor
              facility. While the Spanish conquered the Aztec city of Mexico-Tenochtitlan in
              1521 and subsequently formed the uppermost stratum in the society thus created,
              the situation was not straightforward. Intermarriage between conqueror and
              conquered was common and within the Spanish themselves significant social
              stratification took place. While documentary evidence provides some insight
              into this process, many details are unknown and through the study of ceramic
              material excavated from Mexico City residences significant additional insight
              can be attained.

Immediately after the conquest Spanish conquistadors began
              to import serving vessels from Europe and China. These vessels were different
              from Aztec pottery because they were covered with a white glaze and had
              specialized shapes that pleased European tastes. Indigenous Mexicans
              immediately began producing pottery in imitation of the form and surface finish
              of European imports. These imitation types, although recognizably different
              from the European products, apparently gained favor in the colonial market in
              Mexico City. Using archaeological material from 12 Spanish houses Mr.
              Rodriguez-Alegria will address basic questions related to who consumed
              different imported types and who used indigenous imitations of Spanish imports.
              Among the factors to be studied using archival records are the immigrant or
              local status of the families involved, the presence of Indians in the household
              as spouses or servants, the financial wealth of the families, and the role of
              the family in the conquest or in government. The use of imported and indigenous
              products should shed light on the factors which led to emerging class structure
              in New Spain and the role of Indians in the production and distribution of this
              significant artifact class.

This research will shed new light on the process
              of assimilation and acculturation and produce data of interest to many
              archaeologists and historians. It will also assist in training a promising
              young scientist.

