Title       : Surface Visibility for Large Model Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0083836

Award Number: 0083836
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241257             (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg Turk turk@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Many uses of computer visualization rely on displaying surfaces so that a person
              can easily understand the relationships between the different parts of the
              visualized object. This project will study new methods to identify the visible
              parts of an object, and will use this information to produce better images
              (that is, more accurate and complete images) of scientific data. Some possible
              applications of this work are medical visualization (e.g. showing the chambers
              of the heart), studying fracture mechanics (e.g. identifying interior cracks),
              and computational fluid dynamics (e.g. finding and studying vortices in
              turbulent flow).

Technically, the project has two sub-goals. First, it will
              automatically identify interior structures of a complex surface, that is, those
              regions that are not visible from locations outside the object. Currently, this
              is done manually or by connected component analysis, both of which have
              limitations. This project will explore both analytical and sampling approaches
              to quickly computing a visibility function for all surface points. Secondly,
              the project will automatically produce a group of viewpoints and associated
              images (an image coverage) that collectively show every visible portion of a
              given surface. This can be used to both save the user from the error-prone task
              of manually rotating the object to see all visible portions, and may aid in
              creating simplified models for rapid navigation and display. This project will
              explore several approaches, including sampling-based ones, to this previously
              unsolved problem.

