Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY - INCUBATION ACTIVITY: Large Mammal Movement through Complex
               Landscapes in East Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0083827

Award Number: 0083827
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79214              (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Newmark bnewmark@umnh.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel F. Doak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas T. Bolger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel I. Rubenstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1366,1608,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The movement of large mammals through multiple-use landscapes is essential to
              the viability of many large mammal populations that occur in national parks and
              nature reserves. This incubation grant will be used to develop a conceptual,
              theoretical and methodological approach to study large mammal movement through
              multiple-use landscapes of East Africa: in the Masailand of northern Tanzania
              and the Laikipia Plateau in central Kenya. This effort will require a synthesis
              of four active areas of ecological and interdisciplinary inquiry: (1) Landscape
              Ecology; (2) Behavioral Ecology; (3) The mathematical modeling of animal
              movement; and (4) Land tenure and economics.  A review paper on large mammal
              movement through multiple-use landscapes will be written and a mathematical
              model linking landscape pattern to components of animal movement behavior will
              be developed. 

Nature reserves everywhere are increasingly isolated by
              multiple-use human landscapes.  A number of important studies suggest that all
              but the largest reserves are too small to maintain populations of all resident
              vertebrate species.  Thus, the ability of animals to disperse through the
              multiple-use landscapes that surround nature reserves becomes essential..  The
              effort to link reserves with wildlife corridors is hindered by our relative
              ignorance of the ability of multiple-use landscapes to support the movements of
              these species.  The conceptual, theoretical and methodological approach
              developed in this incubation grant will serve as a template for the study of
              large mammal movement through multiple-use landscapes. By developing a
              quantitative understanding of the effect of landscape patterns on movement it
              will be possible to evaluate the effects of changing land use on animal
              movement.  By examining how land tenure and economics affect landscape pattern,
              these social factors can also be linked to animal movement and nature reserve
              viability.

