Title       : Establishment of the Arkansas-Oklahoma Center of Instrumentation and Science for
               Planetary Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a0083095

Award Number: 0083095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fae L. Korsmo                           
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $746269             (Estimated)
Investigator: Derek W. Sears dsears@uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry A. Roe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul H. Benoit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy A. Kral  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wesley E. Stites  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An Arkansas-Oklahoma Center of Instrumentation and Science for Planetary
              Surfaces will be established at the University of Arkansas, Fayetteville and
              Oklahoma State University, Stillwater campuses.  The Center will enable the
              development of state-of-the-arts facilities for the creation of instrumentation
              for robotics exploration of planets in the solar system and establish a
              critical mass of researchers with diverse but synergistic interests.  Core
              faculty, with unique expertise in remote geo-sensing, luminescence dating, and
              platform engineering prototypes, will form the nucleus of the Center. 
              Moreover, the center will provide facilities and infrastructure that will bring
              together researchers in the Chemistry and Biochemistry, Biological Sciences,
              Mechanical Engineering, Chemical Engineering, and Physics departments at the
              University of Arkansas and Oklahoma State University.  The proposed research is
              based on: simulation of modern and ancient surfaces of meteorites and related
              materials, luminescence dating of Martian water-formed sediments, search for
              Martian life by strictly controlled exploration of conditions which could
              support a particular type of life (methanogens), and platform experiments which
              involve in-situ gas generation for inflatable structures which could eventually
              be deployed on Mars and other bodies.  All of the projects envisaged for the
              Center, including outreach, will have industrial partners ready to utilize the
              Center's work as opportunities arise.

