Title       : A Decoupled I/O Architecture for Data-Intensive Cluster Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2001    
File        : a0083497

Award Number: 0083497
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tzi-Cker Chiueh chiueh@cs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Cluster computing exploits the exponential growth in processing power,
              memory/disk capacity, and network link speed of commodity hardware developed in
              the PC industry to achieve excellent price-performance, and is becoming a major
              platform for scientific computation, Web page and file servicing, as well as
              large-scale information analysis applications such as data mining and knowledge
              discovery. A distinct characteristic
shared by many emerging workloads on PC
              clusters is the requirement for intensive disk data accesses during program
              computation. The fundamental technique to address the performance problems
              associated with disk I/O is to overlap disk access with program computation so
              that the I/O delays are completely masked. Disk prefetching is one incarnation
              of this technique. In this project, we propose an automatic
              application-
specific file prefetching scheme that exploits specific
              applications' access patterns to the fullest extent and achieves close to
              perfect prefetching. The key idea is to apply the concept of decoupled
              architecture, which was originally proposed to bridge the gap between CPU and
              memory, to overlap computation with disk I/O. Given an application program, the
              compiler automatically translates it into two threads, one corresponding
to
              the original program (computation thread) and the other including all
              statements in the original program that are related to disk I/O (prefetch
              thread). At run time, the prefetch thread is scheduled to be suficiently ahead
              of the computation thread so that all the file access requests of the
              computation thread are satisfied in the file system cache, which is populated
              by the prefetch thread anticipatively. To validate the decoupled I/O
              architecture, we will design, implement, and evaluate an active parallel disk
              I/O subsystem called Platypus that embodies the application-specific file
              prefetching scheme and that is designed to be a modular building block for
              scalable PC cluster systems that aim at data-intensive computing. Platypus
              consists of a source-to-source translator to generate computation and prefetch
              threads from a SPMD parallel program
automatically, a run-time thread
              scheduler that coordinates the execution of prefetch threads on the I/O nodes,
              and a cache manager that maximizes main memory utilization efficiency by
              optimally balancing the benefits of file caching and prefetching.
