Title       : Customized Interfaces for Assistive Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0083240

Award Number: 0083240
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $489800             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Vijay Kumar Kumar@cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Camillo J. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Ostrowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 6846      UNIVERSAL ACCESS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks to develop a novel class of computer interfaces centered on a
              vision-based interaction paradigm, and human augmentation using a range of
              panoramic sensors and intelligent controllers to provide assistive technology
              to disabled users.   The goal of such interfaces is to enable people with
              physical disabilities such as impaired limbs, paralysis, or tremors to overcome
              difficulties associated with accessing computers and products with embedded
              computers such as wheelchairs, household and office electronic equipment, and
              robotic aids with traditional input devices.  The goal is to create the
              framework, architecture, scientific algorithms, and augmentative hardware and
              software to facilitate (a) interaction; (b) control and tasking; and (c)
              programming of computers and computer-controlled smart devices.  There are two
              main sets of research problems that need to be solved: (a) the development of
              novel, flexible, portable, adaptable interfaces that allow users with physical
              disabilities to interact with computers and computer controlled devices by
              touching and feeling; and (b) human augmentation via a combination of
              inexpensive sensors and controllers, along with a set of algorithms and
              software for computer mediated control.  This research will result in the next
              generation of interfaces for users to interact with computers and robot
              assistants, and more generally, devices with embedded controllers.  Although
              the immediate goal is to develop the basic framework, methods, and algorithms
              using the smart wheelchair as a test product, the basic ideas will be
              applicable to a wider range of products.
