Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY - INCUBATION ACTIVITY: Quantitative description of the response of
               a complex system to disturbance: subsurface microbial communities and chemical
               contaminants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2002   
File        : a0083839

Award Number: 0083839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61291              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roseanne M. Ford rmf3f@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron L. Mills  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janet S. Herman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph J. Vallino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George M. Hornberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1608,9238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ford 
0083839

The release of chemical pollutants into groundwater disturbs
              the resident microbial community and triggers a complex network of feedback
              loops affecting the groundwater geochemistry, soil structure and microbial
              diversity of the system.  Human intervention in the form of engineered
              remediation to restore the site introduces yet another disturbance to which the
              microbial community and abiotic components of the systems must respond.  An
              emergent property typically associated with microbial communities is
              homeostasis.  The objective of this research is to test the homeostasis
              hypothesis for a subsurface microbial community under the stress of a chemical
              pollutant release and the remedial actions which may follow.

To accomplish
              this objective will require effective collaboration among a team of scientists
              and engineers with expertise in microbiology, hydrology, biogeochemistry,
              engineering, ecological modeling, adaptive control theory, and data
              visualization.  Incubator activities are designed to foster communications
              between experimentalists with an understanding of the physical system and
              mathematical modelers with quantitative tools for characterizing and predicting
              properties of the system.  A relatively simple laboratory experiment [two
              bacterial species within a fixed-film flow-through column with a reactive
              mineral surface (iron) that serves as an alternative election acceptor in the
              absence of oxygen] is defined in order to  explore three modeling approaches: 
              (1) system of nonlinear partial differential equations for each species, (2)
              metabolic modeling, and (3) adaptive control theory.  This prototype system
              will be used to focus the interdisciplinary discussions on a concrete problem
              and facilitate productive interactions.  Additional modeling approaches will be
              explored through a brainstorming session, computer systems and a follow-up
              videoconference.  A written summary from the workshop will be published in
              technical news journals to benefit the scientific community at large.

