Title       : In-Vacuo Research Facility for Characterizing Materials, Processes and
               Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0083103

Award Number: 0083103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mahendra K. Sunkara   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan K. Dozier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Cohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raul Miranda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth C. Dickey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A major new materials analysis facility will be established within the State of
              Kentucky.  The facility is designed to build on, complement and integrating
              existing capabilities for nano-scale analysis available within the state.  It
              will consist of the following components. 
 Several complementary analysis
              tools designed to probe composition and structure of the surface and
              sub-surface to a depth of several atomic monolayers, with nanometer, and
              sometimes, atomic resolution.
 A sample preparation lab for preparing and
              mounting crystalline samples that are 10-1000 atomic layers thick for analysis
              by University of Louisville (UL) and University of Kentucky (UK) Transmission
              Electron Microscope (TEM) facilities.
 An expert staff to assist and support
              Kentucky researchers in using the analytical system, as well as expedite for UL
              researchers analysis using the TEM's at the UL Medical School and UK Chemical
              and Materials Engineering Department.
Key to the project is a custom designed
              system containing Auger electron spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron
              spectroscopy, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy, low energy electron
              diffraction, surface profiling microscopes (including atomic force and surface
              tunneling microscopy and surface tunneling spectroscopy), and ion milling to
              provide X-ray and ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy depth.  Together these
              instruments provide precise and detailed information on material composition,
              topography, crystalline structure, and electronic properties, as well as some
              capabilities to perform in situ surface modification and nanolithographic
              patterning.  The instruments attach to three interconnected, ultra high vacuum
              (UHV) chambers, which permit measurements in a UHV or other controlled
              atmosphere without exposure to the detrimental effects of air.  The system can
              be connected through UHV transports to many other co-located analyses,
              syntheses and processing chambers, and thus supports investigations of
              researchers who require in vacuo materials analysis and synthesis
              capabilities.

