Title       : Biocomplexity - Incubation Activity: Integrated Modeling of the
               Complementarities and Conflicts Between Ecological Systems and Economic
               Activities in North Carolina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0083327

Award Number: 0083327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: V. Kerry Smith kerry_smith@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard J. Pietrafesa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1320,1366,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This incubation activity will investigate the nature of the complementarities
              and conflicts between the services of ecological systems and economic
              activities, focusing specifically on the land-water interface for North
              Carolina's linked rivers and estuaries.  Recent concerns about rapid economic
              growth, ongoing transformations to North Carolina's environmental resources,
              growing nutrient loadings to coastal waterways, animal agriculture, and the
              prospect of increased hurricanes and coastal flooding in a rapidly developing
              landscape have focused attention on the development of integrated research to
              design policy responses to these issues.  This research seeks to develop
              linkages between ecosystem models and a dynamic computational economic model
              describing equilibrium locations of heterogeneous households and firms in a
              spatial context.  The ecosystem structures simulate ecological processes and
              functions based on the land use designation of their cells along with their
              interface with rivers, wetlands, and coastal estuaries.  The research will take
              advantage of attributes of the study area and the research team drawn from the
              Research Triangle and external universities.  These include: (a) a long history
              of field research for background data (e.g. the EPA Albemarle-Pamlico Study
              1990-96), some relatively undisturbed coastal environments for new monitoring
              activities, and recent efforts to collect fairly extensive information on key
              descriptors of the major watersheds; (b) a network of linked natural
              scientists, engineers, and GIS-based landscape ecologists with a history of
              collaboration; (c) one of the largest collections (in the US) of environmental
              economists (who also have a history of collaborating with the natural science
              community); and (d) a select group of distinguished external scholars with
              experience in the quantitative and methodological requirements of developing
              and linking spatial models capable of describing the dynamic interactions of
              ecological processes and economic activities.  A team of natural and social
              scientists and engineers will work with: V. Kerry Smith and Leonard J.
              Piedrafesa of NC State University; Nancy Bockstael, University of Maryland; and
              Thomas Rutherford, University of Colorado.  Activities include a conference
              with commissioned papers and a continuing workshop series where natural and
              social scientists will interact to define the research.  This incubation
              activity was funded as part of the FY2000 Biocomplexity Special Competition.
