Title       : Cooperative Coevolution of Neural Networks in Sequential Decision Tasks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0083776

Award Number: 0083776
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $419113             (Estimated)
Investigator: Risto Miikkulainen risto@cs.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In sequential decision tasks such as resource optimization, robot control, and
              game playing, several decisions must be made before the outcome can be
              evaluated. Such reinforcement feedback depends on the entire sequence of
              decisions, and it is difficult to determine which of the decisions were
              responsible for the outcome.  This project aims at developing better techniques
              for learning in domains with such sparse feedback, based on evolving neural
              networks with genetic algorithms. The goal is both to be able to solve existing
              problems faster, and to be able to solve problems that have not been feasible
              as sequential decision tasks before.   Our previous work showed that
              neuroevolution is most powerful when individual neurons are evolved to
              cooperate and form good networks.  In this project, such cooperative
              coevolution methods are studied in depth. The research aims at answering three
              main questions:   Where does the power of cooperative coevolution come from and
              what are the best ways of making use of it?    How do the evolutionary
              reinforcement learning methods differ from the traditional value function
              methods in learning sequential decision tasks?    Does evolutionary
              reinforcement learning have the accuracy and flexibility required in real-world
              applications?    If successful, the project will result in cooperative
              coevolution algorithms that will solve existing sequential decision tasks
              faster, and will allow solving more difficult tasks than before.   We will know
              how to decide between evolutionary and value function methods for a given
              reinforcement learning task, and also how to use each method most effectively. 
                Finally, the project will demonstrate how learning in general, and
              cooperative coevolution of neural networks in particular, can be used to save
              resources and achieve complex behavior in challenging real-world tasks.
