Title       : SBER Instrumentation: Vehicle to be used in Anthropological Field Research on
               the Giant Extinct Lemurs and Associated Fauna of Madagascar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a0083774

Award Number: 0083774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elwyn L. Simons esimons@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1327      SBE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Simons
0083774

The objective of the research project proposed here is to
              gather new collections of primate and other vertebrate subfossils in Madagascar
              from caves in limestone karst regions and from swamp deposits at a variety of
              sites. Efforts are focused on a series of caves in the Mahafaly Karsts near
              Toliara (Tulear). We will explore new sites in the western Bemaraha Massif and
              the northern Narinda Peninsula. We will also return to the productive Ankarana
              Massif of northern Madagascar and to the marsh sites of Ampasambazimba and the
              recently rediscovered Masinandraina. This research program has continued for
              several years, more recently funded by NSF BNS 89-11315, BNS 92-07084 and
              96-30350. Earlier we found the most complete skeletons known for almost all
              giant extinct lemurs, and many new lines of investigation have opened up based
              on these associated finds. The cooperation involves scientists from five or
              more Universities. Roads in the regions we need to reach in order to make
              discoveries are awful or nearly nonexistent. There is terrific wear and tear on
              the vehicles and several we previously had have ceased to function. Hence, this
              proposal.

Recent years have seen an explosion of interest in the attempt to
              understand the interaction in Madagascar between colonizing humans and the
              endemic species they met, as well as in documenting the role of environmental
              change in the extinction process. We have learned a great deal about
              paleodistributions of both extinct and living lemurs, and we have documented
              hithertofore unrecognized corridors and exchanges of fauna from different
              regions of the island. We are now beginning to understand the similarities and
              differences between modern and paleo- communities of the recent past, and we
              hope to document further, and in greater detail, the nature or "rules" (if any)
              and temporal framework of this continuing extinction event. To do so, we plan
              to gather new dates for subfossils, to search for better evidence of the
              contemporaneity of humans and giant lemurs, to focus on the systematics and
              ecogeographic variation of the subfossUs, and to test and modify if necessary
              our recent reconstructions of "ecospace" via ecomorphology.

Controversy
              persists as to the probable agency for primate extinction in Madagascar:
              whether by disease, environmental change, human hands, or by their synergistic
              interaction. Additional island-wide radiocarbon dates are needed to establish
              the temporal length of the wave of extinction and better document the timing of
              environmental change. The very real possibility exists that different regions
              of Madagascar experienced a different combination of insults, and the
              extinction process was piecemeal and regionally distinct. Analysis of the
              associated fauna, particularly birds and small mammals, will provide new
              evidence about environmental change in particulhr regions and allow us to
              assess the nature and time depth of regional endemicity.

Discoveries made to
              date from this project have revolutionized our understanding of essentially all
              known types of giant extinct lemurs and have added a few new species to the
              still growing roster of Malagasy primate taxa. We hope that new exploration
              planned here in the Bemaraha and Tulear regions will expand our knowledge of
              the rarest species such as Hadropithecus and the giant aye-aye or may lead to
              the discovery of new forms. We hope that the efficacy of our team working under
              previous grants has been demonstrated by the many finds and recent publications
              listed below.

The present proposal requests 80% funding for al00GX Toyota
              1999 model Landcruiser Station Wagon.


