Title       : Technology for 24-GHz Wireless Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a0083220

Award Number: 0083220
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280129             (Estimated)
Investigator: Seyed-Ali Hajimiri hajimiri@its.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Rutledge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0083220
Hajimiri

Most of the recent work in the area of wireless networks
              has been focused on systems operating at 2.4 and 5 GHz.  The bandwidth
              available at these frequencies limits the maximum data rates for these
              networks.  Very little has been done to use frequencies at or above 20 GHz for
              wireless networks.  The major advantages of higher frequencies are higher
              available bandwidths, smaller antenna sizes and possibility of using phased
              array structures for directionality and gain boosting.  The major impediment to
              operation at these frequencies is the large hardware cost, which originates
              from the large amount of circuitry that has to be done in gallium-arsenide or
              other III-V semiconductors.

An alternative approach using a large silicon
              integrated circuit core and a small gallium-arsenide front-end is proposed to
              remedy this problem.  The proposed approach uses an array of resonant
              microstrip patches etched on a 5-cm square printed circuit board to receive and
              transmit signals.  The antenna system can provide a gain of 20 dB, and this
              great directionality is available for both transmitting and receiving.  The
              array can scan in azimuth to find, and communicate to other units on the
              network, while rejecting undesired interference cause by other users.  The
              system has a gallium-arsenide monolithic microwave integrated circuit (MMIC)
              that only consists of a low noise amplifier (LNA) for the receive path and a
              power amplifier (PA) on the transmit side.  Due to the high cost of gallium
              arsenide components, every effort is taken to minimize the size of the
              gallium-arsenide circuitry.

Silicon integrated circuit is at the heart of
              the system and is the most critical part of it.  It contains the first down-
              and up-conversion blocks, i.e., the fully integrated frequency synthesizer
              operating at 21.6-GHz and two mixers down- and up-converting the signal from
              and to 24 GHz from a 2.45-GHz intermediate frequency (IF).  This choice of IF
              frequency is not arbitrary and is to allow for bypassing the front-end
              circuitry and using a lower-frequency resonance of the array to effectively act
              as a single patch antenna receiving at 2.45GHz ISM band for finding other users
              and low bit rate data transmission in so-called sniffing mode.

The
              fully-integrated 21.6-GHz silicon frequency synthesizer is based on using
              distributed voltage controlled oscillators (DVCO), which make it possible to
              use transistors close or even beyond their cut-off frequency, fT.  These DVCOs
              produce a reasonable output power with good phase noise performance and large
              tuning range, using a novel tuning technique, known as delay-balance,
              current-steering tuning.  A super-harmonic injection-locked frequency dividers
              can be used as the prescaler to divide the output frequency to lower
              frequencies that can be handled by digital dynamically-loaded frequency
              dividers to further divide to reference oscillator frequency to maintain phase
              lock.  To demonstrate the feasibility of this approach, a 0.35-mm CMOS DVCO
              operating at 10 GHz with 12% tuning range and a phase noise of -104dBc/Hz at
              1-MHz offset from the carrier is designed and tested.  Also two silicon bipolar
              DVCOs operating at 12 GHz and 17 GHz are demonstrated, further verifying the
              feasibility of such systems.

A complete analysis of MOS switching mixer
              makes it possible to exploit the higher bandwidth of the MOS transistor when
              used as switches and not gain devices.  This approach which is based on
              stochastic differential equations with cyclostationary sources is used to
              optimize silicon up- and down-conversion mixers' performance at 24 GHz.  It is
              shown that high performance circuitry for the first IF/sniff mode RF can be
              implemented in silicon, making it possible to integrate the complete back-end
              of the transceiver.


