Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY -- INCUBATION ACTIVITY: Connectivity of Migratory Populations and
               its Consequences for Population Dynamics and Microevolutionary Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2000   
File        : a0083451

Award Number: 0083451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32976              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Webster mwebster@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter P. Marra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Nichols  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. P. Chamberlain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard T. Holmes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1366      BIOCOMPLEXITY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1366,1608,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Migration involves the movement of individuals between geographically separated
              sites, and is a common life history trait in many taxa, including birds.  Our
              understanding of the movement of individuals among populations of migratory
              species, and the consequences of these movements, remains rudimentary, in large
              part because tracking individuals has proven near impossible. Recent
              technological advances, in both molecular genetics and geochemistry (e.g.,
              isotopic tracers), now provide tools that can be used to address these complex
              questions.  We propose to hold two separate workshops to develop and refine an
              integrated approach for measuring movement and dispersal patterns of migratory
              birds and for assessing through modeling the consequences of these movements
              for population dynamics and microevolution.  These workshops will bring
              together experts in the field and will focus on: (1) how data from isotopic,
              molecular genetic, and population studies can be combined to develop a robust
              model of the connections between summer and winter populations of migratory
              species, and (2) the theoretical consequences of strong versus weak population
              connectivity.
A better understanding of migration is central to several issues
              in ecology, evolution and conservation. The most pressing need, and to date the
              most seemingly intractable problem, has been in determining (1) the movement
              patterns of individuals between summer and winter populations and (2) dispersal
              rates and distances from natal sites to eventual breeding locations.  The
              former is important for determining how limiting factors (including impact of
              habitat destruction, effects of climate change, etc.) operating in different
              parts of the birds' annual cycle determine local abundances and thus population
              dynamics.  The latter is needed for assessing gene flow among populations and
              its effects on local adaptation and speciation. In addition, many migratory
              songbirds are undergoing population declines, and thus an understanding of the
              factors that determine their abundances, which could operate in breeding and/or
              non-breeding periods, is of urgent conservation concern.

