Title       : Collaborative Research: Sonic Logging of GISP2, GRIP and NGRIP Boreholes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0083132

Award Number: 0083132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52505              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin D. Waddington edw@ess.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 
OPP-00-82469
Lamorey
OPP-00-82469
Waddington

Interpretation of
              paleoclimate records from ice cores depends on understanding the ice sheet flow
              to determine depth-age relationships and whether the ice has been affected by
              folding.  The alignment of crystals in ice, called fabric, is an important
              factor in understanding ice sheet flow because preferentially aligned crystals
              cause the ice to flow more easily in certain directions. Fabrics have
              traditionally been determined by using thin sections cut at intervals in the
              ice core.  A new method of determining fabric is sonic logging, where a probe
              is lowered into a borehole to measure the velocity of compressional waves
              through the ice.  Sonic logging is valuable because it provides a continuous
              profile of the ice fabric and averages the alignment of ice crystals over a
              larger volume than do thin sections.   The Principal Investigators will measure
              sonic velocity profiles at the Greenland Ice Sheet Project 2 (GISP2), Greenland
              Ice Core Program (GRIP), and Northern Greenland Ice Core Program (NGRIP) and
              use them to: 1) improve the understanding of the relationship between thin
              section and sonic velocity data; 2) determine if sonic velocity data can be
              used to identify the depth at which paleoclimate record continuity is lost and
              if so, formulate criteria to identify this depth; and 3) provide verification
              and input data for anisotropic flow law models.

Sonic velocity profiles,
              combined with thin section data, will be used to investigate how sonic
              velocities and thin section data can be combined to better determine ice
              fabric.  A fabric estimation model will be developed that uses thin section
              data and velocity profiles to predict fabric parameters and their uncertainty
              and spatial variability. The sonic velocity profiles will be used to determine
              if the depth at which the paleoclimate record continuity is lost can be
              identified from sonic logging.  This determination was facilitated at GISP2 and
              GRIP by comparing two paleoclimate records because they correlate highly above
              this depth and diverge below it.  NGRIP will provide another important set of
              data because this location was chosen specifically to recover ice that was
              found to have disturbed stratigraphy at GISP2 and GRIP.  Finally, the GISP2,
              GRIP, and NGRIP sonic logs will be used to verify and constrain the latest
              generation of ice sheet flow models that use an anisotropic flow law to include
              the effect of fabric. 

