Title       : User Interface Softbots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0083281

Award Number: 0083281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497633             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. St. Amant stamant@csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on ibots, interface agents that interact with software
              applications through the graphical user interface, through the same medium as
              human users.   The project will have two main thrusts.   First, the PI will
              define a taxonomy of tool use in the user interface, based on descriptions of
              user behavior in a variety of common applications, and he will build a
              computational model of agent tool use that integrates work on visual routines
              and cost-based user modeling.   An environment for agent exploration and
              evaluation will then be developed, to include sets of tools in three distinct
              task areas:  support for the construction of domain descriptions and the
              incremental build/test cycle for agent development;    support for the
              exploration of different control strategies in carrying out these tasks;   and
              support for the evaluation of interface agent performance.   As this
              environment is completed, the PI will evaluate it along two parallel tracks, as
              a mechanism allowing cognitive models to interact with off-the-shelf software,
              focusing on models in the ACT-R, Soar, and LICAI frameworks, and as a testbed
              for developing new problem domains for planning algorithms.   This work will
              have an impact in several areas.   It will allow cognitive modeling researchers
              to evaluate their models in actual (not simulated) environments, a
              long-standing goal for researchers in this area.  It will provide a comparable
              benefit to planning researchers, who also need domains that are both real and
              tractable for their planning algorithms.  It will produce novel interface
              agents and domain descriptions, with opportunities to test the adequacy of
              existing agent designs against real-world problems at a relatively low
              development cost; the project also has the potential to increase the visibility
              of interface agents research, by allowing agents to work in previously
              inaccessible areas.   Finally, it will result in a model and implementation of
              agents specialized for tool use, an area of ecological research that remains
              unexamined to date, and which should contribute significantly to our
              understanding of complex software environments.


