Title       : Biocomplexity: Physical, Biological, and Human Interactions Shaping the
               Ecosystems of Freshwater Bays and Lagoons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0083625

Award Number: 0083625
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark B. Bain Mark.Bain@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose A. Lobo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin A. Cowen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel P. Loucks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nelson G. Hairston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This NSF Biocomplexity Program recognizes that thorough knowledge of ecosystem
              structure and function must incorporate the external environmental
              surroundings. The principal theme organizing this research effort is
              biocomplexity in open ecosystems. The main hypothesis is that the average time
              water takes to move through an aquatic system is a key variable defining the
              extent that ecosystems are self?organized or dominated by outside influences.
              The project team will study distinct and enclosed freshwater bays and
              lake?level lagoons (embayments) along the New York coast of Lake Ontario
              including the associated watersheds, wetlands, and human settlements. Lake
              Ontario embayments are representative of wetland?dominated coastal habitats
              around much of the Great Lakes and they are of great importance in the region.
              The embayments provide habitat for most Great Lakes aquatic species, change the
              quality of water entering the lakes, effect nutrient inputs to the open waters,
              support highly diverse and productive wetland vegetation, and provide very
              desirable locations for water?oriented human settlements. The investigators
              have identified eight study ecosystems that combine extremes of three key
              factors that will determine water residence time: bay volume, watershed size,
              and connectedness to Lake Ontario. All data and model simulations will be
              integrated mathematically to determine the conditions that allow ecosystem self
              organization or ecosystem property forcing by external factors.
While the
              study is designed to answer fundamental questions about ecosystem control, the
              research will have major practical value for resolving technical questions
              about Great Lakes water level regulation. For this reason, a management and
              policy advisory panel has been organized with representatives of key
              international, federal, New York State, intergovernmental, and academic
              organizations. Panel involvement in the research will allow these organizations
              to understand the details of NSF sponsored research, and it will provide
              opportunities for them to be early adopters of the results. The education goal
              for the project is to complete a set of seven doctoral students that conducted
              their research within our interdisciplinary surroundings while specializing on
              one of the component fields. Project investigators will promote the themes of
              the NSF Biocomplexity Program to students through cooperative inter?field
              advising, cross?disciplinary research involvement, and a team directed
              graduate?level course in Biocomplexity Theory, Principles, and Research
              Methods

