Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY--INCUBATION ACTIVITY: Linking Ecology, Physiology and Climate
               Change: Influence of Environmental Stress on Community Structure in the Rocky
               Intertidal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0083369

Award Number: 0083369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61896              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gretchen E. Hofmann   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann P. Kinzig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Menge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Helmuth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1608,9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The goal is to create a collaborative, multi-investigator consortium to address
              the complex question of how environmental stress is transduced through
              organisms to influence their distribution in both time and space. The study
              system is the rocky intertidal habitat of the northeast Pacific, an environment
              that is one of the most stressful and physiologically challenging on Earth.
              During field experiments on the U.S. coast of the northeast Pacific, data will
              be collected to generate a predictive model of the interaction of physiological
              stress, climate and community structure in the rocky intertidal zone. 

The
              project integrates the effort of four scientists: an ecological physiologist
              (Helmuth), an integrative and molecular physiologist (Hofmann), a
              computational/mathematical ecologist (Kinzig) and a community ecologist
              (Menge). Three specific incubation activities are included: (1) Travel to
              meetings to plan the project and integrate the components of the project, (2)
              development of techniques essential to the success of a full proposal and (3)
              the recruitment of a climatologist to the project to assist with modeling
              small-scale weather patterns at the intertidal field sites. The project also
              includes a training component. Graduate students will be involved in one of the
              planning meetings and will assist in developing the new techniques required for
              the full proposal. These techniques include: optimization of the use of an
              infrared camera to record body temperatures of individual animals, development
              of a biochemical analyses of stress proteins that will allow high through-put
              processing  and the development of a GIS-based model for the project. This
              collaboration meets the criteria established for the Biocomplexity theme and
              stands to contribute greatly to  scientific understanding of the interaction of
              organisms with their environment and the biological consequences of changes
              induced by natural or anthropogenic forces. 

