Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY--INCUBATION ACTIVITY: Genome Evolution and Macroevolutionary
               Diversification in Green Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2000  
File        : a0083659

Award Number: 0083659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela S. Soltis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas E. Soltis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1366      BIOCOMPLEXITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1366,1608,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0083659
Pamela S. Soltis

Drs. Pamela S. Soltis and Douglas E. Soltis of
              Washington State University were awarded, through the Biocomplexity Incubation
              Activity Program, a grant to coordinate scientific discussions and propose
              future research into the complexity of genome diversification in plants.  The
              green plants represent one of the largest branches on the Tree of Life, with
              more than 1/2 million species.  Plant nuclear genomes, which vary tremendously
              in size, organization, and structure, are the products of nearly a billion
              years of evolutionary history.  Recent breakthroughs in the study of plant
              phylogeny, as well as new developments in the study of genes and genomes, are
              being integrated to examine genome diversification and complexity over vast
              evolutionary time.  The primary goal of this Incubation Activity is to foster
              interdisciplinary research to facilitate a new synthesis of plant genomics and
              plant evolutionary biology.  Genome doubling, a process that has been
              responsible for generating the majority of plant diversity on Earth, including
              the origins of most crop plants and 17 of the 18 "world's worst weeds",
              apparently leads to complex genomic interactions that may ultimately be
              responsible for new chromosomal and gene arrangements and novel patterns of
              gene expression.  Soltis and Soltis have assembled a core of researchers with
              extensive expertise in plant phylogeny, analysis of gene and genome evolution,
              mechanisms of genome evolution, computation, and bioinformatics.  This group
              will (1) explore the role of genome doubling in the diversification of plants
              and (2) investigate the patterns and mechanisms of genome evolution following
              genome doubling.  The group anticipates publication of multi-authored original
              research contributions, initial software releases, and development of a
              full-scale Biocomplexity Research Proposal during the two-year funding period
              of this grant.  

