Title       : Symposium on Mathematical Statistics in Natural Language, San Francisco, CA,
               February 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a0083278

Award Number: 0083278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6564               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence S. Moss lmoss@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A symposium will be held at the 2001 meeting of the American Association for the
              Advancement of Science (AAAS) on the topic of statistical aspects of natural
              language analysis and processing.

This symposium originates with the
              Association for the Mathematics of Language (MOL), a special interest group of
              the Association for Computational Linguistics which has held bi-annual meetings
              for over 10 years. The bigger goal of the proposed symposium is to heighten
              general scientific awareness of mathematical investigations of natural language
              structure and processing. Formal and computational studies of language draw on
              a broad range of mathematical fields (among them formal language theory;
              complexity; classical and non-classical logic; algebra and category theory;
              game theory) and have inspired innovations and extensions in a number of them.
              It would be difficult in a AAAS Symposium to address the full range of this
              work in a way that would do justice to both its breadth and its depth. The
              symposium will therefore  concentrate on a single, more sharply delineated
              topic -- statistical aspects of natural language analysis -- in a way that
              connects technological advances in language engineering, linguistic structure
              and processing.

Capacity for language depends on the interaction of
              biological endowment and empirical experience, in such a way that the stable
              interpretation of physical objects is possible in the face of broad variation
              across speakers, in changing contexts, and over time. Advances in computational
              methods of storage, search, and processing make it possible to model the
              dynamic interaction of endowment and experience qualitatively, in a way
              amenable to quantitative methods. This symposium focuses on approaches to this
              range of problems based on statistics and information theory. The presentations
              will begin with a survey of statistically-based work on speech processing
              (which underlies successful and available computational speech-to-text
              processing). It will then examine applications of these ideas to syntactic
              parsing and lexical ambiguity resolution. The presentations will be designed to
              stress the importance of the appropriateness of different statistical
              methods
to different problems in natural language analysis and processing and
              to show how distinctions among current models connect with such classical
              problems as the distinction between supervised and unsupervised learning.
