Title       : Equipment Proposal: Integrated Optical Force and Near-Field Scanning-Probe
               Microscope for Polymer Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  2000     
File        : a0083258

Award Number: 0083258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raj Rajagopalan raj@eng.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1189,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF CTS 0083258
Equipment Proposal: Integrated Optical-Force and Scanning-Probe
              Microscope
Raj Rajagopalan, University of Florida

Abstract

The funds
              requested through this proposal will be used to construct an
              optical-tweezer-probe for a scanning optical microscope and to add dynamic
              light scattering peripherals to the instrument. The resulting optical force
              microscope will be used to study polymer-induced forces at solid-liquid
              interfaces and to develop techniques for measuring dynamic compliance of
              polymer layers. The requested additions will enhance the capability of the
              basic instrument so that a number of related problems, such as mechanical
              response of oil-surfactant-water interfaces and fluorescent microscopy on
              single polymer chains, can be studied.

The overall objective of this grant
              is to incorporate a device for "optical manipulation" of small particles in a
              microscope. A tightly focused laser beam trained on a small particle allows one
              to manipulate and move the particle using the forces generated by the light
              beam. The combination of such a "laser tweezer" with a scanning optical
              microscope allows one to use the optically held particle as a "probe" to study
              local interactions on a surface. The laser beam holding the particle behaves
              like an invisible spring on the particle, and the stiffness of this "spring"
              can be changed easily by adjusting the laser power. Therefore, the optically
              held probe allows one to study very soft surfaces such as polymer chains on a
              surface or a liquid/liquid interface. This opens up new ways to study the
              mechanical and dynamic properties of polymer layers, single polymer chains,
              surfactants at interfaces, and the like. The implications of such phenomena
              extend to a number of important problems in engineering and the sciences, such
              as stability of biological and pharmaceutical dispersions, polymer
              compatibility with biomedical surfaces, and environmental separation processes
              involving particulates.



