Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY -- INCUBATION ACTIVITY: Origins of Biocomplexity: Colonization and
               Succession of Microbial Communities in a Dynamic Geochemical Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0083837

Award Number: 0083837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Garrison                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86954              (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Craig Cary caryc@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peggy A. O'Day  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Holloway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1608,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              One of the primary mandates of the Biocomplexity initiative is to understand how
              biocomplexity arises and changes in response to changing physical/chemical
              environments. Quantifying the influence of local geochemistry on the
              establishment and evolution of microbial systems is best achieved by studying
              environments where steep physical and chemical gradients exist over a small
              spatial scale. The primary goal of this Biocomplexity Incubation Activity is to
              establish a new collaboration among microbiologists from the University of
              Delaware and geochemists from Arizona State University. They will develop
              strategies for measuring and collecting physical, chemical, and microbiological
              data, and preliminary testing of novel devices for seafloor sampling. This
              interdisciplinary team of researchers brings with them expertise in high
              pressure/high temperature experiments, fluid/mineral geochemistry and
              spectroscopy, molecular microbiology, engineering, and seafloor vent studies.
              They will accomplish the research goals through real and virtual meetings,
              design of new sampling devices, and participation in a vent cruise.  An
              investigation will be initiated of how microbial colonization is influenced by
              the dynamic thermochemical gradients and variable mineral/fluid chemistry of
              deep?sea hydrothermal vents and, in turn, how the presence of microorganisms
              influences the local geochemistry. Young seafloor hydrothermal chimneys will be
              examined because they represent one of the few environments on Earth that are
              known to evolve rapidly from strictly abiotic conditions to complex microbial
              communities in a short time period (days to weeks). These high?temperature
              systems offer access to intense thermochemical gradients that are characterized
              by rapid and predictable mineral precipitation and chimney growth. These
              sulfide structures can be manipulated in situ, providing reliable access to
              both the initial abiotic geochemical system and progressive stages of microbial
              colonization. Appropriate measurements of fluid chemistry, mineralogy, pore
              structure, and microbial communities in these environments provide the
              constraints for recreation of these systems in the laboratory for detailed and
              quantitative examination. Examining microbial colonization in these dynamic
              geochemical environments provides a unique opportunity to understand the
              diverse and complex interactions between microbes and fluid/mineral evolution.
