Title       : The Use of Computational Quantum Chemistry in Applied Thermodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2002   
File        : a0083709

Award Number: 0083709
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  2000  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley I. Sandler sandler@che.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0083709
S. Sandler
University of Delaware

The unifying theme
              of the research is the use of modern computational chemistry to improve
              predictive methods used in the chemical, biochemical and environmental
              industries. Modern computational quantum mechanics has progressed rapidly in
              the last decade, both in terms of accuracy and speed, largely as a result of
              the availability of large-scale, highly parallel computers. To a large extent,
              the chemical engineering community has not taken advantage of this progress.
              This project is directed to the application and utilization of computational
              quantum chemistry in three areas of molecular thermodynamics.

The first area
              of application of computational quantum mechanics is to the improvement of
              group contribution methods. It is well known that such methods suffer from
              several defects.  The most important is the proximity effect in which the
              behavior of a functional group is affected by neighboring groups on the same
              molecule. This is a violation of the basic group contribution concept that a
              functional group should behave the same independent of the molecule of which it
              is a part. Here one generalize's a successful, but so far restricted hybrid
              quantum mechanics/group contribution model that had been developed that
              corrects the properties and interactions of each group based on how its charge
              and dipole moment vary from a reference state due to neighboring groups on the
              same molecule. The second area is the application of quantum chemistry methods
              to compute the interaction energy landscape between two molecules, and then to
              use this information in a interaction potential function together with
              nonadditive multibody effects in Monte Carlo computer simulation. Computer
              simulation techniques have provided a great deal of qualitative insight into
              molecular level phenomena.  However, the quantitative accuracy of simulations
              have been poor unless the empirical parameters in the effective two-body
              potentials have been fit to experimental data. The goal of the this part of the
              research is to determine whether the phase behavior of mixtures of interest to
              chemical engineers can be accurately computed using state-of-the-art multibody
              potential models. The third research area involves the use of the results of
              combined quantum chemistry/computer simulation calculations for mixtures
              mentioned above to test the underlying theoretical basis of activity
              coefficient models traditionally used by chemical engineers. The goalis to
              improve upon these models, and to provide a method of determining the
              parameters in these models in the absence of experimental data.

