Title       : ITR: The Bio-Networking Architecture: A Biologically Inspired Approach to the
               Design of Scalable, Adaptive, and Survivable/Available Network Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0083074

Award Number: 0083074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460338             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tatsuya Suda suda@ics.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1660,4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The researchers envision a future where a universal network connects every
              human being and most human-made electronic devices. The universal network spans
              locations engaged in every human endeavor, including the home, workplace,
              transportation vehicles, public facilities, and space facilities. The wide
              availability of open computing power, bandwidth, and natural interfaces such as
              speech recognition and brain-computer interfaces will allow the user or
              organization to merge with the network into a unified, ubiquitous entity.
    
              To realize this vision, the researchers believe a radical shift in network
              design paradigms is necessary. The PI proposes a new network architecture
              called the Bio-Networking Architecture. The Bio-Networking
Architecture is
              inspired by the observation that the biological world has already developed the
              mechanisms
necessary to achieve such key requirements as self-organization,
              scalability, adaptation and evolution,
security, and survivability necessary
              for our envisioned universal network. In the biological world, each
individual
              entity (e.g., a bee in a bee colony) follows a simple set of behavior rules
              (e.g., migration,
replication, reproduction, pheromone emission, energy
              exchange, mutation, death), yet a group of entities
(e.g., a bee colony)
              exhibits complex, emergent behavior and characteristics (e.g.,
              self-organization,
scalability, adaptation and evolution, security and
              survivability). The researchers believe if a network is modeled after
              biological concepts and mechanisms, it may be able to achieve the desirable
              properties of self-organization, scalability, adaptation and evolution,
              security, and survivability.
     In the Bio-Networking Architecture, network
              services and applications are implemented by a
distributed, adaptive, and
              self-organizing collective entity called the super-entity, which consists of a
              large
number of autonomous entities called cyber-entities (analogous to a bee
              colony consisting of multiple
bees). Each cyber-entity implements a functional
              component related to the overall service or application
and follows simple
              behavior rules (e.g., migration, replication, reproduction, pheromone emission,
              energy
exchange, mutation, death) similar to biological entities. Useful
              behaviors and characteristics arise from
the behavior and interaction of
              individual cyber-entities. The innovative features of the
              Bio-Networking
Architecture include:
1)Application of Biological Concepts.
              The proposed Bio-Networking Architecture is the first attempt to
 apply the
              biological concepts of emergent behavior, adaptation, evolution, diversity,
              social networking,
 and food (energy) to the design of a network
              architecture.
2)User-Network Unification. The Bio-Networking Architecture
              represents a paradigm shift in the
relationship between a user or an
              organization and the network. It merges the network and the user
              or
organization into a unified entity, giving the user or organization a
              ubiquitous presence.
3)Emergent Behavior and Evolution. The Bio-Networking
              Architecture enables the construction of
complex services and applications
              with the inherent properties of self-organization, scalability,
adaptation,
              evolution, security, and survivability. Because the Bio-Networking Architecture
              adapts and
evolves to accommodate short and long term changes in network
              conditions, system designers,
administrators, and users are free from managing
              and tuning network applications.
4)Self-Organization. The proposed
              Bio-Networking Architecture is a self-organizing, administration-free,
and
              scalable networking architecture which vertically integrates the protocol stack
              from the
network layer upward, eliminating duplication of functionality among
              protocol layers.
