Title       : Integrative Research Program in Marine Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0083102

Award Number: 0083102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric R. Lacy lacyer@musc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294250001    843/792-0211

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project lays out an innovative program to use genomic and biochemical
              approaches to investigate genes and gene products in commercial shrimp
              associated with their resistance to environmental stresses and viral
              infections. Genomics tools such as the functional analysis of expressed
              proteins (deduced from the comparative analysis of expressed sequence tags or
              ESTs) will be developed and applied to explore which genes are involved in
              resistance and how these genes are regulated. The initial work will focus on
              the host response of commercial shrimp species to two virus diseases (TSV and
              WSSV); later the methods may be applied to other marine species as well. A
              multi-institutional network of researchers at the Medical University of South
              Carolina, the SC Department of Natural Resources, and the National Ocean
              Services Laboratory will establish the program building on expertise already in
              place on molecular genetic and protein biochemical approaches to one aspect of
              shrimp physiology, namely, the host response. The research effort is directed
              towards "functional genomics," i.e., the detection and study of genes by virtue
              of their expression. The work presents an integrated approach for understanding
              the combined and interacting effects of environmental stresses and viral
              infection in both cultivated and wild shrimp species, focusing on gene
              expression as studies by cDNA to mRNA ("ESTs"), and by rapid identification of
              expressed proteins using mass spectrometry-based protein structure analysis.
              The current application proposes to put infrastructure in place to: (1) focus
              efforts on a single species which will lay the groundwork for expansion into
              other marine species; (2) increase competitiveness by hiring two new additional
              junior faculty to augment and complement existing capability in molecular
              biology/genomics and bioinformatics; (3) develop a bioinformatics component
              which will lay the groundwork for further research and graduate training
              efforts, and (4) form partnerships with private companies to transfer the
              findings for commercial interests.

