Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY -- INCUBATION ACTIVITY: Developing conceptual and mathematical
               approaches to model transport and transformation of elements through a
               geothermal landscape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2002   
File        : a0083880

Award Number: 0083880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pilar M. Lopez                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99984              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia JS Colberg pczoo@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Benito Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert O. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James I. Drever  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy W. Hinman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1608,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Colberg
0083880

It has long been hypothesized that interactions between
              biotic and abiotic processes at small scales affect the movement and fate of
              elements at large scales, yet, to date, this relationship has not been
              systematically explored in aquatic ecosystems.  One of the major challenges of
              such work is to quantitatively integrate the biological and physicochemical
              controls at small scales (i.e., microbial communities) with those of larger
              scales (i.e., river networks), so that we can begin to address some of the
              unifying questions that characterize biocomplexity research.

Rivers in
              Yellowstone National Park are ideal systems in which to examine the
              interactions of biotic and abiotic complexity.  The Upper Madison River
              drainage, for example, is strongly influenced by geothermal activity that
              produces sharp spatial gradients involving temperature, redox potential, major
              ions, and trace elements.  These physicochemical features, in turn, drive
              changes in mocrobial and metazoan diversity and functions.  Unlike hot springs,
              which have been intensively studied in recent years, streams and rivers in this
              unique geothermal landscape remain much less examined.  Because geothermal
              inputs are spatially variable along these rivers, the inputs and reactions of
              elements (e.g., irons, phosphorus, carbon, nitrogen) are also expected to
              exhibit spatial variability that will affect the distribution and composition
              of biological communities.

The objectives of the proposed incubation
              activities are to:  (1) develop new research interactions that will facilitate
              biocomplexity research along geothermal gradients in Yellowstone National Park;
              (2) develop a scientific database on the Upper Madison Basin; and (3) organize
              and sponsor two workshops for the project team and their students that will
              focus on mathematical modeling and linking biological community structure with
              ecosystem function, respectively.

