Title       : Biocomplexity Incubation Activity: Integrating Social Science Into Long-Term
               Ecological Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0083744

Award Number: 0083744
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99251              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Redman charles.redman@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Morgan Grove  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1366,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The rapid growth in understandings of the complex ways that human and natural
              systems interact in a broad range of environments have led to intensified calls
              for greater collaboration among social and natural scientists in the study of
              long-term environmental change.  Major differences in theoretical perspectives,
              vocabulary, organizational structure, and scientific culture have inhibited
              these collaborations, but increasing numbers of researchers in both the human
              and natural sciences now are looking to bridge the gaps that previously
              separated them.  This Biocomplexity Incubation Activity award will provide
              support to enable the Central Arizona-Phoenix Long-Term Ecological Research
              (CAP LTER) project in collaboration with the Baltimore Ecosystems Study (BES
              LTER) to hold a series of workshops to promote the integration of social
              sciences into long-term ecological research.  The project's primary objective
              will be to spark scientifically exciting interdisciplinary research that brings
              together social, biological, and physical scientists to better understand human
              ecosystems.  The project is based on a previous workshop where social and
              biophysical scientists reached a consensus on a broad conceptual framework for
              investigating human ecosystems and proposed a set of social patterns and
              processes key to their study.  Because a unified understanding of human
              ecosystems needs to be taken in incremental steps, four research projects will
              be identified where investigators agree that bringing together social,
              biological, and physical scientists would lead to a better understanding of the
              mechanisms that govern ecosystem dynamics.  An initial workshop focusing on the
              practical issues will help the four research projects implement integrated
              research.  A second workshop will focus in depth on the proposed social
              patterns and processes and suggest ways these core topics can be implemented in
              the pilot projects.  A final workshop will develop specific ways the proposed
              projects can accommodate the multiple spatial and temporal scales of the human
              ecosystem.  This project will facilitate the development and dissemination of
              strategies for integration.  The focus on four pilot projects will enable
              pragmatic solutions to emerge, with these solutions providing insights that
              will facilitate planning for enhanced involvement of social scientists by
              additional LTER sites.  This sustained effort will foster progressive steps
              toward the integration of the social sciences into long-term ecological
              research and development of a unified understanding of human ecosystems, one of
              the most urgent challenges to understanding biocomplexity and the environment.
