Title       : Fabrication and Characterization of Integrated Waveguide Laser Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a0083087

Award Number: 0083087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Denise M. Krol dmkrol@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of our proposal is to explore the fabrication and
              characterization of all-waveguide laser devices that integrate a lasing medium
              with optically written Bragg gratings and a nonlinear optical element in a
              single phosphate glass waveguide. The nonlinear element can either be a
              periodically poled (for frequency doubling) or uniformly poled segment (for an
              electro-optic modulator) of the waveguide device.
The rapid growth of the
              telecommunications industry has led to intensive research and development of
              new fiber based components, such as Erbium doped fiber amplifiers (EDFAs),
              fiber Bragg gratings and fiber lasers. As a spin-off from telecom applications,
              fibers are now also rapidly finding their way into other industrial
              applications, such as medicine and sensor technology. For certain applications,
              waveguide structures may be preferred over fibers because of their compactness
              and the ability to integrate different optical components such as splitters,
              couplers and laser amplifiers or signal sources on a single substrate. Existing
              waveguide laser technology would be greatly enhanced if it could be integrated
              with a nonlinear optical, (2) , element in such a way that the laser and the
              nonlinear optical function were fabricated in the same waveguide.  Such an
              integrated optics approach requires the use of Bragg gratings in the waveguide
              to define the laser cavity. Second-order optical nonlinearities, which do
              normally not occur in glasses, can be introduced through a thermal poling
              process.

The research described here addresses the following two issues:
1.
              A study of the formation of refractive index changes and Bragg gratings through
              an optical writing process in phosphate glasses and waveguides.
Here the goal
              is to effectively write Bragg gratings in phosphate glasses and waveguides
              using sensitization of the glass through doping or by writing the grating with
              ultra-short (100 fs) pulses from a high peak-power laser.
2. A study of the
              formation of a second-order nonlinearity through thermal poling in these
              glasses. Experiments will be carried out to determine whether a second-order
              nonlinearity can be induced in phosphate glasses and for which poling
              parameters and glass compositions it is optimized.
This technology will lead
              to new integrated optical devices with applications in telecommunications - in
              particular WDM (wavelength division multiplexing)- and optical computing, as
              well as metrology, spectroscopy, and remote sensing.
In addition, these
              studies will contribute to the understanding of photosensitivity and poling in
              glasses.
Because of its multidisciplinary nature and great relevance for the
              high-tech industry, this research offers a unique opportunity for education and
              training of graduate students.

