Title       : An Integrated Approach to Making, Understanding, and Using Magnetic Single-Film
               and Multilayer Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  2000  
File        : a0083046

Award Number: 0083046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Lederman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig A. Grimes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard R. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. MacLaren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth C. Dickey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, investigating the development of magnetoelastic sensing based on
              magnetic thin films that display large values of magnetostriction at low
              fields, aims to improve the interface behavior that controls the mechanisms of
              giant magnetoresistance (GMR). The project will focus on imperfect interfacing
              and its consequences, performing integrated experimental and modeling research
              dealing with both the transport and magnetic aspects involved in the design of
              nonvolatile magnetic random access memory (MRAM) or GMR sensor. Low values of
              magnetic anisotropy are crucial to the investigation, where several
              possibilities for obtaining desirable film properties will be considered.
              Magnetic films and multilayer systems are central to several forefront
              technological areas. The use of GMR-based components has become the dominant
              market element in the computer disc business, which in 1998 constituted a $38
              billion enterprise. The use of GMR materials is at the heart of spintorics
              (spin electronics), which includes the development of MRAM, and the improvement
              of read heads and hard disc media. Single film and multilayer magnetoelastic
              sensors exhibit great potential due to their ability to provide inexpensively
              remote query sensing of chemical or environmental parameters to monitor ongoing
              industrial processes, even the quality of material in sealed containers (e.g.,
              milk). Morever, magnetoelastic sensors can also provide miniature pressure and
              acceleration sensors for Navy or Air Force use. 

The project will initiate
              an interdisciplinary effort integrating experimental, theoretical, and
              computational modeling research to establish an ongoing Center for the Sciences
              and Technology of Magnetic Films. To provide a state-of-the-art central
              facility, the SQUID magnetometer will be upgraded first. Targets involve the
              submission of an NSF MRSEC preproposal by September 2001, and the pursuit of
              ONR and AFOSR funding sources. Industrial collaboration with IBM Almaden and
              Seagate will provide additional experimental facilities as well as the
              opportunity for students to spend residential time in an industrial
              environment. The effort involves collaboration among WV, LA, and KY: Tulane
              University and University of Kentucky.

