Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY INCUBATION ACTIVITY: How Physical-Biological Coupling in the
               Western Arctic Ocean Influences Marine Mammal Abundance and Native Subsistence
               Harvests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0083507

Award Number: 0083507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78453              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carin J. Ashjian cashjian@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,1608,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract: Biocomplexity-Incubation Activity: How Physical-Biological Coupling in
              the
Western Arctic Ocean Influences Marine Mammal Abundance and
              Native
Subsistence Harvests

Marine mammal distribution, relative abundance
              and availability to Native subsistence hunters in the Western Arctic likely are
              influenced by oceanographic variability resulting from interannual variation in
              both weather patterns in the Arctic and longer-term global climate
              fluctuations. This variability influences the development of localized "hot
              spots" at which elevated concentrations of marine mammal plankton prey, and
              aggregations of marine mammals, are found. Indigenous knowledge demonstrates
              that such "hot spots" are favorable hunting locations. To investigate
              Biocomplexity in the Arctic marine environment, this effort will develop a
              five-year research program to examine trophic cascades from the "bottom up"
              (i.e., from physical -biological interactions to human consumption of marine
              mammals). The central hypothesis is: Marine mammal distribution, relative
              abundance and availability to Native subsistence hunters can be modeled in
              relation to variability in plankton production and food web structure which are
              linked to physical conditions in the Western Arctic. This is a one-year
              Incubation Activity (IA) to support the development of a research plan that
              effectively addresses this question. The IA will be collaborative and includes
              physical and biological oceanographers, modelers, marine mammalogists and
              Alaska Native representatives. Incubation activities will include: 1)
              identification of existing relevant data as background for our modeling and
              field work; 2) assembling a team of scientists and Native representatives with
              relevant expertise and knowledge; and 3) the conduct of two planning workshops
              with this team to develop a comprehensive research program to focused on the
              central hypothesis. 

