Title       : Establishing an advanced multimedia hub to broadcast real-time SCOLA TV Channels
               over Internet2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a0083124

Award Number: 0083124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498295             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hamid R. Sharif hsharif@unomaha.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Qiuming Zhu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander D. Stoyen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Satellite Communications for LeArning (SCOLA) is a Nebraska non-profit
              organization, which provides real-time foreign news, cultural, and video
              language programs via satellite to the United States federal government and
              many teaching institutions (SCOLA viewership was estimated at 15 million in
              1999). This project will build on the existing success of SCOLA programs by
              establishing an advanced multimedia platform to broadcast real-time learning
              and cultural video materials over Internet2.  A superior test-bed to research
              video transmissions over next generation Internet, will be provided by:  (1)
              creating a leading national center; (2) developing useful practical
              applications; (3) expanding research, teaching, and outreach opportunities
              state-wide and nationally; (4) developing unique multimedia courses and
              laboratory experiences; (5) supporting and enhancing the work of SCOLA, and (6)
              fostering rapid dissemination of information for learning, collaboration, and
              research.  The research problems are well defined and include:  multicast
              routing and quality of service (QoS), transport protocol needed for reliable
              multicasting, and potential scalability of reliable multicasting.  The project
              provides for the creation of video databases.  Multicast routing and its QoS
              extension will be studied, as well as, reliable multicast transport protocols,
              scalable fair reliable multicast, and security in multicast.  The research
              aspect focuses on finding a good solution to the integration of routing and
              resource reservation.  Its success will further the understanding in the field.
               The move towards an Internet2-based SCOLA system offers an advanced, real-time
              multimedia delivery, and the potential to integrate a variety of data types,
              and support many audiences; while the Internet2-based SCOLA and its
              connectivity to the Tel Laboratory will advance research in multicast protocol
              definition, security, and reliability uses. 

