Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Networks of Migrant Women in Senegal and
               the Spread of HIV
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a0083187

Award Number: 0083187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Alberto Palloni palloni@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SES   0083187
PI:     Alberto Palloni, Kristin A Velyvis


This project
              studies the social networks and religious beliefs of migrant women in Senegal. 
              These economically disadvantaged women have a high risk for exposure to HIV,
              and this research seeks to identify network and belief structures that may be
              protective in reducing risks.  Most of the data collection will occur in Dakar,
              the capital of Senegal, a destination for large numbers of migrant workers. 
              Structured interviews will be conducted with women of two ethnic groups to
              establish demographic characteristics (age, education, occupation, migration
              history, marital status, and other facts), and those will be used to select
              probability samples corresponding to the migrant populations.  Further
              interviews with women selected in the sampling will inquire about sexual
              partners and practices, friendship and family ties, and religious beliefs. 
              Data analyses will focus on potentially protective effects of social networks
              and religious beliefs in reducing the incidence of unprotected sexual activity,
              the frequency of sexual activity, and the number of partners.  Regressions,
              using density of social networks and homophily in ethnicity, village of origin,
              and religion as independent variables, permit assessment of hypotheses
              regarding social structures and sexual practices.  Networks are expected to
              directly affect sexual practices, while effects of religion are expected to be
              indirect, operating through networks.  Results of this research include
              developing network models, establishing a network data set, and improved
              understanding of how social networks interact with what might appear to be
              highly individual decisions regarding sexual practices.
