Title       : An Innovative University-Industry Collaboration to Develop New Phosphor
               Materials Using Combinatorial Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2001  
File        : a0083030

Award Number: 0083030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Buttry buttry@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Pope  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dean M. Roddick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Ackerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, using combinatorial search methods to discover and fabricate new
              phosphors for flat panel displays, aims at developing new methodologies
              to
Discover new phosphor materials and 
Actually identify new materials that
              have attractive properties for flat displays.
The general approach consists of
              using electrodeposition as a means of preparing new inorganic phosphor
              materials (e.g. oxides, silicates, aluminates, phosphates, etc.) that vary in
              composition over wide range of values. Because of the multicomponent nature of
              these phosphates (typically containing three or four different metals), the
              number of compositions that must be examined to effectively map compositional
              space for a given class of materials may be many thousands. The effort
              comprises activities in several distinct areas:
Synthesis of new
              metal-containing precursors that can be used in electrodeposition,
Development
              of electrodeposition methods that can be used as the substrate for
              electrodeposition,
Development of a microelectrode array that can be used with
              the new precursor metal complexes, as the substrate electrodepositions,
Actual
              phosphor deposition using the methods and precursors just described,
Parallel
              testing of the emission characteristics of the arrays of phosphors, and
Bulk
              synthesis and characterization of the most promising materials.
The expected
              outcomes of the effort include:
Development of new approaches for rapidly
              discovering phosphors,
Identification of new materials that have attractive
              properties for flat panel displays, and
Development of a long-term materials
              discovery and characterization effort at University of Wyoming (UW), that will
              dovetail with the institution and state's efforts at fostering the
              establishment and maintenance of a viable science and high technology based in
              the State.
The effort involves 3 researchers at UW and one at Blue Sky Applied
              Technologies, Inc. (BSAT).


