Title       : Cell Progression Through Meiosis: A Signal from Recombination to the First
               Division
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0083816

Award Number: 0083816
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Malone robert-malone@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Meiosis, the special division process in eukaryotes wherein chromosome number is
              reduced from diploid to haploid during the production of gametes, is complex
              and highly conserved. It is possible to think of the various steps of meiosis
              somewhat like an intracellular developmental pathway.  Mitotic cells get a
              signal to enter meiosis and must go through premeiotic DNA synthesis,
              recombination and synapsis, reductional division, equational division, and
              packaging of the haploid nuclei in the proper order. An interesting and
              important question is how the various steps of meiosis communicate with each
              other to ensure that they occur at the right time and in the right sequence. In
              the budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, answers to some of the questions
              are known. A key feature ensuring that events occur properly is ordered
              transcriptional regulation.  Entry into meiosis involves the loss of a mitotic
              repressor (RME1) and expression of a meiotic activator (IME1).  This results in
              the transcription of the "Early Meiotic Genes", which include the genes
              necessary for meiotic recombination. These early events activate a second
              transcriptional regulator, NDT80, which is required for expression of the
              "Middle Meiotic Genes" and the first and second meiotic division. NDT80
              activation also results in the expression of "Late Meiotic Genes", though it is
              not yet completely clear whether this is direct or/and a consequence of NDT80
              activation of the Middle genes.  A second layer of regulation in meiosis is
              meiotic checkpoints. For example, a failure to perform premeiotic replication
              results in cell arrest. Recent interest has been stimulated by the realization
              that cells also have a checkpoint that assesses the state of meiotic
              recombination. In certain recombination mutants (e.g., dmc1) blocked at
              intermediate points in the meiotic recombination pathway, the cell arrests
              before the first division. This arrest requires several genes (e.g., RAD17,
              MEC1 ) known to be involved in mitotic DNA damage recognition checkpoints. It
              has been proposed that this checkpoint assessing the state of recombination is
              a key feature of normal progression through meiosis and that the "dmc1
              checkpoint"  also occurs in wildtype cells, as the intermediate is made
              normally during recombination. It makes good sense that the high frequency of
              breaking and rejoining chromosomes during recombination is a process which the
              cell should be able to sense.  Attempts to segregate chromosomes before
              recombination was finished would be disastrous.  There is yet another mode
              whereby meiotic recombination communicates with the first division, and that
              this communication occurs as recombination starts in wild type cells. It has
              been shown that meiotic cells are capable of recognizing that recombination has
              been started; the response is to delay the first division for a time equivalent
              to the time necessary to accomplish recombination.  Null mutations in four
              genes required to initiate recombination ("EE" genes) result in a earlier first
              division. This is intuitively pleasing; it seems eminently reasonable that
              starting the complex process of recombination should signal the next meiotic
              step, the first division. It appears that this signaling process is complex
              since null mutations in different EE genes can have somewhat different effects
              on the timing of the first division. It has been shown that the signal is not
              the formation of double strand breaks (the first easily observed DNA
              intermediate in recombination initiation). The importance of this initiation
              signal is indicated by noting that, in its absence, the first division occurs
              at the time when homologs would normally be recombining.  This indicates that
              the first division segregation apparatus can be ready and functional
              considerably earlier than it normally acts. Data from this laboratory indicates
              that the start of recombination prevents this premature division.  This project
              asks how this novel signal from recombination to the first division works. Does
              it require the majority of the initiation genes, consistent with the idea that
              the signal is the formation of an initiation complex? What is the role of the
              synaptonemal complex and its component parts in sending the signal? Is the
              normal signal from recombination initiation recognized and  communicated by the
              checkpoint genes that also respond to the dmc1 mutant block which occurs at
              later stages? Does the signal work by affecting activation of the central
              meiotic regulator NDT80? Finally, what are the other genes involved in this
              signal from recombination to the first division? This work will define how this
              intracellular signaling process, crucial for the proper  progression through
              meiosis, functions to ensure that two critical steps in meiosis happen at the
              proper times.
