Title       : Biocomplexity Incubation Activity: Integration of Spatial, Ecological, and
               Environmental Social Science Methods for the Study of Biodiversity and
               Biocomplexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a0083546

Award Number: 0083546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99497              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emilio F. Moran moran@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Odland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1366,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Ongoing research examining the complex interactions among human and natural
              systems have demonstrated the need for more frequent and cohesive communication
              among social and natural sciences.  This Biocomplexity Incubation Activity
              award will support a project that consists of a series of workshops and other
              activities designed to integrate research on environmental change and its
              effects on biocomplexity being carried out by ecologists, who generally work on
              spatially explicit models of population dynamics, and social scientists, who
              tend to do research on the social, economic and institutional bases for human
              modification of environments.  The project will involve two workshops.  Each
              workshop will run for three to five days and will involve 30 to 45
              participants; including roughly equal numbers of ecologists and social
              scientists.  The first workshop will center on the construction of preliminary
              models and the exploration of issues that have to be resolved in order to
              integrate the insights and working methods of ecology and social science. 
              Preliminary models will be developed and tested over the following year in a
              sequence of graduate seminars.  Web-based materials will be developed to
              maintain contact among the participants.  A substantial portion of the second
              workshop will be devoted to preparing proposals for further research on
              biocomplexity and biodiversity.

Ecologists and environmental social
              scientists have been addressing related issues although they have emphasized
              different research questions and have used dissimilar models and methods. 
              Despite their differences in research traditions, these two fields have reached
              a stage where intensive interactions in a series of workshops should be very
              fruitful.  Both groups have been heavily concerned with the destruction or
              transformation of habitat, a set of processes that probably pose the greatest
              threat to biodiversity.  Both groups have also addressed these processes in
              ways that make spatial processes explicit and important.  Among ecologists,
              space has become an extremely important component in the logic of theoretical
              models of ecological processes.  Among social scientists, spatial frameworks
              have become crucial as basis for gathering and organizing information about
              environmental change.  This project will use these common concerns with habitat
              destruction and spatially explicit modeling to develop a set of research
              projects that integrate the work of ecologists and environmental social
              scientists.

