Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Classic Maya Urban Planning in Central
               Quintana Roo, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2001  
File        : a0083571

Award Number: 0083571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce Marcus joymar@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Joyce Marcus, MS Laura Villamil will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. She will survey and conduct test excavations at two
              Mayan archaeological sites, Lagartera and Margarita Maza de Juarez (MMJ),
              located in the Quintana Roo region of lowland Mexico. Centers of this type
              were, in fact, pre-industrial cities because they incorporated thousands of
              individuals into single spatially integrated units. Both sites contain temple
              and plaza complexes which indicate the ability of rulers to mobilize large
              numbers of individuals for public work projects. Differences in building type
              within such cities demonstrate they served multiple functions both public and
              domestic in nature. Archaeologists have focused considerable attention on the
              spatial organization of such entities because they believe such data will
              provide insight into the social, political and economic organization of the
              Maya. MS Villamil, along with other researchers, has noted that even within a
              single region cities vary significantly in form and that some have a single
              well defined center while others appear to have multiple clearly defined areas
              of public buildings. She wishes to understand why such is the case and
              hypothesizes that centers with a single core developed slowly over time and
              were situated at the top of the regional hierarchy. Multiple core centers, she
              believes resulted from a single building episode and that the cores serve
              complementary rather than redundant functions. Such cities, she argues
              represent secondary centers and appeared slightly later in time than their
              single core counterparts. To test this idea she will compare Lagartera and MMJ
              which have single and multiple cores respectively. Using aerial photographs she
              will create maps of both sites and over the course of two field seasons conduct
              ground surveys to verify them and to fill in additional detail. She will then
              excavate a large series of test pits to collect stratified ceramics which will
              allow individual structures and areas to be dated relative to each other. In
              this way she will determine the extent of construction contemporanity. 

This
              detailed examination of contrasting site plans will contribute to understanding
              of the development of urban society. The investigation of different urban
              patterns in the Maya area and of the specific historical trajectories which led
              to their development will contribute to cross-cultural studies seeking to
              understand the effects which various sociopolitical circumstances have on the
              appearance, growth and transformation of cities. The project will also assist
              in training a promising young scientist.

