Title       : Center for Excellence in Conservation Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a0083056

Award Number: 0083056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499766             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee A. Weber   (Principal Investigator current)
              Guy A. Hoelzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brett R. Riddle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary M. Peacock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Richard Tracy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ & Comm Col Sys of NV
	      2601 Enterprise Road
	      Reno, NV  895121666    702/739-3517

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The DNA Analysis Facility recently established at the University of Nevada, Reno
              has greatly enhanced the potential for Nevada scientists to employ cutting edge
              genomics techniques.  This new expertise in molecular biology will be united
              with the well-established research programs in evolutionary genetics and
              conservation biology to establish a Center for Conservation Genetics within the
              University of Nevada System.  The proposed Center will add significant
              capabilities in the area of the genetics of natural populations, and promote
              interaction among conservation biologists and other scientists with expertise
              in molecular biology and evolutionary genetics.  Molecular technologies have
              been increasingly used to analyze genetic structure of natural populations and
              determine the degree of population isolation, information that is critical for
              determining how best to protect threatened and endangered species.  The Center
              for Conservation Genetics will carry the following specific missions.
 Enhance
              the capability of the Biological Resources Research Center to conduct
              population genetic structure analyses of threatened and endangered
              species.
Function as an umbrella organization to bring the expertise of
              faculty to bear on conservation genetics projects.
Serve as a focus for
              graduate education in conservation genetics at the University of Nevada, Reno
              and the University of Nevada, Las Vegas.
Serve as a vehicle for outreach and
              training in conservation genetics in the West. 

