Title       : Establishment of a 2-D/3-D Micro/Nano-Scale Device Fabrication Facility at The
               University of Kentucky
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a0083116

Award Number: 0083116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fae L. Korsmo                           
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijay P. Singh vsingh@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig A. Grimes  (Principal Investigator former)
              Zhi Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonidas G. Bachas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lyndon S. Stephens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth C. Dickey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, building upon and seeking to substantially accelerate the recently
              established momentum in nano and microscale research at the University of
              Kentucky, enhances the device fabrication capabilities to include clean room,
              MEMS fabrication, chip processing and microscale package integration or
              connection to macroscale devices.  Added to a Class 10 Clean Room funded by the
              state, and to the LIGA microfabrication and testing equipment provided by
              DARPA, the several key pieces of device fabrication equipment enabled by this
              award contribute to establish an advanced micro/nano-scale fabrication
              facility, capable of making both 2-D and 3-D structures.  The microdevice-MEMS
              fabrication facility will support and strengthen multiple ongoing research
              projects, facilitating synergistic multi-disciplinary research.  The project
              blends the skills of the Electrical, Mechanical, Chemical, and Materials
              Engineering Departments with those of the Chemistry and Physics Departments. 
              Thirty-two faculty members have identified on-going research projects that will
              be significantly strengthened.  This project substantially bolsters state
              capabilities for fabrication of the sensing 2-D microdevices, and interfacing/
              packaging technologies by enhancing the capability to fabricate 2-D and 3-D
              micro/nano scale device assemblies from silicon, ceramics, and metals; thus,
              complete systems may be fabricated, encompassing integrated circuit
              micro-systems interfaced with macro scaled components such as pumps, heat
              sinks, etc. that are able to operate in harsh industrial or biomedical
              environments.  Optimizing finite state resources, the Device Fabrication
              Facility will be open to all state researchers.  The infrastructure fosters
              collaborations with regional industries that require robust microdevices in
              their manufacturing processes, providing the basis for enhanced economic
              development and growth in the state.  The work also contributes to enhance the
              educational experience of a substantial number of students.



