Title       : Integrated Heat and Mass Transport Within Sintered Metal Microfibrous Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0083045

Award Number: 0083045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce J. Tatarchuk brucet@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel K. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the transport mechanism and behavior of a new class of
              microfibrous porous solids.  These materials possess heretofore-unavailable
              combinations of void volume and "active sites" which permit optimization
              between the intrinsic kinetics of the process and the intraparticle/intrabed
              heat and mass transport required to feed these "sites."  If broadly successful,
              new classes of materials may result which can sustain selected chemical
              reactions and associated physical processes at rates per unit volume as much as
              one- to two- orders-of-magnitude greater than currently available.  The
              broad-based and fundamental impact of these new materials will allow
              investigation of their application across five normally diverse areas.  These
              include:  (1) thermal management systems using microfibrous heat pipe wicks;
              (2) microfibrous entrapped catalysts and sorbents; (3) microfibrous entrapped
              electro-catalyst and Faradaic materials, (4) microfibrous metallic filters, and
              (5) microfibrous entrapped biosupports.  Inaugural research activities will
              focus on: assembling key personnel and training staff; building microfibrous
              materials; mechanical testing of materials; and studying the structure/property
              behavior and resulting transport phenomena toward each of the five core
              scientific areas.
 
