Title       : Collaborative Research: Individuals' Spatial Abilities and Behavior in
               Transportation Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a0083110

Award Number: 0083110
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51972              (Estimated)
Investigator: Reginald G. Golledge golledge@geog.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Considerable attention has focused recently on the development of Intelligent
              Transportation Systems (ITS) to more effectively manage transportation
              networks.  In particular, Advanced Traveler Information Systems (ATIS) are
              being developed to alert drivers and public transportation passengers to delays
              in real-time so they can make travel decisions to avoid congestion and take
              advantage of under-utilized facilities.  Urban area governments need to assess
              which types of ATIS are most cost-effective, and whether other projects might
              be better investments of public funds.  This collaborative research project
              will develop transportation models to support these types of analysis by
              integrating geographic theories and transportation network models and
              explicitly considering the heterogeneity of spatial knowledge among the
              traveling public.  The research plan includes field experiments to establish
              tests of spatial relationships.  Residents of a number of metropolitan areas
              will participate in surveys that address transportation behavior, assessment of
              spatial knowledge, and perceptions of transportation alternatives.  Latent
              variable and discrete-choice models will be estimated to establish the effect
              that knowledge of the transportation network and information-processing
              capabilities have on short- and long-range transportation and urban behaviors. 
              The analysis will compare the predictive capabilities of these models against
              conventional models.  The expected outcome of this research project is an
              enhanced capability to model travelers' responses to emerging information
              strategies to manage transportation demands.  This project represents an
              important advance in basic scientific knowledge, as it more closely ties
              geographic theories to transportation planning models.  Many geographic
              experiments have established means to measure a person's spatial knowledge by
              observing their wayfinding efficiency and transportation behavior, but these
              methods have not been used to predict future travel choices.  Transportation
              planning models have ignored the heterogeneity of spatial ability and knowledge
              and instead assumed that travelers have full information about the network or
              homogenous perception errors.  More innovative research studies have examined
              how spatial knowledge may influence travelers' response to ATIS messages but
              have not addressed the more basic question of how travelers become aware of
              alternative routes, modes, destinations, etc.  This project will address that
              question by relating spatial knowledge to transportation choice from the full
              range of options.  Project findings will contribute to the refinement of
              existing transportation planning models, thereby allowing government planners
              to examine transportation investments and more effectively allocate public
              expenditures.

