Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY--Multiscale Simulation of Avian Limb Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a0083653

Award Number: 0083653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2999320            (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Glazier   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Alber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jesus Izaguirre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0083653
Glazier

Developing multicellular organisms exhibit dramatic changes
              in shape and form, as well as the emergence of rapidly changing spatial
              organization of specialized (differentiated) cell types, e.g. neurons and
              muscle fibers. These events, which generate the body plan and the various
              organs, depend on regulated gene expression, elaborate interactions between and
              among cells, and coordinated cell movement. Gene expression by itself cannot
              give a full account of the emergence of body plans, specific forms and shapes.
              Genetics and biochemistry interact with the physical properties of individual
              cells and cell aggregates in the course of development, making it a multiscale
              process of enormous complexity. As in many complex processes, however, one can
              discover dynamical and organizational rules at various levels if appropriate
              techniques are used to analyze developing organisms. This project brings
              together biologists, experimental and theoretical physicists, mathematicians,
              and computer scientists, each of whom has experience analyzing individual
              biophysical problems, and brings their expertise to bear on a specific
              developmental process-the formation of the vertebrate limb. Experimental and
              theoretical methods will be used to investigate the emergence of the limb bud
              from the body wall, the control of genes mediating cell aggregation, the
              spatiotemporal regulation of the limb skeletal pattern, and the ingrowth of
              nerve fibers into the limb from the spinal cord.

This work will result in a
              multilevel characterization including subcellular, cellular and supracellular
              mechanisms which will provide a causal understanding of vertebrate limb
              development, as well as generate analytical tools that can be used to study
              similar problems in developmental biology. These tools will include software
              for solving the inevitably complex systems of mathematical equations that
              describe the interplay of genetic and material properties found in living
              embryos. New software will be built and distributed to model not only limb
              development, but also other types of organ formation and illness (e.g. tumor
              metastasis and vascularization). The overall strategy represents a step towards
              genuinely integrated research on animal development to deliver on the promise
              of the gene sequencing projects of the previous decade.

