Title       : Closing the Digital Gap in Underdeveloped Regions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2000  
File        : a0083047

Award Number: 0083047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $749312             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W.D. Connolly connolly@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul G. Huray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Kucera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth A. Bishop  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frances L. Van Scoy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The recently Access Grid (AG) technology, will be used to establish and
              strengthen the networking bonds to researchers in jurisdictions participating
              in the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).  This
              will facilitate technology transfer to and formation of collaborations with,
              the major research centers in the more densely populated and technologically
              developed parts of the country.  The AG is a multi-site, interactive multimedia
              system which allows group to group collaboration. To deploy AG nodes to EPSCoR
              states, a concerted effort is needed to package the required hardware, document
              the installation process, assist in trouble shooting, and provide training. 
              Six multimedia teleconferencing facilities in the EPSCoR states would be
              established after constructing nodes of the AG at: the University of Kansas,
              the University of Kentucky (in place), Montana State University, North Dakota
              State University, the University of South Carolina, and West Virginia
              University.  The project, serving as a prototype, or proof of concept of
              viability within the EPSCoR community, is geared toward establishing
              partnerships (e.g., additionally, the Argonne National Laboratory, along with
              the National Computational Science Alliance at the University of Illinois will
              serve as technical resources).  In addition to establishing the six AG sites
              the project will also explore research issues that affect AG operation.  For
              example, Spatialized Audio (ability to make a qualitative differentiation to
              separate voices to make individual voices more distinguishable), Audio, Setup,
              Balance and Quality (mechanisms for remotely setting and detecting audio
              balances), Video (improvements: tools to monitor and control color balance and
              quality), Networking (designate important streams to dynamically switch and
              re-route traffic), and Application Integration (visualization stream
              integration).

