Title       : RUI: Query Optimization for Multi-Database and Data Warehousing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2002    
File        : a0083312

Award Number: 0083312
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148362             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fereidoon Sadri sadri@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

RUI: Query Optimization for Multi-Database and Data Warehousing

	In
              multi-database systems, similar information may be represented under different
              structures (schemas). Current database languages are suitable for querying a
              single database, but are not powerful enough to reconcile such "schematic
              heterogeneity" among databases. New languages have been proposed to achieve
              interoperability among multiple databases. This research project is concerned
              with query optimization for such languages, in particular "schemaSQL", a
              recently proposed extension of the industry-standard database language SQL. The
              restructuring capabilities provided by schemaSQL and similar languages have
              applications far beyond multi-database systems. For example, operating data
              over possibly many years of operation are summarized and stored in a data
              warehouse. The warehouse data can then be analyzed for patterns and trends to
              improve the operations. Restructuring of the warehouse data can potentially
              result in a significant increase in query processing efficiency. This research
              project involves a team of graduate and undergraduate students, and will
              enhance the development of human resources in science and engineering both at
              graduate as well as undergraduate level. The results of this project will
              provide a new approach to querying and query optimization using restructuring
              and will have applications in multi-database systems interoperability and
              efficient query processing, data warehousing efficiency, and physical database
              structuring for optimized operation. 
URL:  
              http://www.uncg.edu/~sadrif/nsf/query-optimization.html


