Title       : Acquisition of a Superconducting Magnet for Magneto-Structural and
               Magneto-Electronic Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2001  
File        : a0083189

Award Number: 0083189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107902             (Estimated)
Investigator: Trevor A. Tyson tyson@adm.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark C. Croft  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chi-Chang Kao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph I. Budnick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent G. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0083189
Tyson
         
This is an acquisition award from the Instrumentation
              for Materials Research program to the Foundation @ New Jersey Institute of
              Technology. The institution will acquire a 10 Tesla superconducting magnet for
              magneto-structural and magneto-electronic studies of complex metals such as
              transition-metal oxide (TMO) systems. The instrument will be located at the
              National Synchrotron Light Source at Brookhaven National Laboratory. It will be
              used to conduct research that will elucidate the lattice-magnetic field
              correlations and field dependent local moments. The results will assist in the
              development of more accurate theoretical models of these materials. The study
              will focus on the manganese doped TMO systems (manganites) and the ruthenium
              doped  (ruthenates) TMO systems. These materials exhibit novel charge transport
              and spin correlations, including colossal magnetoresistance, and the possible
              coexistence of superconductivity and ferromagnetic correlations at the atomic
              level.  The exact details of this coexistence are not understood. Utilizing
              plane polarized synchrotron radiation researchers will be able to examine
              structural deformation parallel to and transverse to the applied magnetic field
              and correlate these structural deformations with magnetoresistance data.
              Additionally, direct measurements of the local magnetic moments on the
              transition metal sites with circular polarized radiation (x-ray magnetic
              circular dichroism) will be performed. Undergraduates, graduate students and
              experienced researchers will conduct research utilizing this magnet.  Use of
              the magnet will be integrated into laboratory courses.
***

This is an
              acquisition award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program to
              the Foundation @ New Jersey Institute of Technology. The institution will
              acquire a 10 Tesla superconducting magnet for magneto-structural and
              magneto-electronic studies of complex metals such as transition-metal oxide
              systems and to train students to perform modern physics experiments. The
              instrument will be located at the National Synchrotron Light Source at
              Brookhaven National Laboratory (NSLS). Local structural distortions play a key
              role in the determination of the properties of complex metals such as
              transition-metal oxide systems. This magnet will give researchers the
              capability of measuring x-ray absorption spectra and magnetic circular x-ray
              dichroism in varying magnetic fields. Utilizing the unique properties of x-ray
              radiation from the NSLS, researchers will be able to measure atomic structural
              deformation parallel to and transverse to the applied magnetic field and
              correlate the structural deformations with changes in the electron transport. 
              In addition, the atomic level magnetic properties on the transition metal sites
              with circularly polarized radiation (x-ray magnetic circular dichroism) will be
              studied. The elucidation of the lattice-magnetic field correlations and local
              magnetic properties will assist in the development of theoretical models of
              these materials.  Undergraduates, graduate students and experienced researchers
              will conduct research utilizing this magnet.  Use of the magnet will be
              integrated into laboratory courses.

