Title       : The Unscented Kalman Filter for Machine Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a0083106

Award Number: 0083106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287073             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric A. Wan ericwan@ece.ogi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0083106
Wan

Several areas of machine learning including classification and
              regression, nonlinear signal processing, and adaptive control, rely heavily on
              the extended Kalman filter (EKF).  For example, the EKF plays a central role in
              nonlinear state estimation required by complex control applications, and is
              used as a parameter, estimation algorithm in neural network training for
              pattern recognition, and for identification of dynamic systems.  The EKF also
              plays an important role in the simultaneous modeling and estimation (known as
              dual estimation) of noisy time-series, with applications ranging from speech
              enhancement, to financial forecasting and environmental modeling.

The
              central approximation used in the EKF is a linearization of the nonlinear
              system dynamics.  While this is done in order to propagate the mean and
              covariance of the state variables being estimated, the EKF can introduce
              considerable errors between the estimates produced by the algorithm and the
              true statistics of the state.  However, the computational expense of the
              algorithm is considerably lower than that of more accurate Markov-Chain Monte
              Carlo (MCMC) sampling methods, and produces excellent results in many
              circumstances. The benefit of good results at low cost is primarily responsible
              for the widespread use of the EKF.

In 1997, Julier and Uhlman introduced a
              new approach called the Unscented Kalman Filter By avoiding a linearization of
              the system, the UKF offers increased accuracy in the estimation of the mean and
              covariance of the state variables, resulting in a substantial performance
              improvement.  The implementation of the UKF requires no analytic derivation of
              Jacobians (gradients) as in the EKF, and most importantly, the improved
              accuracy is achieved without an increase in computational expense.

The prior
              application of the UKF focused only on state-estimation problems in the context
              of nonlinear control.
The objective of this project is to extend the use of
              the UKF to the full breadth of machine learning applications that currently
              depend on the EKF.  This will entail the systematic development of algorithmic
              extensions and application evaluations as detailed in the proposal.  Although
              numerous theoretical and practical problems must be overcome before this goal
              is achieved. Preliminary investigations have shown that the potential
              advantages of the UKF in these contexts are significant.  Clearly, the
              diversity of applications that currently employ the EKF suggests that the
              proposed research aching impact on a wide variety of fields.
***



