Title       : Vacuolar Sequestration of Anthocyanin in Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0083221

Award Number: 0083221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia Walbot walbot@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Flowering plants synthesize diverse metabolites, many of which are stored in the
              vacuoles.  Many such secondary metabolites are toxic or highly reactive and
              must be sequestered from the cell to prevent damage; interestingly, many of
              these stored compounds are useful drugs, because of their specific interactions
              with enzymes and other cellular constituents.  To understand how plants manage
              toxic metabolites the mechanism of vacuolar sequestration for anthocyanin
              pigments and the precursor flavonoid compounds will be analyzed using a
              combination of genetics and biochemistry.  Anthocyanins are ideal model
              compounds because so much is already known about their biochemistry and the
              genetic control of their synthesis.  These pigments confer the red/blue/purple
              colors in many flowers; the pigments are members of a large chemical class, the
              flavonoids, widely distributed in green plants.  Flavonoids are natural
              sunscreens against UV damage, attractants for pollinators, signals in
              plant-microbe interaction, and molecules required for successful pollen-stigma
              interaction.   Flavonoids are also an important component of a healthy human
              diet.  Despite their good features, flavonoids cause cellular damage by
              oxidizing proteins and intercalating into DNA increasing mutation frequency;
              such damage is prevented if the flavonoids are sequestered efficiently into the
              vacuolar compartment.  Presently, it is known that the BZ2 protein of maize and
              the AN9 protein of Petunia are required at an early step in the transfer of
              anthocyanin from the cytoplasm to the vacuole; mutant plants lacking these
              proteins accumulate anthocyanin in the cytoplasm.  In this project the role of
              MRP29 in moving anthocyanin across the tonoplast membrane will be tested.  The
              current model is that BZ2 is a carrier protein for anthocyanin; it delivers
              this cargo to the MRP29 transporter, which in turn transfers the cargo into the
              vacuole.   MRP29, an ATP Cassette Binding Protein transporter,  is regulated by
              the same transcription factors that are required to activate the biosynthetic
              genes of the anthocyanin pathway.  Research will focus on establishing whether
              MRP29 is localized to the tonoplast membrane of the vacuole, on the impact of
              mutation at MRP29 on anthocyanin sequestration, on the interaction of MRP29
              with BZ2 and related proteins in vivo and in vitro, and on the requirements for
              anthocyanin sequestration in an in vitro assay that will be established during
              the research project.   Mutant yeast cells, lacking all ABC transporters, will
              be transformed to express the maize MRP29 protein; using vacuoles prepared from
              such yeast strains, tonoplasts containing just one plant ABC transporter can be
              purified.  This material will be used to test the model at a more refined
              biochemical level.  
