Title       : ITR: An Interactive Experimental/Numerical Simulation System with Applications
               in MEMS Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0083004

Award Number: 0083004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $469999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Bradley lizb@cs.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiao-Chuan Cai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yung-Cheng Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1640      INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY RESEARC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1652,1660,4080,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will build a new generation of numerical simulation systems by
              creating a feedback path between physical experiments and numerical solvers.
              There are a number of exciting implications of this data-adaptive simulation
              idea. Engineering fluid flows are inherently complex. This complexity limits
              measurement and precision, so engineers are forced to work with fluid flows
              based on very sparse information. Numerical solvers, on the other hand, can
              resolve tiny flow structures, but they generally run in an open-loop mode and
              are thus unverified. Coupling the two forms of technology offers powerful
              advantages to each. Comparisons against live experimental data will allow
              simulation algorithms to be verified quantitatively, in detail, and in-line.
              Once it is verified in this fashion, one can use the simulation with confidence
              on related problems. Once can also use the sensor information to correct the
              solver's data, or even to adjust the solver parameters on the fly. Moreover,
              once the solver is properly synchronized with the real system, one could use
              the former to explore the physics of the latter in more detail than sensors
              would allow - and still trust the results.

A particularly compelling
              application area for data-adaptive simulation techniques is
              microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). This emerging technology is driving a
              revolution in engineering design that is placing new demands on numerical
              simulation. Accurate modeling of the interaction of tiny, flexible, moving
              structures with high-speed chaotic fluids is challenging. To resolve the fine
              details in this kind of simulation, computational fluid dynamics technology
              requires extremely fine meshes and the solution of very large systems of
              nonlinear equations. This makes it difficult to build production-quality
              computer-aided design (CAD) tools for MEMS, which in turn forces engineers to
              fabricate devices without testing them. Functional CAD tools would allow MEMS
              designers to achieve one-pass design, much as VLSI does now.

