Title       : Algorithmic Learnability of Phonologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2000   
File        : a0083101

Award Number: 0083101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235513             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce B. Tesar tesar@ruccs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan S. Prince  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop an explicit formal system for the learning of
              phonologies, capable of inferring
lexical representations, deducing
              constituency and other nonovert structure from overt observables,
              and
constructing the mapping between lexical forms and the grammar's
              output.

The primary formal problem to be attacked is the mutual entanglement
              of constituent structure,
phonological mappings and phonological lexical
              representations. A language learner has direct access to
none of these; they
              must be inferred from positive overt data. However, the three are tightly
              interrelated.
The correct phonological mapping depends upon the structural
              analysis assigned to overt forms by the
target grammar as well as on the
              lexical representations taken to underlie the overt forms. Assigning
              the
correct structural analysis to an ambiguous overt form requires some grasp
              of what the correct phonological
mapping is like, as does the induction of
              underlying forms. In the face of these entanglements, a successful
solution to
              the full learning problem must work on all three simultaneously, using progress
              on one to
achieve further progress on the others, ultimately arriving at the
              correct conclusion for each.

The research will build on existing work
              solving important subproblems within phonological learning
under Optimality
              Theory (OT). In prior work, learning algorithms have been developed for OT
              systems in
which there are mutual entanglements between constituent structural
              analysis and phonological mapping,
but in which lexical representations need
              not be learned. The new research proposed here will extend and
generalize
              these approaches so that they may apply to systems which require non-trivial
              learning of lexical
representations. This requires the addition of significant
              further structure to the learning and processing
algorithms: a lexicon must be
              constructed and maintained, the parsing algorithms which assign analyses
              to
overt data must be expanded to make use of the lexical representations, and
              the learner must have
procedures for hypothesizing and adjusting lexical
              representations. The basic algorithms for learning
mappings will also be
              modified to ensure learning of phonotactic distributions as a preliminary to
              the
analysis of lexical relations.

The investigations will begin with
              metrical stress grammars, including those with rich morphophonemic
relations
              dependent on underlying contrasts in stress and quantity. An important part of
              the project will be
the construction, as targets for learning, of constraint
              systems that plausibly capture phenomena requiring
the nontrivial interaction
              between lexical representations and phonological mappings. Extensive
              survey
and analysis of the targeted linguistic generalizations will be
              required to establish the empirical basis of the
learner's goals.

The
              proposed learning algorithms will be tested and evaluated via both formal
              analysis and computer
simulations. Given that the property of mutual
              entanglement of analysis and mapping is not particular to
phonology, but is
              endemic to the problem of learning from observable data in all linguistic
              domains, the
results of this research are expected to provide insight into how
              language learning must proceed in general.
