Title       : Bi-stable MEMS for Non-Volatile Information Storage and Opto-Mechanical
               Computing in Harsh Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2000 
File        : a0083155

Award Number: 0083155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336500             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. A. Saif saif@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman R. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate micro-mechanical bi-stable systems for use in
              nonvolatile data storage and optomechanical computing, in harsh environments
              where conventional microelectronics face severe limitations. Such environments
              include high or low temperatures, and radiation as encountered above the
              earth's atmosphere (space exploration and satellite communication), in nuclear
              reactors or in other environments involving intense radiation. The proposed
              project will employ an approach based on our recent theoretical and
              experimental investigation on a MEMS bi-stable system that consists of a micro
              mechanical column compressed by an axial force so that it buckles in one of two
              possible states (0 or 1). The state of the column will be changed by the
              pressure of a moderate intensity laser beam, thus potentially enabling
              opto-mechanical computers and digital data storage. Being a mechanical system,
              it is inherently robust. Our long term vision is to develop micro-mechanical
              computational elements driven by a fixed light source such as CW laser or
              focussed sunlight. Such a continuous light source can be used to completely
              power a finite state computational machine using the elements proposed herein.
              
This project will address four fundamental queries: (1) The mechanism by
              which an optical beam switches the state of the bi-stable system, such as light
              pressure or  photo-induced stress. (2) The material of choice for computational
              elements that will sustain harsh environments, e.g., thermally grown Silicon
              dioxide on a silicon column. (3) The limit of miniaturization or the limit of
              the minimum force by which the state can be changed due to thermal noise. (4)
              Radiation damage: The effect of high energy particles encountered in space, and
              high electromagnetic fields on the
stability of the bi-stable system, and the
              radiation damage of the material(s) will be studied at nanosecond intervals
              with nanometer resolution. We also propose to design and construct the basic
              memory (bi-stable multivibrator) and logic elements,(AND, OR, NOT) using
              variations of the MEMS bi-stable system. The above study will be a first step
              in applying micro mechanical systems for computational and data storage
              purposes in very harsh environments.

