Title       : 3-Manifolds and Applications to Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a0083097

Award Number: 0083097
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51011              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter D. Neumann neumann@math.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Barnard College
	      3009 Broadway
	      New York, NY  100276598    212/280-5262

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-0083097
PI: Walter D. Neumann

Despite the venerable history of
              the algebraic geometry, many difficult
problems remain even in low dimensions.
              Methods of low dimensional
topology have proved very helpful here, and part of
              this project concerns
a continuation of the investigator's successful
              application of such
methods to the study of singularities of complex surfaces
              and the topology
of plane affine curves. One issue to be addressed is explicit
              analytic
description of singularities with given topology. The general
              question is
notoriously difficult, but the investigator and J. Wahl have
              recently made
a series of conjectures on realising rationally Gorenstein
              singularities
with rational homology sphere links as explicit quotients of
              complete
intersections and are making significant progress towards
              their
resolution. 3-manifold topology is also being applied to the study of
              the
global topology and analytic classification issues for
              two-variable
polynomials. These issues are of intrinsic interest as well as
              having
potential to contribute to the resolution of the famous
              Jacobian
Conjecture.  In a rather different direction, the investigator will
              study
invariants of 3-dimensional manifolds that relate to number theory
              and
algebra, namely the so-called character and eigenvalue varieties and
              the
Bloch invariant.  Connections are emerging between these invariants
              that
will inform both topology and algebra/number theory.

Algebraic
              Geometry, which is essentially the study of the zero sets of
families of
              polynomials, has always been an important area of
fundamental research, and is
              also important in such diverse
applications as control theory and
              communications. The project will
apply topological methods to algebraic
              geometry, to obtain results on
how to realise and classify families of
              polynomials that lead to
particular topologies.  The methods of 3-dimensional
              topology are of
particular importance to this project, and there is also
              feedback from
algebra and number-theory to topology, as well as some
              interaction
with theoretical physics and cosmology. The project also
              studies
new insights that these connections bring to all these fields.

