Title       : North Dakota Science and Technology Partnerships: A Proposal to the EPSCoR ESG
               Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a0083063

Award Number: 0083063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498321             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory D. Gillispie   (Principal Investigator current)
              Orven F. Swenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andres D. Campiglia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Orlando R. Baiocchi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will implement a comprehensive plan to enhance the role of
              technology in North Dakota's economy and its educational system.  The plan will
              encourage and assist graduate students in starting up companies.  Their new
              small businesses and existing ones will be tied into the university research
              community.  They will be informed of the federal technology development
              programs such as the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) and the Small
              Business Technology Transfer (STTR) programs and assisted in submitting
              applications.  Strong and meaningful links will be forged between engineering
              and the natural sciences at both the research and pedagogical levels.  Project
              objectives to be accomplished include:  (1) increased submissions by North
              Dakota companies to federal SBIR and STTR programs; (2) implementation of a
              Master of Science in Technology degree that will equip students with a range of
              skills needed to be effective in a smaller company; (3) strengthening the
              research programs of existing faculty at North Dakota State University, and (4)
              development of an undergraduate short course to stimulate entrepreneurial
              activity.  These activities are intended to provide the talent pool necessary
              to develop a high technology base in North Dakota and in turn provide local
              employment opportunities for in-state students educated at the North Dakota
              State University. 

