Title       : Explore the Universe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0083463

Award Number: 0083463
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1350000            (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. DeVorkin David.DeVorkin@nasm.si.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maureen Kerr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beatrice Mowry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Brennan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Romanowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 1798      Special Projects (AST)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: David DeVorkin
Inst: Smithsonian Institution
AST-0083463


The
              Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum (NASM) will develop and install a
              major new permanent exhibit, Explore the Universe, which shows how
              understanding of the Universe has changed over time as the tools we use to
              study it have evolved.  The exhibition makes use of a selection of artifacts,
              working models, images, interactive videos and computer programs, hands-on
              exhibits, and live demonstrations to explore scientists' view of the Universe
              as well as how they use ground- and space-based technology to study it.  The
              exhibit will cover all regions of the electromagnetic spectrum, and offer a
              blend of historic perspective and modern experience with the science of
              astrophysics and cosmology.  The goal is to communicate both the magnificence
              of the Universe and the efforts of scientists to understand it.  An
              accompanying web site will be developed that contains the images, text, and
              computer interactives of the exhibit, and a virtual tour of the gallery. 
              Educational materials will be prepared for teachers, students, and families
              visiting the exhibit, and a supplemental educational program of visitors,
              workshops for teachers, and internship programs will be created.

Funding for
              this project is provided by the Division of Astronomical Sciences, the Division
              of Physics, and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate
              for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.
***
