Title       : Neural Transmission & Modulation in the Cerebellum and Vestibuloocular Reflex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a0083552

Award Number: 0083552
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235633             (Estimated)
Investigator: James G. McElligott   (Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm H. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              LAY ABSTRACT
Neural Transmission & Modulation in the Cerebellum and the
              Vestibulo-ocular Reflex
James G. McElligott 
Operation of the
              vestibulo-ocular reflex is essential for maintaining clear vision in the
              presence of head movements.  For proper operation of this reflex throughout
              life, adaptive increases or decreases in the magnitude of this reflex are
              necessary.  This adaptation corrects for alterations in the vestibular and
              visual system associated with early developmental, age, and injury related
              events.  A simple brain circuit involving the cerebellum and vestibular nucleus
              controls adaptation of the reflex.  Presently, it is not known where in this
              neuronal circuitry these changes occur.  It is also unclear if changes occur by
              a single common neuronal mechanism or by multiple mechanisms.  The purpose of
              the research is to address these questions.  Experiments will be directed
              towards investigating the involvement of two brain neurotransmitters (glutamate
              and GABA) and their actions at specific receptors (NMDA for glutamate and GABAa
              for GABA) within the cerebellar neuronal circuitry.  Of particular interest is
              the glomeruli synapse in the cerebellum where these receptors are present.  It
              is at this unique synapse that mossy fibers, Golgi and granule cells contact
              each other and interact.  
Often the brain is compared to a computer in its
              operation.  However, the brain has the ability to repair and to alter its
              circuitry, a property that the computer lacks.  The object of this research is
              to understand the mechanisms by which the brain produces these alterations or
              adaptive changes.  This knowledge will aid in the development of techniques to
              facilitate the adaptive process.  This knowledge will also have a direct
              bearing on understanding problems associated with disturbances to the
              vestibular or balance system.  This has an impact on everyday vestibular
              problems encountered on the earth, as well as the more recently identified
              vestibular alterations that are associated with extraterrestrial space
              exploration. 



