Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY--INCUBATION ACTIVITY: A Collaborative Problem Solving Environment
               for Computational Modeling of Eukaryotic Cell Cycle Controls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a0083315

Award Number: 0083315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald A. Berkowitz                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99965              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Tyson tyson@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jill C. Sible  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Layne T. Watson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford A. Shaffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Naren Ramakrishnan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1136,1366,1608,9183,9263,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The cell division cycle is the sequence of events whereby a living cell
              replicates all its components and divides them between two daughter cells, so
              that each daughter has the information and machinery necessary to repeat the
              process. Because it underlies the growth, development and reproduction of all
              biological organisms, the cell cycle is intensely studied by molecular
              biologists, who have recently uncovered many details of the biochemical network
              controlling cell division. Among eukaryotic cells (plants, animals, fungi), the
              regulatory mechanism is highly conserved, with homologous components
              functioning across species barriers from yeast to frogs to humans. So many
              details of this control system are now known that intuitive methods cannot
              explicate the complex interactions among these molecular components. New
              computational methods to describe complex genetic regulatory systems are
              desperately needed. For this reason, the Principal Investigator has created
              mathematical tools to model the control system, analyze its properties, and
              compare hypothetical mechanisms to the actual behavior of dividing cells. The
              purpose of this project is to bring these computational tools to a wider
              audience of theoretical and experimental biologists by developing a web-based,
              collaborative, problem-solving environment (PSE) for modeling cell-cycle
              regulatory networks. When fully developed, the PSE will allow users to access
              experimental databases on cell cycle genes and proteins, to construct
              hypothetical control mechanisms and explore their properties by numerical
              simulation, and to compare model behavior with the observed properties of
              cells, so that the underlying mechanistic hypotheses can be tested, refined and
              expanded. This "incubation project" will initiate the development of the PSE,
              in order to demonstrate the feasibility of the computational method that will
              in turn make a convincing case for full funding of the project 

