Title       : Center for Applications of Information Technology in the Teaching and Learning
               of Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0083336

Award Number: 0083336
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Haney                           
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9999998            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Ewing   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon J. Denton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jane C. Conoley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jane F. Schielack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Joseph Newton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0083336
EWING

Texas A&M will institute the "Center for the Applications of
              Information Technologies in the Teaching and Learning of Science."  The Center
              focuses on the development of innovative strategies and unique learning
              experiences to enhance teacher preparation and teacher professional education
              through the development of education specialists with advanced degrees.  The
              Center joins research faculty in scientific disciplines with research faculty
              in education to address the critical issues of teaching and learning in science
              in grades 7-12.  Typically discrete strands of scientific research, educational
              research, and information technology are woven into a more seamless and aligned
              infrastructure with a national mission.  The partnership includes universities,
              community colleges, research centers, museums, state education agencies, and
              the mathematics and science teachers in NSF-funded systemic initiatives in
              Texas. 

The Center provides research-rich professional development
              experiences for 700 grades 7-12 teachers and the education of approximately 60
              professional development specialists with the capacity for national leadership.
               The research objectives focus on the impact of information technologies on (1)
              how science is done, (2) how science is taught and learned, (3) how the
              processes and products of learning science can be assessed and (4) how a
              network can involve 7-12 teachers and their students in a community of
              scholarship.  The activities and outreach efforts of the Center are conducted
              through interdisciplinary research teams, consisting of university faculty,
              doctoral and master's students, and master teachers working with Texas
              districts involved in systemic reform.  These teams work on research and
              development that introduce modern science methods and integrate information
              technologies into the teaching of science.  The outcomes of the project include
              science education/technology specialists, increased district capacity for and
              delivery of teacher enhancement, and research on the effective uses of
              information technologies in science education.


