Title       : Collaborative Research: Interactive Level-Set Modeling for Visualization of
               Biological Volume Datasets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0083287

Award Number: 0083287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264999             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Breen david@cacr.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As scientific data becomes larger and more complex, the problem of presenting
              data effectively is joined by another, potentially more difficult one - how to
              extract presentable data from the flood of raw information. This problem is
              equally difficult for results from large simulations and data from
              high-resolution instruments. Thus, the field of scientific visualization
              becomes intimately tied to more traditional studies of data analysis, including
              image processing, pattern recognition, artificial intelligence, and computer
              vision. However, in contrast to those fields, visualization explicitly includes
              the user in the process of filtering, extracting, and rendering meaningful
              data. The goal of this project is to make level-set modeling - a useful but
              computationally expensive visualization technique - interactive for use in 3-D
              visualization of biological data sets.

Technically, the project has three
              components. The first is the design and implementation of a hardware and
              software system for interactive level-set surface model computation and
              display. This system will use off-the-shelf PC hardware and graphics boards and
              new algorithms and software to reach its interactivity goals. The second
              component will create the human-computer interface that allows users to
              interact with the level-set models. This will require mapping user input onto
              the mathematical descriptions controlling surface motion and deformation in the
              models. Finally, the third component will be the application of the techniques
              to visualize large biological data sets by researchers in this project.

This
              is a collaborative project between California Institute of Technology and the
              University of Utah.

