Title       : Real-time Path Planning in Changing Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0083275

Award Number: 0083275
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261766             (Estimated)
Investigator: Seth Hutchinson seth@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses new methods to generate collision-free paths for robots
              that operate in environments that change over time. Typical applications of
              this research include robot arms mounted on mobile platforms, arms that operate
              in factory settings, or any other manipulation systems that operate in
              environments that are either unknown a priori or may change over time.
The
              proposed approach comprises preprocessing and on-line stages. Preprocessing
              produces a representation of the configuration space that can be easily
              modified in real-time to account for changes in the environment. A
              one-dimensional roadmap is constructed for an obstacle-free workspace, and the
              mapping from workspace cells to
nodes and arcs in the roadmap is encoded.  In
              the on-line stage, when the environment changes, this mapping is used to make
              the appropriate modifications to the roadmap, and plans can be generated by
              searching the modified roadmap. At the heart of the method is the encoding for
              the mapping from workspace obstacles to configuration space obstacles.  To make
              the proposed approach truly viable, a major component of the proposed research
              will focus on robustness and complexity issues. These issues will be addressed
              by using tools from the fields of image processing, information theory, graph
              theory, computational geometry, and incremental algorithms.

