Title       : Biocomplexity -- Incubation Activity: Anopheline Mosquito Adaptation to Urban
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0083602

Award Number: 0083602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Beier   (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Regens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Novak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kate Macintyre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Johann U. Baumgartner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1366      BIOCOMPLEXITY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1366,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Cities in Africa are experiencing rapid human population growth without
              comparable economic development, and this is creating diverse ecological
              problems. In many African cities, the majority of residents live impoverished
              in settlements without adequate water, sanitation, and electricity. Such
              conditions promote the transmission of dangerous insect-borne diseases like
              malaria. This project will study Anopheles mosquitoes in two ecologically
              different Kenyan cities. The goal is to develop a model for better
              understanding and predicting how Anopheles mosquito populations are affected by
              key factors associated with urbanization. Activities will include: 1) planning
              meetings to develop the model for assessing Anopheles mosquito populations and
              2) field and laboratory studies of Anopheles mosquito populations in Kenya.
              This project will be coordinated with a well-established insect science program
              in Kenya to unite scientists working on mosquito ecology and behavior with
              teams of scientists specializing in ecological modeling and spatial statistics,
              geographic information technology, social and behavioral sciences, hydrology,
              demography, and urban planning. 

This project on biocomplexity and
              urbanization in Africa will produce a computational model for Anopheles
              mosquitoes that can be used practically to help guide activities relating to
              urban planning and environmental policy in Africa. With a strong focus on
              training African scientists and student, the project will strengthen
              international educational programs in the area of insect science and will help
              promote the use of ecological techniques for problem-solving in Africa. 

