Title       : Optical Properties of Rare Earth DOPED Wide-BandGap Nitride Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0083412

Award Number: 0083412
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henryk J. Lozykowski lozykows@bobcat.ent.ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               

This project seeks to advance  understanding of  luminescence properties of
              rare earth (RE) doped GaN, AlN and their alloys which have great potential for
              use in new generation of light emitting devices. Study of optical and
              electrical properties of wide-bandgap III-V nitride semiconductors  doped with
              RE ions will be performed in an attempt to gain further insight into the
              excitation and deexcitation processes of RE 4f n  transitions.  It will provide
              a comprehensive understanding of the optical-electrical properties of  these
              materials and thereby assessing the potential for rare earth doped
              semiconductor devices.  In addition, the optical properties of rare earth doped
              III-V nitride alloys will be investigated in order to attempts to build MIS, 
              p-n  heterojunction and other light emitting structures. Investigation  of
              electro-optical properties  of GaN and AlN doped with rare earth impurity
              should determine what type of defect RE ions introduce in III-nitrides  hosts.
              The optical technique will include photoluminescence spectroscopy (PL),
              selective excitation spectroscopy (SES), cathodoluminescence spectroscopy (CL),
              rise and decay kinetics measurements and  other complementary  
              characterization techniques. The goal of this work is to develop highly
              efficient materials for novel UV visible and infrared optoelectronics devices.
              For these applications controllable doping n and p type are an obvious
              necessity. The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
              photonic material science having high technological relevance.  An important
              feature of the project is the integration of research and education through the
              training of the students in a fundamentally and technologically significant
              area. 


 






















