Title       : Physics-Based Recognition in Outdoor Hyperspectral Images Using Small Image
               Samples
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a0083133

Award Number: 0083133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210134             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn Healey healey@ece.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The project focuses on the problem of recognizing objects in outdoor images
              acquired under unknown conditions when only a few pixels are available on the
              object. The development of this capability would enable the recognition of
              small or partially obscured objects at large distances thereby enhancing the
              performance of systems for many applications such as wide-area search and image
              registration.  A recognition system that operates in an uncontrolled outdoor
              environment must overcome several substantial challenges.  The appearance of an
              object  in an outdoor  scene is highly variable due to spatial and temporal
              variation in the illumination and atmospheric conditions. Also, in images of
              distant or obscured objects, modeled object surfaces may appear at subpixel
              scale therefore reducing the usefulness of
geometric features.  This project
              will address several important scientific issues.  Methods will be developed to
              build hyperspectral subspace models for materials of interest and backgrounds
              using physical models and the underlying image data.  Models will also
              developed that describe the statistical properties of these subspaces.  These
              models will be the basis of  statistical algorithms for recognition that are
              invariant to the scene conditions.  The models and algorithms will be evaluated
              using a range of
hyperspectral data acquired under different conditions in
              different  environments.  An important goal is to determine the fundamental
              bounds on recognition performance in unknown environments as spatial resolution
              degrades.

