Title       : Building Quantitative Skills of Students in Geoscience Courses: An NAGT Workshop
               to Examine Successful Practices and Promote Course and Curricular Revision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0083251

Award Number: 0083251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114322             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Heather Macdonald rhmacd@wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42) This award supports a workshop, Building the Quantitative Skills of
              Students in Geoscience Courses, that will be offered in the summer of 2000.  In
              the last century, the geosciences have changed from being a predominantly
              descriptive to a more quantitative science.  However, many geoscience courses,
              particularly those at the entry-level, are non-quantitative, many faculty have
              little experience in effectively incorporating quantitative exercises into
              entry-level courses, and many students do not feel confident about their
              ability to use mathematics to solve geoscience problems or to make
              well-informed decisions as effective citizens.  Thus, a central question facing
              geoscience education is the role of quantitative skills development in
              geoscience courses.  The National Association of Geoscience Teachers workshop
              will provide an opportunity for participants to learn about best practices and
              current issues in building the quantitative skills of non-majors and majors,
              revise a particular course to more effectively use quantitative problems to
              promote deeper understanding of geoscience, develop specific activities and
              assignments for that particular course that engage students, and address other
              issues associated with teaching mathematical skills in context.  Workshop
              presenters will share inquiry-based activities and assignments that are
              data-rich and promote active learning.  Workshop participants will leave the
              workshop with specific strategies for developing, implementing, and assessing
              exercises that will build the quantitative skills of students and use effective
              pedagogies, all with an aim of improving student learning in geoscience
              courses.  The workshop participants include geoscience and mathematics faculty
              members from a variety of institutions, including two-year institutions, and
              some geoscience graduate students.  Participants are strongly encouraged to
              attend in teams that might include faculty members from paired two-year and
              four-year schools, geoscience and mathematics education faculty from the same
              institution, or a graduate teaching assistant and a geology faculty member. 
              Presenters include geoscience and mathematics faculty from two-year and
              four-year colleges/universities.  Issues addressed in the workshop include the
              specific quantitative skills to be developed, strategies to most effectively
              teach such skills, standards for teaching mathematics developed by the
              mathematics and mathematics education community, examples of best practices
              with a particular emphasis on entry-level geoscience courses, strategies to
              support students in learning more quantitative skills, and models for
              collaboration between geoscience and mathematics/mathematics education
              programs, various assessment strategies, and other related topics.  Following
              the workshop, participants and presenters will submit activities, assignments,
              and problems sets to be included in an electronic publication to enable wide
              dissemination of workshop results.
