Title       : Biocomplexity: From Gene Expression to Morphology and Multicellular Organization
               in Dictyostelium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2000 
File        : a0083704

Award Number: 0083704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2999982            (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert Levine hlevine@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose N. Onuchic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Loomis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terence T.-L. Hwa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wouter-Jan Rappel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1136,1154,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project details an integrated, multiscale and multidisciplinary approach
              towards characterizing and understanding the development of Dictyostelium
              discoideum, from gene expression to morphology and multicellular organization. 
              The basic underlying premise is that the time is ripe for the concerted
              application of quantitative methods, both experimental and theoretical, to a
              central problem of modern biology, namely how one can form an integrated
              picture of an organism that connects genetic information to behavioral
              response.  For a variety of reasons, Dictyostelium is the logical system in
              which to tackle this challenge.

The research project has three components:
              First, DNA microarray techniques combined with the knowledge of hundreds of
              well-characterized mutants will be used to acquire a large body of gene
              expression data relevant to Dictyostelium development.  Second, a new
              generation of experiments, focusing on the cell response to external signals
              that coordinate multicellular development, will be devised and carried out. 
              Finally, computational simulations will be used to tie together the different
              pieces, e.g., genetic networks with protein networks, protein networks with
              cellular response, and cellular response with multi-cellular morphogenesis.  To
              accomplish these tasks, a high quality, interdisciplinary team of scientists
              has been assembled at the interface of biology, physics, and computation.

