Title       : Collaborative Proposal: People and Place: Geographic Information Technologies
               and Patterns of Individual Identification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0083288

Award Number: 0083288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52793              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Curry curry@geog.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative research project will examine the relation of emergent
              geographic information technologies to changing patterns of individual
              identification. The interdisciplinary research team will address the long-term
              social consequences, and in particular the consequences for personal privacy
              and identity, of the transition to digital geographic information systems. The
              project will provide a comprehensive comparative analysis of a set of case
              studies of information systems which incorporate both geographic and personally
              identifying data.  This analysis will identify trends and tendencies in
              identification practice, theorize possible effects on social equity and power,
              conceptually separate local forces from more global ones, and suggest ways in
              which these technologies may be modified so that their use is more consistent
              with the protection of privacy and associated human values. The cases include
              developing systems in each of three areas of application: (1) Geodemographic
              Mapping; (2) Emergency Response Systems; and (3) Intelligent Vehicles and
              Mobile Telematics. The choice of cases is designed to facilitate comparisons
              along three dimensions.  The first two dimensions concern the functions of the
              system:  whether the geographic information system is intended to model places,
              populations, or mobile individuals; and whether the system is intended
              primarily to facilitate commerce or to regulate social risk.  The third
              dimension concerns the jurisdiction within which the system operates. The
              chosen cases permit a complex set of comparisons that can hold aspects of each
              dimension constant, while varying aspects of the remaining dimensions.  Each
              case study will employ the compilation and analysis of documentary and
              interview data to reveal the mechanics of the system's information collection
              and manipulation, the modeling of persons and places, and the institutional,
              economic, legal, and cultural context of the system's development and use.  The
              research results will interest a variety of disciplinary and interdisciplinary
              groups, including scholars of communication and information technology, public
              policy, and geography, as well as public policy practitioners, technology
              developers, and privacy activists.  Moreover, the research examines systems
              with which individuals will interact throughout their daily lives, often
              without meaningful knowledge and consent.  Given the proliferation of systems
              based on geographic information and the growing public sensitivity to privacy
              and identity issues, the research results are likely to be of general public
              interest and valuable to policy discussions.
