Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Excavation at a Secondary Site Below
               Monte Alban: Local Elites in the Early State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a0083254

Award Number: 0083254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11965              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce Marcus joymar@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Joyce Marcus, MS Christina Elson will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. She will continue ongoing archaeological
              research at the site of San Martin Tilcajete, located in the Oaxaca Valley of
              Mexico. Archaeologists wish to understand the processes which lead to the
              development of social complexity and MS Elson's work focuses on a latter stage
              of this progression: the rise of the state.  Evidence clearly indicates that
              early states arose independently in many parts of the world and scientists
              believe that through comparison of individual examples general underlying
              processes can be discerned. The Oaxaca region is important from this
              perspective because it saw the rise of the Zapotec state approximately 2,000
              years ago. While considerable research has been conducted at Monte Alban, the
              capital, relatively little is known about the hinterland regions which came
              under centralized rule and MS Elson's research addresses this issue. Her work
              at the secondary outlying center of San Martin Tilcajete will contribute to an
              understanding of the role elites played in governance through investigation of
              local elites and their relationship to elites at the capital of Monte Alban.
              Scholars recognize that prehispanic Mesoamerican elites were a powerful group
              who comprised a very small percentage of the overall population. Although they
              made decisions that had far reaching consequences for themselves and their
              followers, it is difficult to acquire the archaeological data necessary to
              document the full range of variety in their decision making behavior. The elite
              at Monte Alban used many different political, economic and ideological tactics
              to integrate previously independent polities into the early state. However,
              while excavation data have revealed the presence of a similar group at San
              Martin Tilcajete, a clear picture of their behavior is not available. Since the
              site existed as an independent entity prior to incorporation into the Zapotec
              state it would be valuable to know how this group adapted during this
              fundamental change. In prior work MS Elson uncovered an elite residence and
              with NSF support she will continue her excavations to obtain comparative data
              from other contexts such as public buildings and commoner households. On this
              basis a more comprehensive picture can be developed of early state level
              administration.

This research is important because it will yield data of
              interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light on the rise of complex
              societies and assist in training a promising young scientist.

