Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY, Incubation Activity: Application of Mathematical Methods and
               Scientific Computation to Complex Ecological Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0083894

Award Number: 0083894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96918              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paulo Lima-Filho   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay R. Walton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter F. Stiller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Lacher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Pilant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1366      BIOCOMPLEXITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1264,1265,1267,1608,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0083894 Lima-Filho
ABSTRACT

Much current ecological theory has evolved from
              empirically fitted data, however these models often lack the mathematical
              depth, rigor and complexity required for multi-scale analysis of natural
              phenomena that are intrinsically non-linear. On the other hand, many
              mathematical models explaining ecological phenomena lack a substantial
              corroborating empirical validation.  These weaknesses are in part due to the
              broad spectrum of knowledge required to develop an integrated conceptual
              framework in the study of ecological systems.  This project is a
              multi-disciplinary collaborative effort, combining an array of different - but
              interrelated - areas of expertise.  These areas involve the mathematical fields
              of geometry, topology, continuum mechanics and computational inverse problems;
              the fields of scientific computation and information technology; and the fields
              of wildlife ecology and spatial methods in biodiversity.  Interdisciplinary
              collaborative initiatives can integrate recent breakthroughs in the various
              mathematical areas described above, with technological advances in Geographical
              Information Systems (GIS) and spatial methods in the study of biodiversity and
              wildlife ecology.  Implementation and validation of models will lead to the
              translation of the hierarchy of models created into a network of interconnected
              programming modules, in a similar fashion to process modeling.  Such
              implementation should eventually have both simulation and prediction
              capabilities, which can be tailored to specific situations, involving various
              degrees of complexity.  Educational Initiatives will be implemented to create a
              human resources infrastructure with expertise on the subject.  Existing
              educational resources (REU and VIGRE grants) are being used to develop
              interdisciplinary courseware and interdisciplinary research activities.  These
              materials and the seminars and workshops supported by the Incubation Grant
              provide the basis for the implementation of a rigorous graduate program to
              train students in the application of advanced mathematics and scientific
              computation in ecology and environmental science.

Ecology and the
              environmental sciences have lagged behind the natural sciences in generating
              predictive models with management and industrial applications.  Although there
              is a great deal of theory on how natural systems function and how these systems
              are impacted by human activities, we do not have a good understanding of how to
              best restore damaged ecosystems, or how to predict the long-term consequences
              of human activities.  Natural systems are extremely complex and are influenced
              by both regular, predictive processes like the changing seasons, and by rare,
              severe events like storms and fire.  The interactions among species are also
              complex.  If scientists are ever to develop a reasonable predictive capability
              regarding natural systems, then they must be able to describe and model natural
              systems with increasing accuracy and precision.  This means that they must be
              able to develop mathematical models and descriptions of these systems and
              computational methods to analyze them.  This project will develop several pilot
              research endeavors to begin cross-disciplinary collaboration among ecologists,
              mathematicians, and computer scientists. In addition, the project will hold
              workshops and seminars to initiate the creation of a graduate degree program in
              mathematical and computational ecology, to train a new generation of
              researchers to better manage and restore our natural systems.


