Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY: Bio-Feedback Basis of Self Organization in Planktonic Ecosystems
               Using Phaeocystis as a Model Complex Adaptive System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2000 
File        : a0083381

Award Number: 0083381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter G. Verity peter@skio.peachnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Hay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marc E. Frischer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard C. Patten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2400

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,1366,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract. Biocomplexity: The Bio-Feedback basis of Self Organization in
              Planktonic Ecosystems using Phaeocystis as a Model Complex Adaptive
              System.

The concept of a "complex adaptive system" (CAS) has emerged as a
              central element in complexity theory as developed in recent years at the Santa
              Fe Institute and elsewhere. This concept embodies the idea that inherent in
              complexity, per se, are self-organizational tendencies that transcend the
              particulars of any complex system under investigation. 

The phytoplankton
              genus Phaeocystis produces prodigious blooms of gelatinous colonies, releases
              copious amounts of DMS, and significantly alters material flows among trophic
              levels and export from the upper ocean. A potentially salient property from a
              CAS standpoint is the ability of Phaeocystis to transform between solitary cell
              and gelatinous colonial life cycle stages, a process which changes organism
              biovolume by 6-9 orders of magnitude, and which is hypothesized to be mediated
              by chemical communication. The colony skin confers protection against grazers,
              viruses, and parasitoids. Phaeocystis utilizes chemistry and/or changes in size
              as defenses against predation, and its ability to create refuges from
              biological attack is known to stabilize predator-prey dynamics in model
              systems. The life cycle form in which it occurs determines whether primary
              production flows through the traditional "great fisheries" food chain or the
              more regenerative microbial food web. 

Phaeocystis is proposed as a model
              organism from which to begin the study of biocomplexity in marine pelagic
              ecosystems. The central question is: how do physical (light, temperature,
              particle distributions, hydrodynamics), chemical (nutrient resources),
              biological (grazers, viruses, bacteria, other phytoplankton), and
              self-organizational (stability, indirect effects, distributed control)
              mechanisms interact with life-cycle transformations of Phaeocystis to mediate
              ecosystemic patterns of trophic structure, biodiversity, and energy flow?
              Ultimately the goal is to understand and predict why Phaeocystis occurs when
              and where it does, and the bio-feedbacks between the smaller single species CAS
              (Phaeocystis) and the larger multi-trophic level CAS (ecosystem). The
              significance of this need is emphasized by the formation of a recent Scientific
              Committee on Ocean Research (SCOR) working group, "Marine Phytoplankton and
              Global Climate Regulation: the Phaeocystis Species Cluster." 

Laboratory
              experiments will quantify the impact of various physical, chemical, and
              biological factors on Phaeocystis life cycle transformations. Bioassays will be
              conducted to quantify chemical communication between life cycle stages and
              other organisms, e.g. grazers and competing phytoplankton. Concurrent studies
              will focus on the sensing and genetic response of Phaeocystis to environmental
              cues. Genetic probes will be developed to recognize and quantify Phaeocystis
              solitary cells in situ, and to identify genetic regulatory elements involved in
              controlling Phaeocystis life history. Mesocosm experiments will be conducted in
              Bergen, Norway, where Phaeocystis blooms can be reliably developed. Field
              studies will be conducted in the fjords of Tromso, Norway, to quantify how
              biocomplexity operates in the water column and the feedbacks to the ecosystem.
              This environment is well known, has a long database, has Phaeocystis blooms
              every spring, and is an excellent location for related cooperative studies,
              e.g. DMS/gas exchange. An ecosystem model will be developed as an investigative
              tool to deconvolve how physics, chemistry, and biology interact to regulate
              planktonic structure and function. A preliminary model is already available as
              a starting point. A life history submodel of Phaeocystis will also be developed
              and embedded within the ecosystem model to explore the mutuality of the
              bio-feedback between these complex adaptive systems of different organizational
              scales. 


