Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY-Evolution and Ecology of Perturbed Interactions: Modeling
               Disequilibria in Time and Space
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0083468

Award Number: 0083468
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2965346            (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudia M. Neuhauser cneuhaus@cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ruth G. Shaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter H. Graham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald N. Alstad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Georgiana May  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1366      BIOCOMPLEXITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Perturbation of biological communities, exemplified by habitat loss and the
              invasion of novel taxa is well documented. Economic development, new
              technologies, and population pressure have escalated the scale, frequency, and
              severity of such perturbations. As a result, evolutionary and ecological
              dynamics may be driven so far from their equilibria that the linear
              approximations used for understanding and predicting consequences of subtle
              perturbations are inappropriate and probably misleading. To elucidate the
              consequences of massive perturbations in biological communities, a spatially
              explicit model whose dynamics are complicated by ecological, genetic, and
              historical factors, is proposed. Studies on (i) corn smut and corn, (ii)
              rhizobia associated with common bean, (iii) corn borer and genetically modified
              Bt and non-Bt corn, and (iv) prairie plants and their pollinators provide the
              empirical basis that are framed by the general model of interactions between
              hosts and their associates.  A hierarchy of models at different spatial scales
              will determine the evolutionary and ecological role of different factors at the
              different spatial scales.  In addition, statistical tools are used to develop
              and analyze data of genetic diversity under non-equilibrium conditions using
              both temporal and spatial information.

Understanding the complex
              interactions between the members of communities undergoing such massive
              perturbations and their evolutionary and ecological consequences requires the
              integration of empirical work and mathematical models across temporal and
              spatial scales. The empirical studies represent examples of large perturbations
              that occurred either in the past (as in (i) and (ii)) or in the present (as in
              (iii) and (iv)).  The historical studies allow testing the predictability of
              the theoretical models to assess the accuracy of the predictions for the
              consequences of massive perturbations that occur presently. The perturbations
              consist (1) of the introduction of novel organisms or (2) of habitat
              destruction, both at a large spatial scale: Corn and beans were moved from
              South and Central America to North America in the past carrying with them
              microorganism that, after introduction, competed with already present
              microorganisms.  Bt corn is currently being introduced in North America as a
              control mechanism for the European corn borer, a devastating pest of corn; Bt
              corn is introduced at a large spatial scale that introduces large selection
              pressure on the evolution of resistance to Bt corn, which will make this
              control mechanism ineffective. Habitat destruction is an ongoing process
              affecting nearly every natural community in North America and in other parts of
              the world leading to loss in biodiversity. The goal is to predict the
              evolutionary and ecological consequences of large range expansions and
              contractions of plants on their associated biological communities in order to
              better manage natural and agricultural systems.
