Title       : Biocomplexity Incubation Activity: Development of the Human Species and Its
               Adaptation to the Envirionment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2000 
File        : a0083721

Award Number: 0083721
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99493              (Estimated)
Investigator: Morris Goodman   (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Pilbeam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elliott Sober  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Conrad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francisco J. Ayala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Acad of Arts and Sci
	      136 Irving Street
	      Cambridge, MA  021381929    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1366,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Considerable scholarly and popular attention continues to focus on research
              associated with understanding "human origins" -- the development of the human
              species and its adaptation to the natural environment.  This Biocomplexity
              Incubation Activity award will support a project that will gather
              multidisciplinary scientific talent from the natural sciences, the social and
              behavioral sciences, and the humanities to formulate research strategies that
              probe the origins of human biology, behavior, and society from diverse
              perspectives.  It also will introduce talented junior researchers, including
              post-doctoral associates, and senior graduate students to this broad challenge
              and encourage them to become involved in this and related multidisciplinary
              efforts as their careers progress.  This project's objective is to draft plans
              for a major, multidisciplinary research project on human origins.  A two-day,
              workshop-style conference with three sessions will bring together molecular
              biologists, geneticists, evolutionary-developmental biologists, geologists,
              computer scientists, paleontologists, anthropologists, cognitive scientists,
              and humanists, all of whom share a common interest of better understanding of
              human origins.  This multidisciplinary group will identify key issues and areas
              of potential collaboration.  The first conference session will focus on how
              comparative primate, genomic data can help decipher the genetic basis of being
              human.  The second will focus on the organismal and cultural-social levels of
              human evolution, with special attention to issues like the impacts of the
              Earth's changing physical and biological environment on human evolution and
              language development.  The third session will focus on how system-level methods
              and related computer modeling can help scientists and other researchers to
              probe a range of complex interactions, such as those linking molecular genetic
              and organismal development and cultural-social organization.  This conference
              will make use of the American Academy of Science's multidisciplinary base of
              scholars and will involve complementary talent nationwide.  Conference
              participants will be about evenly divided between junior and senior
              researchers.  Of the senior scholars, about one-third are expected to be
              Fellows of the Academy.  The gathering will yield a synergy in the study of
              human origins that has not been possible with meetings of single disciplines of
              scholars or even in meetings of closely related disciplines.

