Title       : Plasticity in Ant Mushroom Bodies and its Relationship to Sensory Processing and
               Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0083163

Award Number: 0083163
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $358810             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wulfila Gronenberg wulfi@neurobio.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
	The complex social lifestyles of ants are based on their ability to
              perform
different tasks during an individual's lifetime (e.g. brood-care,
              guarding, foraging)
and on learning and memory. These behaviors are controlled
              by the brain and 
depend on brain plasticity. The aim of the project is to
              study the causal relationship between the structure and function of the brain
              and the complex behavior that it
controls. Particular brain regions and
              individual nerve cells that generate complex behavior will be analyzed in
              different ant species using diverse anatomical techniques. Morphological
              differences will be correlated with the behavioral performance of
              the
respective species or guild member (e.g. forager versus nurse ant). The
              
behavior and learning ability of each ant will be quantified in
standardized
              tests (e.g. maze performance), the effect of brain lesions on
the ant's
              behavior will be assessed, and the electrical activity of
prominent nerve
              cells in the ant brain will be correlated with behavioral
changes. Together,
              these techniques will help to understand how a small
brain with a limited
              number of nerve cells can yet generate the behavioral
plasticity required for
              the survival of the colony.

	Ants have to cope with the same general
              problems and physical constraints as larger animals and humans. Their brains
              function by the same
principles and their nerve cells rely on the same
              cellular mechanisms and
network properties. Unlike vertebrates including
              humans, where populations
of thousands or millions of nerve cells control each
              small behavioral
component, in ants much fewer cells orchestrate the behavior.
              Hence the
effect of a single nerve cell's activity on behavioral changes is
              much
stronger and can be studied much more directly in ants than in
              larger
animals. This and their complex behavior and high learning capacities
              makes
the ants particularly well suited as model systems for research on
              brain
plasticity. Studying the changes that occur in the brains of ants
              that
learn a simple task may help us to better understand how our own
              brains
acquire new capabilities and optimize our behavioral output.


