Title       : A MODIS Receiving Station at the University of Alaska Fairbanks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a0083091

Award Number: 0083091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $489048             (Estimated)
Investigator: Virgil L. Sharpton Buck.Sharpton@gi.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ted E. DeLaca  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin Engle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Verbyla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon W. George  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will establish a Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
              (MODIS) receiving station at the University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF).  MODIS
              is one of the instruments on board the Terra satellite launched into polar
              orbit last year; another MODIS will accompany the Aqua satellite into orbit
              next December.  These wide range remote sensing instruments, which span a wide
              spectral range from the visible to thermal infrared wavelengths, are designed
              to observe and monitor global changes on land, sea, and within the atmosphere. 
              MODIS uses a Direct Access System to provide a direct-to-user communication
              link.  This system relies upon distributed receiving stations to gather
              real-time data across their reception masks.  The UAF is the ideal location for
              receiving, processing, archiving, using, and distributing MODIS data across the
              high northern latitudes.  From Fairbanks a reception mask will cover all the
              land and sea territories of Alaska and span a considerable portion of the whole
              Arctic Region.  The MODIS Science Team has developed and validated a suite of
              algorithms to confidently extract various surface and atmospheric properties
              from the satellite measurements.  When combined with additional properties,
              these data should provide a powerful means of approaching issues of scientific,
              social, and economic importance to the state.  The University of Alaska
              Fairbanks MODIS station will have four main objectives.  These are:  (1) to
              expand capabilities for researchers to contribute in solving arctic global
              change problems; (2) to enhance educational opportunities in remote sensing and
              satellite image analysis; (3) to assist state and federal agencies, as well as
              Alaskan Native Corporations, in inventorying and monitoring activity on land
              (volcanic eruptions, forest fires, atmospheric pollutants, etc.) and sea (oil
              spills, ocean productivity, sea ice migration, etc.); and (4) provide
              expedient, real-time, and low-cost access to MODIS data to the private sector
              in order to encourage development and expansion of remote sensing industry in
              Alaska (capable of marketing, processing, and distributing satellite image
              information to their customers).

