Title       : Biocomplexity Incubation Activity: Human Actions and Land-Use/Land-Cover Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0083474

Award Number: 0083474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jefferson M. Fox foxj@ewc.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vinod K. Mishra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Walsh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald R. Rindfuss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ctr Cult&Tech Interchange
	      
	      Honolulu, HI  96801    /   -

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1366,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Researchers seeking to understand the complex dynamics between humans and their
              environment commonly have used census-type data that are gathered at the
              household level, aggregated these data up to some geographically defined
              administrative unit, and then linked these aggregated data with land-use and
              land-cover data gathered from remote sensors in satellites or airplanes.  In
              recent years, a number of projects have systematically sought to gather
              socioeconomic data at the household level as well as remotely sensed land-use
              and land-cover data.  These projects generally have been independent of each
              other, and there has not been a careful review of the methods being used to
              actually link data on people and pixels (the units of land as viewed by the
              remote sensors).  This Biocomplexity Incubation Award will support the conduct
              of a workshop to address both theoretical and practical issues involved in
              collecting and linking socioeconomic data from households and communities with
              remotely sensed data to study land-use and land-cover change.  This project
              will bring scientists from a number of these major projects discuss the
              methods, challenges, and opportunities currently facing researchers.  The
              workshop is expected to be held at the East-West Center in Honolulu, Hawaii, in
              mid- to late 2001.  Papers prepared by and discussions among participants at
              the workshop will be used to produce a publication that provides a
              state-of-the-art survey of methodology and issues for linking household-based
              socioeconomic data with remotely sensed land-use and land-cover data.  This
              project is designed not only to enhance the knowledge of the scientific
              community regarding the interaction between human and natural systems.  It also
              will provide decision makers with information and tools to enable them to
              better understand human impacts on land-use and land-cover change and to
              predict environmental responses to such changes.  Understanding these processes
              is critical if policy makers and planners are to create the conditions that
              promote environmentally sound and sustainable development.  More specifically,
              the proposed workshop will lead to a better understanding of methods of
              analyzing human impacts on land-use changes and of how these changes influence
              land cover over time.

