Title       : Optical Biosensor for Marine Microbial Process Studies: Development Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a0083193

Award Number: 0083193
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra Isern                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286774             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Kemp paul.kemp@stonybrook.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harbans S. Dhadwal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Josephine Y. Aller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0083193
Kemp
This technology development project will address how modern
              molecular techniques can provide new and fundamental insights into marine
              microbial communities and their activities.  Studies of microbial processes
              have lagged far behind the technological revolution in oceanography.  This
              project,  applying biosensor technology, will continue development of a
              prototype fiber-optic, nucleic acid hybridization biosensor for rapid,
              quantitative detection of the abundance and expression of targeted bacterial
              genes, and the activity of targeted organisms in a mixed microbial community.
              The biosensor is novel in its design, in its application to marine microbial
              process studies, and in the proposed use of RNA targets that provide a natural
              signal amplification to increase sensitivity. The mail objective is to develop
              a highly sensitive, flexible instrument that can be applied to a broad suite of
              ecological problems.  The components of the prototype system are relatively
              inexpensive, compact, and simple to operate. Procedures for extracting and
              purifying nucleic acids require ordinary laboratory skills and do not require
              any unusual equipment not already found in a typical molecular-biology
              laboratory.  It is intended that the proposed instrument and analytical
              procedures be broadly useful and eventually be automated such that the system
              would be useful for remote/moored and continuous underway monitoring of marine
              microbial processes.

