Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY: Mathematical and Biological Modeling of Cell Polarization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0083500

Award Number: 0083500
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1041073            (Estimated)
Investigator: Pablo A. Iglesias pi@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter N. Devreotes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1366      BIOCOMPLEXITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1271,1366,1518,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project integrates experimental research on the biochemical
              aspects governing chemotaxis in Dictyostelium discoideum with theoretical
              developments from control engineering and dynamical systems theory.  Chemotaxis
              - the ability to sense the direction of external chemical sources and respond
              by polarizing and migrating toward chemoattractants or away from
              chemorepellants - is crucial for proper functioning of single cell organisms,
              such as bacteria and amoebae, as well as multi-cellular systems.  In fact,
              chemotaxis occurs to some extent in almost every cell type at some time during
              its development. It is a major component of the inflammatory, and wound-healing
              responses, the mammalian reproductive systems (spermatozoa), the development of
              the nervous system as well as tumor metastasis. Despite of recent advances in
              the understanding of the biochemistry regulating chemotaxis in eukaryotic cells
              -specially of the slime mold D. discoideum, knowledge of the signaling network
              is far from complete.  Nevertheless, this signaling network serves as a
              particularly timely candidate for mathematical and computational modeling, as
              well as an ideal model organism for discovering how cells sense and respond to
              directional external stimuli. The introduction of control engineering and
              dynamical systems theory into this research is particularly appropriate as
              these fields focus on nonlinear phenomenon, particularly those involving
              feedback systems and thus provide a natural counterpoint to biochemical
              research.  Specifically, in this research we propose to 1) localize the
              signaling proteins in living cells undergoing chemotaxis; 2) account for the
              source and nature of signal amplification; 3) explore the mobility of signaling
              proteins during chemotaxis; 4) determine the roles that conflicting
              chemoattractants have on cell polarity; and 5) ascertain the robustness
              properties of this cell signaling mechanism. Our goal is to develop
              high-fidelity models of the regulatory network controlling eukaryotic
              chemotaxis.

Eukaryotic chemotaxis is a fascinating biological phenomenon.  A
              thorough understanding will represent a huge step forward in our knowledge of
              one of the basic properties of life, i.e. purposeful movement, and enable a
              logical approach to the treatment of many devastating human diseases that
              result when this process fails.  Moreover, the similarity of the chemotactic
              responses in mammalian cells to those of D. discoideum ensures that the
              proposed research will have far reaching impact beyond this organism.

