Title       : Biocomplexity Research: Agent-Based Models of Land Use Decisions and Emergent
               Land Use Patterns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0083511

Award Number: 0083511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2749232            (Estimated)
Investigator: Elinor Ostrom ostrom@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tom P. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vicky Meretsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome R. Busemeyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1333,1366,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this project is to explain long-term, complex change
              processes in human-bioecological systems-especially forested regions.  We will
              develop agent-based models to examine how land-use decisions made at one level
              (a household) affect outcomes at that level and at several higher and lower
              levels in a hierarchically nested set of systems.  We develop two agent-based
              models to explain land-use patterns in the frontier and post-frontier Midwest
              of the United States and the frontier of the Brazilian Amazon.  The first model
              will address two major puzzles: (1) Why did the descendants of the initial
              settlers in nineteenth-century Indiana cut down timber at such a massive and
              seemingly uneconomic rate that they eventually denuded the land, causing
              massive erosion and soil loss, and leading to substantial farm abandonment? and
              (2) Why have forests regrown so extensively on privately owned land when so
              many public policies are based on the assumption that fragmented, privately
              owned parcels are destined never to have significant forest regrowth?  The
              second model will explain the spatial and temporal patterns of deforestation in
              the Amazon over the last three decades.  The assumptions we make in the two
              models will be empirically tested and grounded by rigorous laboratory
              experiments.  The patterns of land use at any point in time and the processes
              of change also will be tested against a rich set of data derived from
              ground-truthed satellite data, aerial photographs, land surveys, census data,
              household interviews, forest mensuration undertaken in a sample of forest
              patches, and archival data regarding timber and agricultural prices, input
              costs, and land values.  After further development and testing, both models
              will be used to extrapolate into the future and assess how diverse public
              policies are likely to affect land use in general and forest change in
              particular in these regions.  The project will involve three important capstone
              activities: a Workshop on Agent-Based Models of Biocomplexity, a synthesis
              volume to be derived from the Workshop, and a Summer Institute.

The study
              will have multiple impacts.  By achieving an empirically validated
              understanding of land-use decisions of individual households under different
              policy regimes, the study will produce useful tools for evaluating alternative
              public policies.  Ascertaining how public inducements, taxation, and
              constraints affect rates of forest change contributes to the worldwide effort
              to find effective methods for stimulating reforestation and thereby
              sequestering carbon to offset carbon released into the atmosphere.  The study
              also addresses fundamental questions related to the appropriate model of human
              behavior to use when examining a combination of investment decisions in
              complex, dynamic environments.  Thus, the study is relevant for achieving an
              empirically validated foundation for an array of decision situations beyond
              those of land use and deforestation.  Tools from multiple social, biological,
              and physical science disciplines will be combined and expanded in unique ways
              and disseminated in publications, workshops, and training institutes.  This
              research activity was funded as part of the FY2000 Biocomplexity Special
              Competition.

