Title       : A Regional Framework for Interconnectivity of Coastal Ocean Observing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0083092

Award Number: 0083092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $729461             (Estimated)
Investigator: Madilyn M. Fletcher   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Dagg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Jay Grimes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George F. Crozier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert L. Windom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SURA
	      1200 New York Avenue NW
	      Washington, DC  20005    202/408-7872

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the need for improved connectivity among coastal
              observing systems by creating a regional framework for enhanced communication
              and sharing of coastal observation capacities.  Data will be made available to
              potential users via Internet.  The work involves the following states: Alabama,
              Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, and South Carolina.
Specific project
              objectives are:  
To conduct an inventory of southern regional marine
              laboratories to determine types of sustained observing systems in place or
              planned for the near term; information on accessibility data; mechanisms and
              infrastructure in place to share data; and special processing or modeling
              capabilities; 
To identify those monitored parameters that are common to
              laboratories covering a broad geographical range, which can be used to develop
              a regional analysis and/or predicting capability;
To create a connective
              framework among these key labs by providing critical infrastructure and
              implementing data processing steps necessary for sharing or consolidating
              data;
To identify significant gaps in monitored parameters and connectivity
              infrastructure, and to provide the necessary infrastructure and data processing
              steps to create a connective framework;
To incorporate from the outset a
              dialogue with potential users of data (e.g., researchers, resource managers,
              climatologists, public health officials, ship operators) to ensure that the
              framework is designed so that data are accessible and in a format;
To conduct
              one or more pilot projects that utilize common monitoring elements of multiple
              regional labs and demonstrate a regional framework for building and sharing
              coastal observing capacities; and
To ensure that this southeastern regional
              framework is compatible with the national and international vision of global
              ocean and coastal observation systems.

