Title       : Biocomplexity - Incubation Activity: Visualizing Dynamics Resulting from the
               Political Regulation of Time-Ecologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2001  
File        : a0083934

Award Number: 0083934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gus Koehler koehleg@ednet.cc.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Wohlmuth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Calif State Library Fndtn
	      Room 230 Library and Courts II
	      Sacramento, CA  942370001    /   -

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1366,1371,1608,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Built-in asynchronies between political process and regulated sectors or
              activities can produce unintended disruptions in rates of economic change and
              development undermining the original intent of the policy or regulatory action.
               Such events sometimes lead to unexpected future disruptions as well.  This
              incubation research sets out to investigate whether the concept of
              "time-ecology" combined with direct methods for visualizing government/industry
              interactions, complexity theory, and related computer-based simulation methods
              might yield a fruitful line of inquiry.

Successful global competition
              requires political leadership to continuously develop, adapt, and balance its
              public resources and regulatory activity to support the competitive advantage
              of its industries.  Regulations and public programs, by prescription and
              proscription or the provision of resources, limit the scope of decision making
              by business and other individuals in order to achieve public purposes. 
              Adaptive governance should guide this process based on an adequate
              understanding of industry development.  Knowledge of competitive resource
              patterns of the state and region now and into the near future also can guide
              development of appropriate public policy interventions.  These findings suggest
              that a policy approach is needed that adaptively ties the right mix of
              resources and regulatory activity to the timing of particular stages of
              economic development associated with a particular industry within a democratic
              context.  The catch is that the nonlinear nature of economics and politics
              during development transitions such as those associated with California's
              emerging new information economy are complex, sensitive to initial conditions,
              with both elements interacting across time in unknown ways.  This project will
              lay the groundwork for developing user friendly visualization and simulation
              tools for policy makers so that they can address such issues.  This incubation
              activity was funded as part of the FY2000 Biocomplexity Special Competition.

