Title       : Relating Field Data to Accelerated Life Testing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0083223

Award Number: 0083223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elsayed A. Elsayed elsayed@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Coit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project brings together two NSF I/UCRC's to improve accelerated life
              testing (ALT) of vehicle electronics.  The Center for Advanced Vehicle
              Electronics (CAVE) of Auburn University with partner with the Quality and
              Reliability Engineering (QRE) Center of Rutgers University and Arizona State
              University to investigate the relationship between wear, degradation and
              failure of vehicle controllers as experienced in the field with that expected
              by the results of ALT conducted in the laboratory.  DaimlerChrysler Electronics
              of Huntsville, Alabama supplies the test bed.  Vehicle electronics are subject
              to stress due to temperature, humidity, cycling and other environmental
              hazards.  The materials that comprise the controllers are susceptible to the
              effects of corrosion and oxidation.  The solder that connects the controller
              components can crack due to fatigue and creep under high temperature and
              thermal cycling stresses.  These failures affect the performance of the vehicle
              from slightly to severely.  The research of this project will develop a general
              methodology for specifying accelerated life tests so that they result in an
              accurate characterization of the degradation and failures that will be
              experienced in the filed.  The failure mechanisms for the assembly materials in
              field units will be investigated in the development of the accelerated life
              tests.  ALT standards, which new units must pass prior to marketing, will be
              adequate without being overly conservative, potentially allowing new designs
              and new materials to be used in vehicle electronics.
