Title       : Dynamics of an Invasive Non-Native Species and its Biological, Physical, and
               Human Impacts: Spartina Alterniflora on the Pacific Coast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  2000 
File        : a0083583

Award Number: 0083583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  2000   
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3799621            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan M. Hastings amhastings@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan L. Ustin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David F. Layton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald R. Strong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin D. Grosholz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1366      BIOCOMPLEXITY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1366,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Hastings, Alan M. , Susan L. Ustin, Edwin D. Grosholz, and Donald R.
              Strong

DEB 0083583

"Dynamics of an invasive non-native species and its
              biological, physical, and human impacts: Spartina alterniflora on the Pacific
              coast"

The PIs propose an integrative study of the dynamics of the invasive
              species, Spartina alterniflora (cordgrass), including a core
              mathematical/conceptual model, physical and biological feedbacks, and a study
              of the impacts on non-commercial human values.  The core model is termed a
              "local-state, regional-state" model and the crucial innovation is the use of
              discrete time and continuous states and explicit inclusion of stochastically
              based on integro-difference equations, yielding substantial mathematical and
              computational advantages over reaction diffusion models. The state of the
              invasion will be a function of position along the shore, tidal height, age of
              Spartina, and densities of other species or human valuations in the system, and
              time.  ENSO fluctuations, feedbacks, and non-reciprocal effects are included in
              the framework.  Hypotheses concerning the biological bases of positive
              feedbacks, Allee effects, and density dependence will be tested experimentally
              and results integrated into the model.

Parameterization will be from a rich
              set of historical records and from remotely-sense images, references with GPS. 
              Mixture analysis with data will inform the model of biochemical conditions of
              the cordgrass.  Experiments will give data on demography, clonal growth, seed
              set, tide flow profile, sediment erodability, and shear stress.  Sediment
              accretion will be quantified.  Intensively studied sites will be extrapolated
              to the entire estuary using NASA's ASTER sensor on the Terra satellite.  A map
              will be built of Pacific estuaries using daily MODIS satellite images.  Food
              web and community effects will be studies experimentally.  The ultimate faunal
              effects on the invasion will be measured in passerines and rallids.  These
              observations will be combined with the overall model to develop long term
              prediction of the impact of Spartina on birds.  Finally, these invasions are
              ideal for studying non-commercial values lost to the changes caused by Atlantic
              cordgrass.  Integrating the valuation with the model will provide one of the
              first rigorous studies of invasive species on the value of ecosystem
              services.


