Title       : Collaborative Research: Iron and Light Effects on Phaeocystis Antarctica
               Isolates from the Ross Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0230559

Award Number: 0230559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deneb Karentz                           
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140054             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter N. Sedwick psedwick@bbsr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bermuda Biol Sta Research
	      17 Biological Station
	      Ferry Reach, GE 01, BD      /   -

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The colonial prymnesiophyte Phaeocystis antarctica is a major bloom-forming alga
              in Antarctic shelf waters; where, alongside diatoms, it is considered a
              keystone species in its impact on regional biogeochemical cycling and ecosystem
              structure. Iron levels in these waters fall to values as low as ~0.1 nM during
              the mid to late summer, concentrations that are likely to limit the growth of
              phytoplankton, including P. antarctica. However, in contrast to diatoms, very
              little work has been conducted to examined the effects of iron, or the combined
              effects of iron and irradiance, on the growth, physiology and biochemical
              composition of P. antarctica. In this project, P. antarctica will be collected
              from the southern Ross Sea and grown in semi-continuous batch cultures for use
              in experiments at the University of Charleston to investigate the effects of
              iron availability and irradiance on the growth rate, cellular iron quota,
              buoyancy, biogenic sulfur production, pigment content, redox-protein
              expression, and photosynthetic efficiency of P. antarctica. 

 Phaeocystis
              antarctica is known to have a significant impact on the regional biogeochemical
              cycles of carbon, nutrient elements and sulfur in the Ross Sea, over timescales
              ranging from seasonal to interannual. This species may have also played a
              central role in the inferred basin- scale changes in biogeochemical cycles
              linked to glacial-interglacial climatic change. Thus it is important to develop
              a mechanistic understanding of the factors that control the growth, physiology
              and biochemical composition of P. antarctica, in order to better understand the
              biogeochemical ecology of the Ross Sea and the wider Southern Ocean, and the
              possible linkages with regional and global climate. Together with the results
              of recent and ongoing field and modeling studies, the information provided by
              these laboratory experiments will substantially improve our ability to predict
              how the Antarctic region will be affected by and modulate future climate
              change.
