Title       : Planning and Assessing Student Success in Mathematics - Gateway to STEM and
               Careers (PASS Math)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0230561

Award Number: 0230561
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249954             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha Haehl haehlm@pennvalley.cc.mo.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tim Chappell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sybil Chandler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Penn Valley Community Coll
	      3201 Southwest Trafficway
	      Kansas City, MO  641112764    816/759-1172

NSF Program : 1796      STEM Talent Expansn Pgm (STEP)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Planning and Assessing Student Success Mathematics Gateway to STEM Programs and
              Careers (PASS Math) focuses on reviewing and revising developmental and
              technical mathematics to increase a pool of students interested in science,
              engineering, math, and technical programs and capable of being successful in
              those areas at Penn Valley Community College (PVCC) and the Business Technology
              Center (BTC) of the Metropolitan Community Colleges (MCC) District of Kansas
              City, MO. An underlying assumption is that students' success in math increases
              when they relate math to other disciplines, engage in mathematics inquiry and
              problem solving, explore careers (particularly the STEM careers), and learn to
              communicate mathematically.

The PASS Math project is assessing previous
              projects in mathematics, planning new developmental math pilots, including
              self-paced options, and planning a developmental math program that is more
              effective in remediating math students and preparing them for college-level
              math courses as well as for STEM careers.

The intellectual merit of PASS
              Math is that efforts aim to create a significant increase in students
              transitioning from developmental mathematics to successful completion of
              college-level mathematics. Since mathematics is a significant barrier to
              completing associates and bachelors degrees, more students are in turn
              completing college degrees. By having students explore careers, particularly
              STEM careers, more students are ready, prepared, and interested in completing
              degrees in the required programs. 

The broader impact of PASS Math is that
              this model program can be disseminated to other community colleges in the
              country where almost 800,000 students are enrolled in developmental
              mathematics. A summative and formative evaluation provides data on successful
              activities.

Project objectives include: 
(a) Students who participate in
              developmental math pilot projects experience a 50% better success rate than
              developmental math students who do not participate in the pilots.
(b) 65% of
              students in developmental math pilots enroll in and successfully complete a
              college level math course.
(c) 10% of the students in the pilots progress to
              college-level math courses in a shorter period.
(d) 65% of minority students
              in developmental math pilots enroll in and successfully complete a college
              level-math course.
(e) 10% of the minority students in the pilots progress to
              college-level math courses in a shorter period.
(f) The number of students
              courses who enroll in STEM programs doubles.
(g) The number of minority
              students who enroll in STEM programs doubles.

