Title       : STI: Multi-Gbps TCP: Data Intensive Networks for Science & Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0230967

Award Number: 0230967
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1499967            (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Low slow@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Doyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julian J. Bunn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harvey B. Newman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1766      Strategic Tech for Internet
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The project will develop and deploy "Multi-Gbps TCP" to enable Terascale data
              transfers across shared networks for data intensive science and engineering.
              This builds on a foundation of several years of theoretical development and
              in-depth simulations at Caltech. The testing, optimization and deployment will
              be accomplished using the regional, national and transoceanic research and
              production networks available to (and in some cases co-managed and operated by)
              the Caltech High Energy Physics (HEP) group together with their partners in
              Abilene, DataTAG, the Starlight-CERN-SURFNet "wavelength triangle", TeraGrid,
              AMPATH, CANARIE, CalREN and Pacific Light Rail. Work with IETF, ISOC and GGF,
              and submission of appropriate RFCs and documents during the course of the
              project, will ensure that the new techniques developed are consistent
              extensions of existing standards, and available to the worldwide research
              community.

The goal of this project is to develop practical TCP and AQM
              (Active Queue Management) schemes, with loss recovery tuning, that maintain
              stability, high utilization and negligible loss and delay as the network
              increases in capacity, size, and load. We aim to validate and deploy these
              techniques on HEP networks, the TeraGrid and other US backbones including
              Abilene, ESnet, CalREN, and MREN.

It is well-known that the
              additive-increase-multiplicative-decrease strategy with which TCP probes
              available capacity performs poorly at large window sizes due to serious dynamic
              and equilibrium problems.  These problems must be solved to scale TCP to the
              high bandwidth regime. The proponents have developed a mathematical theory that
              provides a fundamental understanding of the current protocols and exposes their
              stability problems in high latency, high capacity environments and derived a
              new class of TCP / AQM algorithms that solve these problems. The central thrust
              of this work is to compensate for delay, capacity, and routing using the
              correct scaling. Fortunately, the network structure is such that there is
              sufficient information to allow the right scaling to be applied in a
              distributed and decentralized manner, while remaining compliant with the
              current protocol. These new algorithms, with TCP recovery tuning, will
              automatically rescale the parameters so as to maintain stability and optimize
              performance as capacity, delay, routing or loads change.

In simulation the
              new algorithms in ns-2 and have achieved 98% utilization with an equilibrium
              queue of less than 100 packets (0.08 ms queuing delay). In this project, we
              will implement and demonstrate these algorithms in the global HEP research and
              production networks. In addition, work will occur with both with the standards
              bodies to help drive emerging standards, and with Grid software developers to
              deploy them.

The project will leverage the theoretical work on TCP/AQM of
              Low and Doyle, the leadership and experience of Bunn and Newman in the
              development and operation of the international network for HEP (and the broader
              scientific community) over the last 20 years, and the extensive infrastructure
              of HEP networks to make a quick impact. The project's success will not only
              benefit directly the HEP community, but will influence research methods in
              several fields, by enabling the effective use of Grids, globally distributed
              Terascale computing, and distributed Petascale databases for the first
              time.

NSF recognizes that transfers of data files of 1018 bytes (exabytes)
              is important. This project addresses the issue of how to do this in real
              operations.
