Title       : Collaborative Research: An Integrated Assessment of the Pan-Arctic Freshwater
               System: Analysis of Retrospective and Contemporary Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0230243

Award Number: 0230243
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1222391            (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. Vorosmarty charles.vorosmarty@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ernst Linder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steve Frolking  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Fahnestock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Lammers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1079,5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is a synthesis and integration study of the pan-Arctic water
              cycle. An Expanded Arctic Regional Integrated Monitoring System (E-RIMS) will
              be developed that links an existing, operational hydrological monitoring system
              for the pan-Arctic landmass and atmosphere (Arctic-RIMS) to an Arctic Ocean and
              sea ice component. On the terrestrial side, E-RIMS will produce time varying
              aerological and land surface water budgets including river and ice melt inputs
              to the Arctic Ocean. For the ocean, freshwater fluxes from the atmosphere and
              land will be used in concert with observed mass, heat and momentum forcing to
              drive a coupled ocean-sea ice-atmosphere model.  The linked models will be used
              to examine the origin of freshwater fluxes in the atmosphere and landmass and
              how water is then partitioned between solid (sea ice) and liquid forms in the
              ocean. E-RIMS will also track freshwater transport off the shelf, downward
              below the mixed layer, and laterally toward the straits leading to the North
              Atlantic Ocean. 
  
The near real-time monitoring program and historical
              analysis (from 1960) provides an important benchmark for understanding future
              change to the arctic hydrologic cycle. In keeping with current Arctic-RIMS
              protocols, provisional data sets (ca. 1-2 month delay) will be made available
              and then re-analyzed at yearly intervals for improved quality assurance. All
              key elements of the terrestrial and ocean water balance will be provided,
              including an assessment of potential error. Operational data sets will be
              freely accessible on partner institution web sites and through NSIDC.
              

E-RIMS will complement efforts by other investigators using more fully
              coupled air-land-ocean models, by providing to them initial and boundary
              conditions and by carrying-out a set of preliminary numerical experiments to
              help design their more computationally expensive feedback studies. As a final
              part of this work, NWP predictions and medium-term forecasts will be used to
              explore how much skill will have been developed over the course of this
              study.


