Title       : Data Intensive GRID Benchmarks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0230925

Award Number: 0230925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $749999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chaitanya K. Baru baru@sdsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan Snavely  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henri Casanova  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1766      Strategic Tech for Internet
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9150,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Efficient development and deployment of Grids will be advanced by defining a
              suite of benchmark to measure expected quality-of-service for Grid
              architectures and anticipated time-to-solution of Grid applications. In
              particular, the benchmarks to focus on the impact of alternative middleware
              implementations on application performance are needed. 

The outcomes of the
              project will be:
(1) A set of low-level benchmark probes for measuring the
              performance of Grid infrastructure and the overheads of Grid middleware.
(2) A
              synthetic applications benchmark suite embodying anticipated Grid usage
              scenarios of several emerging data intensive Grid applications.
(3)
              Applications profiling tools that can summarize the resource usage patterns of
              Grid applications, and thus inform the refinement of an evolving synthetic
              benchmark as production applications mature.
(4) A maintained website of
              performance data where Grid users can obtain benchmarks, view results reported
              by this group and others, and submit their own new results.
(5) Enabled
              research (some as part of this proposal, but also by the wider community) into
              factor affecting Grid performance.

As Grids emerge, it is important to
              deploy measurement methods along with them so that applications and
              architectures can evolve guided by scientific principles. All sciences need
              agreed upon metrics-a common language for communicating results. And a system,
              to be well engineered, must be measured so that alternative implementations can
              be compared quantitatively. Also, users of systems need performance objectives
              that describe system capabilities so that they can develop and tune their
              applications towards informed objectives. And system architects need examples
              of how the users will exercise the system to inform the design process.
              Benchmarks are thus an important part of the middleware for Grids, enabling
              communication about technological advances and design tradeoffs. The proposed
              work will develop a suite of data intensive Grid benchmarks to convey
              information back and forth between people building Grids and people planning to
              use them. 

The data-intensive applications form a class of problems requires
              access to multiple data archives remote from their computational resources.
              They belong on the Grid because they are already distributed (as opposed to
              traditional HPC applications that may or may not scale well to Grids).  A
              benchmark suite to embody the resource requirements of these emerging
              applications is needed to help Grid architects understand how applications will
              stress infrastructure and middleware, and give users an early look at the
              quality-of-service they can expect for their applications.

