Title       : Digital Tutorial for Sandstone Petrography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a0230578

Award Number: 0230578
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302629             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kitty L. Milliken kittym@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Earle F. McBride  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
A demonstration version of an interactive digital tutorial in sandstone
              petrology was developed
and tested during a one-year proof-of-concept project.
              The current tutorial is a collection of over 
petrographic images of sandstone
              components in which mapped regions respond to active inquiry (by mouse clicks)
              to reveal identification and conceptual information. Organized around the Folk
              sandstone classification, the image collection addresses both provenance and
              diagenesis and serves to supplement, and even partially replace, traditional
              laboratory exercises. Formal educational assessment of the tutorial was
              undertaken at the University of Texas at Austin during two semesters of GEO
              416M, Sedimentary Rocks. The attitudes and attainments of undergraduate
              sedimentary petrology students who did and did not utilize the demonstration
              version as a required resource in their laboratory exercises show that students
              respond extremely well to this style of learning. Assessment results support
              the soundness of the educational
approach and also indicate some clear
              directions for future development. This full development project is doubling
              the size of the image collection to greater than 600 images and associated text
              as well as adding substantial new elements in response to student experiences
              with the demonstration version. Assessment activities are continuing at the
              University of Texas and at four other universities. The digital sandstone
              tutorial is providing a well-balanced treatment of the principal petrographic
              characteristics of major sandstone components and the major sandstone types
              (and also examples of shales). The tutorial also includes self-assessment and
              skill modules that help students learn how to identify minerals, estimate the
              percentage of components, and texture. Publication through a non-profit
              organization makes this large collection of well-organized and intensely
              annotated sandstone images readily available to universities and individual
              students, including those that do not currently have access to petrographic
              thin section collections and petrographic expertise. The educational approach
              developed and demonstrated in this project can be applied to any natural
              science discipline that utilizes visual data.

