Title       : Engineering Informatics, An Integrated Approach Toward Analysis and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0230734

Award Number: 0230734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Pezeshki pezeshki@mme.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. Grant Norton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230734
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Pezeshki, Charles
INSTITUTION
              NAME: Washington State University
TITLE: Engineering Informatics, An
              Integrated Approach Toward Analysis and Design

Abstract

This proposal
              describes an approach to implement a mechanical and materials 
engineering
              informatics. environment for education, integrating the diverse disciplines
              
present in the field of mechanics, materials, heat transfer, thermodynamics,
              fluid 
mechanics, dynamics, and control systems around a common set of
              problems and design 
issues centered on MEMS technology. 

In order to
              implement this curriculum overhaul, planning monies are requested for four
              
essential thrusts. These are: 
	Identifying key software that can be used
              with current coursework that will 
facilitate understanding of fundamental
              physical phenomena. 
	Training  faculty  in  the  use  of  that  software  so 
              that  all  faculty  have  a  baseline competence with current engineering tools
              in their discipline. 
	 Developing a set of canonical examples for each
              discipline that are easy-to-use, 
error-free, appropriate for visualizing the
              desired physical principle, have some 
ability to be modified parametrically
              for use in design studies, and also have some 
degree of hierarchical
              parentage so that they can be used for  ABET  evaluation 
purposes. 
        
                     Developing a database, accessible over the  Internet, for use in our
              distance 
education program that enables students in both our main campus and
              branch 
campus environments  to complete examples and share results with both
              
professors and fellow students. 

Implementation  of  such  a  curriculum 
              change would  enable  the  university  to  mimic  the most sophisticated
              design/build processes present in industry today at minimal cost, the
              university equivalent of  the .paperless airplane.. Further, it is the
              environment that our students will be practicing in as sophisticated software
              becomes ubiquitous in the next ten years. 

