Title       : STI: Development of Shared-Network Protocols and Strategies for e-VLBI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0230759

Award Number: 0230759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory E Monaco                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1100000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan R. Whitney awhitney@haystack.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Wroclawski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1766      Strategic Tech for Internet
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Very-Long-Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) is one of the most powerful techniques
              available for the high-resolution imaging of distant radio sources in the
              universe and for making accurate measurements of the motion of the earth in
              space. Multiple radiotelescopes scattered over the surface of the earth
              simultaneously record data from a radio source at streaming data rates as high
              as 1 Gbps for a 24-hour period; the data are then shipped to a central
              processing site for correlation analysis. Because the signal-to-noise ratio
              achieved by VLBI increases with the bandwidth of the observations, there has
              been a continual effort to increase the captured data rate. The advent of
              modern high-speed networks offers the possibility to transport VLBI data
              electronically with much higher data rates and lower costs to maximize the
              scientific potential of the observations.  The electronic transmission of VLBI
              data (dubbed e-VLBI), however, presents a special challenge to the use of
              high-speed global networks. 

New protocols and strategies must be developed
              so that these applications become efficient high-bandwidth 'background' users,
              while not significantly impacting other normal network traffic. Because many
              high-speed networks, such as Abilene, are not heavily loaded on an average
              basis, there is considerable potential for applications of this class to
              productively use background capacity, promoting better science for fewer
              dollars. MIT Haystack Observatory, working jointly with the MIT Laboratory for
              Computer Science and MIT Lincoln Laboratory, proposes to undertake the
              following tasks to realize this potential: 

1.	Develop and test network
              protocols and algorithms that take advantage of the special characteristics of
              real-time scientific instrumentation applications to utilize low-priority
              bandwidth that is available in fair abundance on many networks. 
2.	Develop a
              system that can be deployed widely at low cost, that can be easily updated as
              algorithms improve, and that can track technology evolution to gain higher
              performance over time. 
3.	Disseminate the work to a broader community. 

