Title       : ASU Engineering and Education: DET Expansion for K-12 Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0230726

Award Number: 0230726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98375              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter E. Crouch peter.crouch@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah Hudelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Krause  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Middleton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary R. Anderson-Rowland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230726
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Crouch, Peter
INSTITUTION NAME:
              Arizona State University
TITLE: ASU Engineering and Education: DET Expansion
              for K-12 Teachers


ABSTRACT

The purpose of this study is to position the
              College Engineering and Applied
Sciences and the College of Education at
              Arizona State University for successful infusion
of
              Design/Engineering/Technology (DET) concepts throughout the complete range
              of
teacher education experiences, including pre-service and post-baccalaureate
              programs.
The project is led by the College of Engineering but includes the
              full participation of the
College of Education. A team of faculty and
              administrators from both colleges will
explore ways in which DET can be
              infused into all aspects of teacher education and
ultimately used to anchor
              instruction in science and math education. Part of the team will
design and
              teach a pilot course that will be used as a tool to conduct research and
              collect
the data needed to inform both engineering and education faculty on
              best ways of
incorporating DET concepts.

The goals of the project include
              1) identifying curricular and pedagogical needs of
teachers and university
              faculty for implementing DET, 2) developing a DET-based pilot
course as a
              research tool for exploring DET in the curriculum, 3) crafting a set
              of
recommendations for a comprehensive implementation of DET in teacher
              education, 4)
developing models for the appropriate points in the professional
              development sequence
for DET, 5) determining the effectiveness of the pilot on
              instructional practices,
curricular choices and student understanding of DET
              and engineering careers, and 5)
developing models that extend DET to
              pre-service education through methods classes
and general education
              courses.

The intellectual merits of this planning grant include a
              re-conceptualizing part of
the science and mathematics component of teacher
              education and bringing technological
design, as addressed in the standards, to
              the forefront of k-12 science and mathematics
instruction. 

