Title       : Renewal of Core Engineering at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0230671

Award Number: 0230671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99112              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin C. Craig craigk@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Bunk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry Sneck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230671
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Craig, Kevin
INSTITUTION NAME:
              Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
TITLE: Renewal of Core Engineering at
              Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Abstract

The thesis of this grant to
              Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute is that before a person becomes a mechanical
              engineer, an electrical engineer, or an engineer in any specialized area, one
              must first "become an engineer!" To identify the physics, mathematics, science,
              and engineering topics that constitute a "fundamental body of knowledge"
              applicable to the education of all engineering students.


The goals of this
              project are:
	To structure these topics into a set of courses which are
              pedagogically sound.
To develop an extended course description for each course
              containing learning objectives and assessment methods of student learning and
              course effectiveness.
	To develop methods to assure student learning levels of
              competency and retention of knowledge.
To develop a system of assessment which
              is competency-based and requires students to demonstrate mastery of unit
              objectives as defined in the extended course description.
	To introduce and
              develop appropriate use of computing tools throughout the Core
Engineering
              Program.
	To create an atmosphere of professionalism in student work and study
              habits and prepare students for licensure as professional engineers and entry
              into the engineering profession.
To create a document describing the plan for
              implementation of the above goals.
	To plan and begin to implement the Core
              Engineering organizational structure.
	To construct a faculty development plan
              that prepares them to teach the integrated Core Engineering program.

