Title       : Radiometric Dating of the Rocky Mountain Foreland Thrust Belt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0230055

Award Number: 0230055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210769             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ben A. van der Pluijm vdpluijm@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chris M. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Whereas direct dating of ductile shear zones is increasingly available through
              the
application of U/Pb, Ar mineral dating and other isotopic techniques,
              radiometric dating
of shallow faulting in the crust's brittle regime has
              remained difficult, because the low
temperatures typical of these faults
              prevent complete syntectonic recrystallization or
resetting achieved in deeper
              faults. Clay-bearing fault rocks are common in many fault
zones, but these
              rocks typically preserve both primary (detrital) and newly-grown
(authigenic),
              fine-grained phyllosilicates. Radiometric ages of these fault zones
therefore
              reflect a mixture of both mineral populations, while we are only interested
              in
the age of the newly-grown phase to date faulting. A second problem
              associated with
dating clay minerals involves the loss of 39Ar during neutron
              irradiation, which can
produce erroneously old ages. Using characterization of
              the detrital clay fraction in
samples using X-ray modeling of grain size
              populations and sample encapsulation for
dating, the PI's have developed and
              tested a reliable geochronologic method to date near-surface faulting. The
              feasibility of their approach was illustrated by dating ~52 Ma fault gouge from
              the most frontal thrust (Lewis Thrust) of the southern Canadian Rockies. The
              Pi's propose a application of their dating method to a geologically important
              region of western North America, the Rocky Mountains, that has both regional
              tectonic significance as well as fundamental thrust belt implications.
              Preliminary results from other faults demonstrate the feasibility of the
              project and indicate several exciting implications for regional geology and
              basic structural geology. The proposed research will be conducted by two PIs
              who combine the needed structural, mineralogic and isotopic expertise, and a
              PhD student who will complete the work as part of his dissertation. The X-ray,
              electron microscopy and Ar facilities are all available at the University of
              Michigan. 
