Title       : STI: A Next Generation Integrated Environment for Collaborative Work Across
               Advanced Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0230937

Award Number: 0230937
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey B. Newman newman@hep.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1766      Strategic Tech for Internet
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The developing, building and deploying of VRVS2, a unique, globally scalable
              next-generation system for real-time collaboration by small workgroups, medium
              and large teams engaged in research, education and outreach, over an ensemble
              of national and international networks is proposed. The collaboration system
              builds on the existing limited-scale prototype-production system serving the
              high energy and nuclear physics (HENP) community and some other data-intensive
              science and engineering sectors.  The primary goals of this proposal are to
              extend the VRVS technology to provide the software infrastructure and
              Web-enabled user interfaces required to meet the research and education needs
              of many fields. VRVS2 will be global in scope, covering the full range of
              existing and emerging protocols and client devices for daily collaboration,
              from mobile devices to desktops to installations in large auditoria. It will be
              integrated with the Grid-enabled Analysis Environment (GAE) now under
              development at Caltech in partnership with the GriPhyN, iVDGL and PPDG projects
              in the US, and the DataGrid, DataTAG, Cross Grid projects in Europe. The
              current VRVS system has been chosen by the Internet2 Digital Video (I2-DV)
              Initiative as a preferred foundation for the development of advanced video,
              audio and multimedia collaborative applications by the Internet2 community of
              US Research and Education schools and labs.
 
The VRVS2 project will create a
              "testbed video network" and develop the necessary middleware to support a set
              of new and essential requirements for rapid data exchange, and a high level of
              interactivity in large-scale scientific collaborations including support for
              emerging standards.  The new design, based on a pure peer-to-peer architecture,
              will facilitate the monitoring functions as well as provide a high degree of
              reliability and scalability.  Each VRVS network server, which handles the
              real-time traffic, will be independent, self-managed by internal monitoring
              agents, and will interact only with its peer reflector nodes. The architecture
              will be fully redundant, with automatic re-routing of packet streams in case
              one reflector fails, including automatic bandwidth and QoS monitoring 
              (latency, packet loss, and jitter) between reflectors, in order to assure the
              best possible connectivity for real time communication.  A modular and scalable
              architecture based on web services to provide advanced monitoring and tracking
              tools that support a very large number of conferences and users will be used. 
              Networking agents that run on the desktop or at the computer center will allow
              any videoconferencing client from a protected site with a firewall and/or NAT
              to communicate with any other client in a public or private remote location.
              Authentication and optional encryption will be added to maintain
              confidentiality of inter-personal communications.  
 
NSF is funding this in
              the belief that the VRVS2 project may have a profound impact on education, as
              well as research.
