Title       : Dayside Auroral Imaging at South Pole
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0230428

Award Number: 0230428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vladimir Papitashvili                   
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296436             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen B. Mende mende@ssl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harald Frey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5115      ANTARCTIC AERONOMY & ASTROPHYS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is to operate two ground-based imagers at South Pole station and
              combine their observations with simultaneous global auroral observations by the
              IMAGE spacecraft investigating temporal and spatial effects in the ionosphere
              from the reconnection processes at the magnetopause. The location of South Pole
              has advantages for auroral imaging because the continuous darkness over the
              winter months allows 24 hours optical observations and the ideal magnetic
              latitude permits observation of the dayside aurora. The reconnection (merging)
              region of the magnetosphere provides the most significant entry point for solar
              wind plasma. It is now widely accepted that the dayside region contains the
              footprint of field lines that participate in reconnection processes with the
              interplanetary field. Although there is quite a body of literature about the
              auroral footprints of the dayside reconnection region from ground based
              observations, it has not been possible to relate those results to simultaneous
              global auroral images. Global observations of proton auroras from the IMAGE
              spacecraft provided direct images of the footprint of the reconnection region
              showing that reconnection occurs continuously and that the spatial distribution
              of the precipitation follows the theoretically predicted behavior as a function
              of the interplanetary field. The apogee of the IMAGE spacecraft orbit is slowly
              drifting south and in the time frame of this project (austral winter of 2004),
              IMAGE apogee will be over the Southern hemisphere. Thus, it will be possible to
              obtain simultaneous global images of the aurora by IMAGE and of the high
              latitude dayside region by two ground-based imagers (electron and protons
              auroras) at South Pole Station. The main project goal is to capitalize on this
              unique opportunity and use the IMAGE satellite as the "telescope" and the
              ground-based imagers as the "microscope" for these observations. In summary,
              the proposed project will use new opportunities provided by IMAGE and the South
              Pole proton-electron data answering several key questions for better
              understanding of substorms and related phenomena. Understanding the Earth's
              electromagnetic environment is one of the key requirements to predict space
              weather and to understand how geoactive magnetic storms are. The project will
              continue the involvement of students in every phase of the program, which
              appears to be a good encouragement for some to start a career in upper
              atmospheric research.
