Title       : Science and Mathematics Authentic Inquiry-Based Teaching: Project SMART for K-12
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0230535

Award Number: 0230535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anant R. Kukreti Anant.Kukreti@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel B. Oerther  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thaddeus W. Fowler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine Maltbie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230535
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Kukreti, Anant
INSTITUTION NAME:
              University of Cincinnati Main Campus
TITLE: Science and Mathematics Authentic
              inquiRy-based Teaching: Project SMART for K-12


ABSTRACT

Project SMART
              partners engineering and education faculty members with K-12 educators
              to
empower high school students to successfully complete college.. Project
              SMART recognizes that effective student education requires authentic,
              inquiry-based learning. By solving open-ended problems based upon real world
              examples, students will link the relevance of their education with their daily
              lives and appreciate
the intrinsic and tangible values of science and
              mathematics in modern society. The five goals of Project
SMART
              include:

	Improving science and mathematics achievement of ALL students,
              consistent with our overarching
goal ioTo Leave No Child Behind.l_
	Training
              secondary science and mathematics educators to incorporate authentic,
              inquiry-based
education into current secondary science and mathematics
              curricula.
	Attracting secondary school students to engineering; enhancing the
              perception of career opportunities in engineering; and improving students SMET
              related skills to become successful engineers.
	Instilling an awareness of the
              importance of learning science and mathematics skills in K-6
administrators,
              teachers, parents, and students.
	Increasing the quantity and quality of
              gender and ethnic student diversity in SMET related courses.

The partners 
              form a unique alliance among engineering and education faculty of the
              University of
Cincinnati (UC), the Southwest Ohio section of High Schools That
              Work (HSTW), and the Greater
Cincinnati Tech. Prep. 

For this planning
              proposal, we have presented our preliminary thoughts on the main elements
              envisioned
for Project SMART, including: 1) teacher professional development;
              2) educational resources for
teachers; 3) student programs: out of the
              classroom and into the world of science and mathematics; 4) pre-
engineering
              program for high school students; and 5) evaluation, assessment and
              improvement. In
particular, we have proposed special programs specifically
              targeting traditionally underrepresented groups
in SMET related fields
              including ethnic minorities and girls. In addition, we have presented our views
              on
ininstructional theorylu which will form the context for the planning and
              development of these elements.
The Project Committee believes that the
              implementation of Project SMART in the microcosm of
Cincinnati is transferable
              to other school districts struggling with similar education problems. During
              the
last century, Ohio lead the nation as a strong manufacturing state. Now,
              we must change our educational
style to keep up with society's technological
              demands. Project SMART is envisioned to transform the
lives of students it
              touches by tearing down barriers to high paying jobs and creating informed
              citizens.

