Title       : Microscopic and Macroscopic Perspective in Mechanical Engineering: Technology
               Enhanced Learning and Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0230688

Award Number: 0230688
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87538              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Mendelsohn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vish V. Subramaniam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230688
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Mendelsohn, Daniel
INSTITUTION
              NAME: Ohio State University Research Foundation
TITLE: Microscopic and
              Macroscopic Perspective in Mechanical Engineering: Technology Enhanced Learning
              and Integration

Abstract

This grant discusses plans to reform the
              undergraduate Mechanical Engineering (ME) educational experience at The Ohio
              State University (OSU). This is necessary in order to prepare future mechanical
              engineers to solve problems in emerging technologies such as
              micro/nanotechnology and biotechnology.

The proposed reforms will be focused
              around four major tasks. (1) The first task is the introduction of emerging
              knowledge of multi-scale, multi-physics and non-linear phenomena in the areas
              of the curriculum where it is not already taken into account appropriately. For
              example this includes address topics such as 
problems which cover a wide
              range of time and/or length (nano-, micro-, nano-) scales, and  coupled
              phenomena, such as the coupled elastic and electric response in the
              piezo-electric effect. The understanding of these non-traditional phenomena and
              the associated analytical and experimental tools necessary to reach that
              understanding are becoming increasingly important in the emerging technologies
              of today, in particular in microelectronics, MEMS, nanotechnology and
              bioengineering. The second task concerns the elimination and/or reduction of
              emphasis on certain classes of problems, illustrative examples and solution
              techniques which predate, and are largely made irrelevant by, the existence of
              powerful new computational and visualization environments. The third task is to
              replace these legacy materials with problems and examples and techniques which
              exploit the modern computational environment, and are used to illustrate basic
              concepts in a more dynamic and illustrative way than they were before; this
              will necessarily train the students in at least one of a variety of available
              computational and visualization environments. The fourth task is to explore and
              take advantage of some of the more modern teaching methods, such as active
              learning, multiple representation, multimedia presentation, web-based
              materials, and mentoring.

