Title       : Automation of Whole House Construction Using Contour Crafting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0230398

Award Number: 0230398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Behrokh Khoshnevis khoshnev@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yan Xiao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,1624,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Conventional methods of manufacturing automation do not lend themselves to
              construction of large structures with internal features. This explains why the
              evolution of construction automation has been slow. A promising new automation
              approach is layered fabrication, generally known as solid free form fabrication
              or rapid prototyping, which uses an additive method and is capable of creating
              complex internal features. However, most of the current layered fabrication
              methods are limited by their ability to deliver a wide variety of materials
              applicable to construction. Additionally, they are severely constrained by the
              low rates of material deposition which makes them attractive only for the
              fabrication of small industrial parts. 

This project addresses a novel
              construction automation approach using a layered fabrication process called
              Contour Crafting (CC) which has been developed at the University of Southern
              California. The process aims at automated construction of whole houses as well
              as sub-components. Using this process, a single house or a colony of houses,
              each with possibly a different design, may be automatically constructed in a
              single run. 

The specific focus of the PIs' research plan is to extend their
              current research activities, which have so far concentrated on small scale
              parts, to build and test full-scale sections of houses using proper
              construction materials, and to investigate other pertinent scalability issues.
              Towards realizing these objectives, the PIs aim at conducting activities
              pertaining to: (a) development of crucial machine elements for construction of
              segments of full-scale houses, (b) software and control issues, and (c)
              experimentation, testing and analysis of constructed structures. It is
              anticipated that the research results will be also extendable to construction
              on other planets, and to the field of ceramic arts.



