Title       : Teaching Non-Linear Structural Behavior with a Physics Engine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0230573

Award Number: 0230573
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57923              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk A. Martini martini@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Our project addresses the issue of teaching the behavior of structural systems
              to undergraduate and graduate students in engineering and architecture.
              Understanding modes of failure and collapse is essential for structural
              designers, yet the computer programs most common in undergraduate education use
              linear elastic analysis which does not model non-linear failure phenomena such
              as yielding, large displacements, or buckling. As a result, student intuition
              and judgment are strongly shaped by linear elastic theory, so students gain
              little insight into these types of failure modes and other non-linear
              phenomena. Our project improves structural engineering education by instilling
              in students a much stronger understanding of non-linear behavior. Our project
              involves the development of a computer program that can perform interactive,
              real time, analysis and animation of structural response, including yielding,
              large displacements, contact phenomena, and buckling. Our computer program is
              accompanied by an exercise manual with example problems and input files
              organized as topic modules that can be integrated into existing courses. The
              software and manual is being tested in courses in the departments of
              architecture and civil engineering at the University of Virginia. Our formative
              and summative evaluation is being done via student surveys and analysis of
              student work using methods developed in collaboration with University of
              Virginia's Teaching Resource Center. Dissemination of our will is being done
              via our web site as well as by papers at national conferences. 
