Title       : Preparing Mathematicians to Educate Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0230847

Award Number: 0230847
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2998135            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan C. Tucker   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence C. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard L. Madison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Dubinsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Math Assn of America
	      1529 18th St NW
	      Washington, DC  200361358    202/387-5200

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This is a multifaceted initiative by the Mathematical Association of
              America to strengthen the mathematical education of teachers, responding to the
              growing list of national reports that call for better preparation of the
              nation's mathematics teachers. These reports and their recommendations come at
              a time of growing interest among college and university mathematicians to do
              more to contribute to improved elementary and secondary school mathematics
              teaching.  Many college faculty need assistance with appropriate instructional
              strategies to help future K-12 teachers connect their college mathematics to
              K-12 mathematics. Further, college faculty need better information about the
              mathematical issues that arise in day- to-day K-12 classroom lessons. This
              initiative nurtures and supports a growing connection between college faculty
              and K-12 teachers by providing educational, organizational, and financial
              assistance to mathematical scientists with specific interest in teacher
              education.  Numerous connections and collaborations with other mathematical
              science organizations and projects are being pursued and developed to enhance
              the initiative.
     This initiative also assists efforts by mathematicians to
              run professional development programs for practicing teachers. It takes a
              broad, systemic approach to improving the preparation of K-12 mathematics
              teachers, commensurate with the major, long-term impact that is sought on
              mathematicians and the mathematical education of teachers. The initiative
              targets more than just the mathematics faculty who teach courses in the
              foundations of elementary or secondary school mathematics, because future
              teachers are strongly influenced by other courses they take in mathematics. 
 
                 The Preparing Mathematicians to Education Teachers (PMET) initiative has
              four components: 
1. Faculty Training: a series of workshops, from one to four
              weeks, spread over two summers with intervening academic year projects; and
              mini-courses of 3-8 hours in length; 
2. Information and Resources: articles
              in professional journals, panels at professional meetings, multi-media
              websites, and hard-copy material dissemination to support faculty instruction
              for teachers; 
3. Mini-grants: support for grassroots innovation in teacher
              education at individual campuses; and 
4. Regional Networks: coordination of
              efforts at individual institutions

