Title       : Curriculum, Program, and Infrastructure Development for Bachelor of Science in
               Optical Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0230150

Award Number: 0230150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marek Osinski osinski@chtm.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne L. Madsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur H. Guenther  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sudhakar Prasad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine B. McCormick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230150
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Osinski, Marek
INSTITUTION NAME:
              University of New Mexico
TITLE: Curriculum, Program, and Infrastructure
              Development for Bachelor of Science in Optical Science and Engineering
NSF
              RECEIVED DATE: 06/03/2002

ABSTRACT

The faculty of the Department of
              Electrical and Computer Engineering (EECE) in the School of Engineering,
              the
Department of Physics and Astronomy in the College of Arts and Sciences,
              the Department of Educational
Specialties in the College of Arts and Science,
              and the Department of Individual, Family, and Community Education
in the
              College of Education at the University of New Mexico (UNM) propose to jointly
              develop a comprehensive
plan for a new B.S. degree in Optical Science and
              Engineering, with emphasis on education in the field of
photonics, accompanied
              by teacher training and enhancement of K-12 optics education initially at the
              high- and
middle-school levels, and eventually reaching down to the elementary
              school level in the implementation stage of
this program. The program will
              also have an important objective of supporting optically enabled aspects
              of
microsystems, nanoscience, and other emerging fields. Specifically, the
              plan will incorporate development of a new
college degree curriculum,
              proposing creation of new laboratories, development of courses training K-12
              teachers in
optical science and engineering, creation of outreach programs,
              identification and activation of sources of support
for minority students, and
              involvement of local and national industry and government
              laboratories.

Through the incorporation of current pedagogical learning
              theories concerning instructional design and
assessment, the proposed new
              degree curriculum will support a new model that will be available for use by
              other
engineering programs at UNM's School of Engineering and nationwide. Most
              importantly, the proposed degree will
bridge the last remaining gap in the
              unique hierarchy of photonics educational programs in New Mexico, starting with
              the Photonics Academy at West Mesa High School supported by the Sandia National
              Laboratories that feeds into the Photonics Technology Associate Degree program
              at the Albuquerque Technical Vocational Institute, and ending with the M.S. and
              Ph.D. programs in Optical Science and Engineering offered at UNM. The
              comprehensive line-up of educational and career options in optics and photonics
              that would be enabled by the proposed B.S. degree will permit New Mexico
              industry to fill its photonics-centered positions at all levels, from the
              technician to the advanced researcher, from a workforce trained locally. The
              proposed degree will, more generally, help meet the emerging workforce and
              educational needs of the entire US industry.

The main goal of the proposed
              program is to create a unique and highly desired cadre of optics personnel
              who,
because of their broad, advanced, interdisciplinary, and industrially
              relevant education and training, will be able to
lead the State of New Mexico
              and the Nation into the optics- and photonics-engaged 21 st century.


