Title       : An Apatite/Zircon (U-th)/He Thermochronometric Study of the Rapid Tectonic
               Denudation of an Oblique Crustal Section-Southern Sierra Nevada, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  2002   
File        : a0230383

Award Number: 0230383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254708             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason B. Saleeby jason@gps.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth A. Farley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY
The PI's propose to produce a series of (U-The)/He apatite and
              zircon thermochronologic profiles in the southernmost Sierra Nevada region as a
              test of the very rapid tectonic denudation of the Sierran batholithic rocks by
              low-angle detachment faulting in latest Cretaceous-early Paleogene time. This
              phase of denudation exposed an oblique crustal section through the southernmost
              Sierra Nevada batholith to a paleodepth of ~35 km. Apatite He studies in the
              greater Sierra Nevada region to the north have revealed the persistence of a
              high standing orogenic plateau with long wavelength-high relief fluvial
              dominated topography during the same time interval. In marked contrast the
              deepest level exposures of the batholith to the south had subsided to marine
              conditions by early Eocene time in conjunction with tectonic denudation. These
              profound along strike variations in the paleogeomorphology of the Sierran
              magmatic arc can be linked to the tectonic removal of the sub-batholithic
              mantle lithosphere beneath the southernmost Sierra-northern Mojave Desert
              region by a shallow flat-slab segment of the subducting
oceanic plate, and the
              related tectonic underplating of Franciscan trench-affinity
metamorphic
              assemblages. The PI's have identified an array of known and apparent
              high-
level batholithic detachment sheets along the southernmost Sierra and
              northern Mojave
Desert region that appear to represent part of the upper
              crustal rocks that were displaced
by the detachment system. They have also
              identified modern topographic anomalies and
anomalous structural-textural
              overprints in the basement rocks of the southern Sierra
region which
              correspond to the onset of steep gradients in batholith emplacement
barometry
              and its implicit depth of denudation. They interpret these areas to represent
              the
remnants of footwall complexes proximal to the breakaway zones where the
              northernmost detachment sheets calved off the edge of the orogenic plateau.
              Vertical
apatite and zircon thermochronologic profiles are proposed across
              these zones as a test of
very rapid cooling and tectonic denudation. These
              profiles will be extended southward
along constant elevation profiles to the
              deepest exposed levels of the batholith in order to
further test for regional
              rapid cooling, and to test for a possible southward migration in
progressively
              deeper levels of denudation with time. The broader goals are to relate
              the
paleogeomorphic evolution of the southern Sierra region to
              lithosphere-scale tectonics
and dynamics, and to relate these findings to the
              globally important problem of the
upward migration and surface exposure of
              deep crystalline basement rock as related to
uplift, erosion, tectonic
              denudation, and the evolution of lower crust and upper mantle.
The proposed
              research program runs for a period of three years and includes a
              vigorous
program of sample collecting, mineral separation, geochemical
              analysis, and the
synthesis of the new data with existing geological and
              geochemical data sets. The project
will entail partial efforts of the joint
              PI's and their technical staff, and constitute a major
component of a Caltech
              Ph.D. Dissertation.

