Title       : Measurements Addressing Quantitative Ozone Loss, Polar Stratospheric Cloud
               Nucleation, and Large Polar Stratospheric Particles during Austral Winter and
               Spring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2002  
File        : a0230424

Award Number: 0230424
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vladimir Papitashvili                   
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2003  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $741382             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Deshler deshler@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 5115      ANTARCTIC AERONOMY & ASTROPHYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal seeks the continuation of in situ balloon-borne ozone observations
              over Antarctica through 2005. Ozone in the Antarctic stratosphere suffers a
              much different seasonal cycle today than it has in the past due to the
              introduction of significant amounts of chlorofluorocarbons into the atmosphere.
              In the past Antarctic ozone amounts were controlled primarily by global
              circulation processes leading to wintertime build up of ozone. Today the
              presence of chlorine coupled with cold temperatures, which create stratospheric
              clouds, leads to a springtime minimum in ozone due to a catalytic reaction
              between ozone and chlorine that has been activated on surfaces of the cloud
              particles. The mechanisms leading to this ozone loss has been the subject of
              much scientific activity and significant progress has been made; however, open
              questions remain which require additional ozone and stratospheric particle
              profile measurements from McMurdo Station. The ozone profile measurements, to
              be completed about every 3 days during austral spring, will contribute to the
              observational base for the period of maximum chlorine loading in the
              stratosphere. This will contribute to the measurement base required to observe
              the first signs of ozone recovery as stratospheric chlorine declines within the
              next decade. Measurements of vertical ozone profiles will be one of the
              important tools used to observe the first signs of the altitude dependent
              recovery following the decline in stratospheric chlorine. In 2003, it is
              proposed to collaborate with several European colleagues in an international
              Antarctic Match campaign to obtain detailed, altitude dependent, ozone loss
              rate measurements for comparisons with chemical transport models and
              photochemical box models. In addition, the polar stratospheric cloud (PSC)
              observations will be continued to address questions related to the nucleation
              of nitric acid hydrates, the existence of large particles within Antarctic PSCs
              and their role in denitrification, and the index of refraction of PSC
              particles. The instruments on the balloons will provide high-resolution
              trajectory measurements, which can be used to assess the accuracy of air parcel
              temperature histories. This information, coupled with in situ aerosol profile
              measurements and a microphysical model, will be used to test various PSC
              nucleation hypotheses, which have direct implications for chlorine activation
              and denitrification. The instrument will be developed with support from a Major
              Research Infrastructure instrument development award from NSF.
