Title       : STI: Multi-Hop Free Space Optics Last-Mile Networks Using Very Low-Cost
               Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0230787

Award Number: 0230787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Partha Dutta duttap@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shivkumar Kalyanaraman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1766      Strategic Tech for Internet
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9150,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The tremendous explosion of bandwidth in the core of the Internet has stopped
              short of end-users due to the well-known "last-mile" problem where it has
              traditionally been infeasible to get a high bandwidth conduit to the home and
              businesses. "Fiberless" or Free Space Optical (FSO) networks can effectively
              complement unlicensed-spectrum RF-based WLAN technologies like 802.1 lb/a, and
              WMAN technologies like 802.16 for the "last mile" problem. Free space optics
              offers tremendous bandwidth and potential for dense spatial reuse of the
              optical spectrum. Although optical networking has become popular in the wired
              networking world, free space optics (FSO) is still a niche technology used to
              provide only selected point-to-point links, and not as a general-purpose
              metropolitan area networking technology. Moreover, several fundamental aspects
              of free space terrestrial optical communication are yet to be explored. The
              proposal is to investigate fundamental limits of very low-cost components, and
              create communication systems that tap into the high bandwidth potential of FSO,
              while addressing its key limitations (eg: Line-of-Sight (LOS) availability, LOS
              discovery, LOS alignment).

An investigation of very low-cost communication
              systems and multi-hop optical networks using high-brightness visible spectrum
              LEDs (HBLEDs) that have more attractive propagation & spatial reuse
              characteristics compared to ordinary brightness infrared LEDs will occur.
              Moreover the potential size, weight, power and form-factor aspects of LED-based
              systems would make it ideal for use in ad-hoc infrastructures (eg: balloons,
              treetops, lampposts. poles on chimneys, moving vehicles etc), and novel
              applications like high-bandwidth mobile ad-hoc networks and future sensor
              networks may be found.

Using trans-receiver pairs that achieve 100 Mbps with
              1-10 mW power, the proposal is to use dense integration of thousands of
              trans-receivers into 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional spatial structures (eg:
              2-d array, 3-d spherical/honeycomb structure). The 2-d array would provide
              extremely high aggregate bandwidth (100 Gbps and more) over 1-2 km. The
              proposed 3-d spherical structures (a.k.a. optical antenna) combined with LOS
              auto-discovery and LOS auto-tracking techniques to instantly discover and track
              LOS if it exists. This structure will allow uninterrupte4,jiltra-high-speed
              operation even in high velocity sway (eg: 120 mph, range over 100s of meters)
              or even mobile conditions.

The project will build low-cost FSO
              interconnection systems, complemented with relatively cheap and programmable
              electronic components after l0s-l00s of opto-electronic (OEO) hops. It is also
              proposed to investigate spatial coding and redundancy techniques at the
              electronic hops taking advantage of the particular spatial structures (eg: 2d
              array, spherical etc). An examination of fundamental network capacity limits
              for FSO-based fixed and ad-hoc configurations, and fundamental power-per-bit
              achievable in future sensor networks will be done.  Evaluating the impact of
              such multi-hop FSO networks on the performance of TCP/IP, VoIP and multimedia
              applications. Leveraging a partnership with renowned Internet entrepreneur,
              field trials of a mix of our prototype low-cost FSO-based systems,
              off-the-shelf 802.1 lx systems, IP routing and 802. ld bridging protocols will
              occur.

The proposed inter-disciplinary research will make significant
              contributions to LED-based communications, low-cost free space optical
              networks, and models for deploying last-mile networks in unlicensed
              spectra.

NSF recognizes the need to solve the lost mile problem and funds
              this project with the hope of a solution immediately emerging from this
              project, or new directions to a solution being established.
