Title       : An Observational Array for High Resolution, Year-round Measurements of Volume,
               Freshwater, and Ice Flux Variability in Davis Strait
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0230381

Award Number: 0230381
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3483129            (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig M. Lee craig@apl.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jason Gobat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ken F. Drinkwater  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Moritz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1079,5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This study will use an integrated observing system that will provide year-round
              measurements of volume, liquid freshwater and ice fluxes across Davis Strait.
              Fluxes through the Strait represent the net integrated Canadian Archipelago
              through flow, modified by terrestrial inputs and oceanic processes during its
              southward transit through Baffin Bay. This study will be part of a coordinated
              international effort to quantify (and eventually monitor) the variability of
              fluxes connecting the Arctic and Atlantic Oceans and to understand the role
              played by the Arctic and sub-Arctic in steering decadal scale climate
              variability, The system will employ complementary techniques, combining mature
              technologies with recent developments in autonomous gliders (presently
              undertaking their first extended science missions) to address all aspects of
              flow through Davis Strait, including some measurements that have not previously
              been technologically feasible. The components of the proposed system include: A
              sparse array of subsurface moorings, each instrumented with an upward looking
              sonar, an Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler (ADCP) and a single
              conductivity-temperature (CT) sensor. These will provide a time series of upper
              ocean currents, ice velocity and ice thickness. These measurements will then be
              used to estimate the ice component of freshwater flux, provide an absolute
              velocity reference for geostrophic shears calculated from Seaglider
              hydrographic sections, and derive error estimates for lower-frequency flux
              calculations. Trawl and iceberg resistant bottom landers, instrumented with
              ADCPs and CT sensors, will be deployed across the Baffin and Greenland shelves
              to quantify variability associated with strong, narrow coastal flows.
              Acoustically navigated Seagliders will provide year-round, repeated,
              high-resolution hydrographic sections across the Strait. The combination of
              emerging and existing technologies implemented in the observing system may
              serve as a prototype for accurate long-term monitoring of freshwater and ice
              fluxes in high latitude environments subject to seasonal or permanent ice
              cover. Acoustically navigated autonomous gliders capable of extended missions
              in ice covered environments will provide a significant new observational tool,
              opening important regions of high latitude oceans to intensive measurement
              programs.
