Title       : Houston Community College System (HCCS) Planning for Engineering Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0230615

Award Number: 0230615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos A. Garcia garcia_c@hccs.cc.tx.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bartlett M. Sheinberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Houston Cmty College
	      P.O. Box 667517
	      Houston, TX  772667517    713/718-5059

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230615
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Garcia, Carlos
INSTITUTION NAME:
              Houston Community College
TITLE: HCCS Planning for Engineering
              Transfer
	
Abstract

Houston Community College System
Planning for
              Engineering Transfer

The Houston Community College System (HCCS), a Hispanic
              Serving Institution with five colleges, has partnered with local and regional
              universities (the University of Houston, Lamar University) and community
              engineering agencies and corporations (NASA, Schlumberger) to develop an
              engineering transfer program. The primary goal of the project is to increase
              the number of underrepresented students enrolled in engineering degree
              programs.

The planning group will develop the new curriculum by
              investigating best practices in engineering education through consultations and
              visits with exceptional programs throughout the country. Because Texas has no
              approved engineering community and junior college curriculum (approval is
              dependent upon credits accepted by the transfer institution), collaboration
              with university partners is critical to the success of the program. Ultimately,
              the program will serve as a model that can be replicated by colleges and
              universities throughout Texas and will set the standard for engineering
              transfer programs. The program will offer its greatest benefits to the
              underrepresented students who will find new career opportunities, and to the
              engineering industry, which will have an expanding pool of well-educated,
              successful employees.


