Title       : Collaborative Proposal: Molybdenum Isotopes as Paleoredox Proxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2003   
File        : a0230183

Award Number: 0230183
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224917             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ariel D. Anbar anbar@earth.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Barling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This proposal seeks funding for continued development and application of the
              molybdenum stable isotope system for the examination of changes in ocean redox
              through time. Research into ocean paleoredox is of great importance in
              paleoceanographic modeling, and in the coupled modeling of changes in the
              biogeochemical cycles through time. At present, the integration of multiple
              geochemical redox indicators in organic carbon-rich sediments identifies, with
              reasonable certainty, sediments deposited under anoxic-sulfidic (euxinic)
              bottom waters. However, beyond the areal distribution of such sediments, there
              is no means of estimating how prevalent euxinic bottom water conditions were at
              any particular time. 
Our initial survey of Mo isotopes in sediments from the
              Black Sea, ferromanganese nodules, seawater and continental materials indicated
              that the largest fractionation of Mo isotopes in the oceans occurs during
              preferential uptake of light Mo isotopes to Mn-oxyhydroxide sediments, but that
              Mo isotopes are relatively unfractionated during removal in euxinic
              environments (Barling et al., 2001). Therefore, Mo in seawater is isotopically
              lighter than Mo in oxic sediments and continent-derived Mo entering the oceans,
              but is similar to that of sediments accumulating under euxinic conditions.
              Because both oxic and euxinic sediments are important sinks in the ocean Mo
              budget, these findings led us to develop the following hypothesis: The Mo
              isotope composition of black shales should reflect that of seawater, and should
              vary with the extent of global ocean anoxia. Specifically 97Mo/95Mo (and other
              Mo isotope ratios) should shif toward isotopically lighter values during
              extended periods of expanded euxinic conditions in the oceans.
We have
              explored key parts of this hypothesis as part of award EAR 0106712 which
              supported one year of further investigation of major reservoirs, and laboratory
              experiments designed to test the inference that Mo isotopes are fractionated
              during uptake by Mn-oxyhydroxides. This award will soon expire. Results to date
              demonstrate that Mo isotopes are fractionated during uptake by Mn-oxyhydroxides
              in the laboratory, in the expected direction and to the expected magnitude. In
              addition, we have found that the Mo isotopic compositions of euxinic sediments
              from the Cariaco Basin are similar to those of Black Sea sediments and
              seawater, consistent with the idea that such sediments provide a first order
              record of seawater Mo isotopes. Recent findings of other workers (e.g., Siebert
              et al., 2001b) also increase confidence in the paleoredox utility of Mo
              isotopes
To further test this hypothesis, we now propose to extend our
              research to examine the isotopic composition of Mo in the geologic record.
              Specifically, we intend to study Mo isotopes and other paleoredox indicators in
              three well-constrained black shale stratigraphic sequences from the
              Mesoproterozoic (Roper Group, McArthur Basin, N. Australia), the Paleozoic
              (Middle Devonian Oatka Creek Formation, northern Appalachian Basin) and the
              Mesozoic (Cenomanian-Turonian Boundary core, ODP Site 1138) Eras. These three
              sequences are selected because they may represent periods of substantial, but
              differing, perturbation of ocean redox conditions for periods of time
              comparable to, or longer than, the ocean residence time of Mo. These sequences
              are also attractive because they are well characterized by other geochemical
              techniques and have good stratigraphic and depositional context. Preliminary
              data obtained from the McArthur Basin, a Devonian black shale and the C-T
              Boundary are consistent with our hypothesis. We also propose to refine our
              laboratory experiments to better understand the mechanisms of Mo isotope
              fractionation in nature.
The proposed research will strengthen ties between
              groups at U. Rochester and U. Missouri, which bring complementary approaches to
              paleoenvironmental questions of mutual interest. Paleoenvironmental research is
              of increasing societal importance as a result of public interest in probable
              anthropogenic climate change and its consequences. The complementary resources
              and approaches of these two groups will enrich the training of two graduate
              students, one at each institution. In addition, the proposed project
              facilitates the participation of a member of an underrepresented group (Co-PI
              Barling).

