Title       : Design and Integration of a Cylindrical Ion Trap Array for a
               Micro-Total-Chemical-Analysis System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0230191

Award Number: 0230191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99905              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane P. Chang jpchang@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research:

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research is being funded under NSF
              02-2: "Next Generation Chemical and Biological Sensors and Sensing Systems." 
              The objective of the research is to design, model, fabricate, test, and
              integrate a miniature mass analyzer to augment the existing chemical analysis
              capability of a total micro-analytical system on a chip.  A smaller, faster,
              cheaper, and more accurate mass analyzer may also be useful in space
              applications, chemical warfare and biological weapons detection, environmental
              monitoring, and medical diagnostics.  A feasibility analysis has been carried
              out to assess the functionality of a cylindrical ion trap array with each trap
              at micrometer scales.  The mass range can be varied to detect low mass
              chemicals and large mass biological molecules by changing the physical
              dimension of the ion trap and/or the operation frequency.  It has been shown
              that the resolution and sensitivity can be maintained in these micro-mass
              analyzers, making a fieldable and portable device possible.  This miniaturized
              mass analyzer will be integrated with a miniature gas-chromatograph column, a
              micro-thermal conductivity detector, a surface acoustic wave detector, and an
              internal calibration unit, for chemical and biological
              sensing.

Impact:

The research outcome will be integrated into a new
              undergraduate laboratory course on Semiconductor Manufacturing and
              Micro-Fabrication to give chemical engineers hands-on experience in fabricating
              and testing miniature chemical sensing systems and the opportunity to work with
              engineering students from other disciplines.  Senior projects, summer
              internships, and research projects will be offered to high school students,
              undergraduate and graduate students, especially women, based on the planned
              research to help their long-term career development in academia and industry.
