Title       : A Multidisciplinary Integrated Capstone Design Curriculum for Electrical and
               Computer Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0230628

Award Number: 0230628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil Goldsman neil@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon H. Orloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven I. Marcus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230628
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Goldsman, Neil
INSTITUTION NAME:
              University of Maryland College Park
TITLE: A Multidisciplinary Integrated
              Capstone Design Curriculum for Electrical and Computer
              Engineering

Abstract

The Department of Electrical and Computer
              Engineering (ECE) at the University
of Maryland at College Park (UMCP) is in
              the process of planning a major curriculum
revision for its undergraduate
              program.  This planning grant will address the Capstone design
program, which
              will be greatly revised to provide a multidisciplinary design experience
for
              senior students and to integrate juniors and sophomores into the Capstone
              experience.
The team  will assess the outcomes of the Capstone experience to
              generate data to guide the revision of our curriculum in general.

A major
              objective of the Capstone design courses is for the students to work on
              a
design project at a professional level. The project makes use of most of the
              knowledge
that students have acquired in the previous two to three years of
              the ECE curriculum.
Therefore, the outcome of the Capstone design experience
              should be an excellent
indicator of the how well the education process in the
              ECE Department is preparing
students for their professional career. A
              year-to-year assessment of the outcomes of the
Capstone design courses will
              enable us to make continuous improvements in the
sophomore, junior, and also
              the senior year curricula. This being the case, the revision of
the Capstone
              program will serve as the engine to drive curriculum revision for the
              entire
ECE program.


