Title       : Biogeochemistry of Victoria Land Coastal Ponds: Role in Terrestrial Ecosystem
               Organic Carbon Dynamics and Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0230237

Award Number: 0230237
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deneb Karentz                           
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295542             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria Uhle muhle@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter T. Doran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Ecosystem structure, processes, and functional linkages in the Antarctic
              terrestrial ecosystem have been the focus of the McMurdo Long-Term Ecological
              Research (LTER) site in the McMurdo Dry Valleys since 1993. This ecosystem has
              a modern component linking the organic carbon dynamics between the soils,
              glaciers, streams and ice-covered lakes plus a legacy to ancient glacial events
              that deposited paleo-organic carbon within the region. The soil reservoir
              contains 72% of the seasonally unfrozen and biologically available organic
              carbon within Taylor Valley and a substantial fraction of this carbon may be
              recalcitrant carbon derived from ancient climatic events. While one of the
              central themes of the LTER is to understand the linkages between ecosystem
              elements in terms of the transport of organic carbon and processes affecting
              primary production, one potentially large source of labile, and hence
              bioavailable, organic carbon that has not been investigated is the abundant
              small ponds found in most areas of the McMurdo Dry Valleys, especially near the
              coast. These ponds have a relatively large surface area, and they seem to
              generate a large amount of stranded microbial mat as they shift position on the
              landscape. The transient nature of these ponds renders the organic matter
              vulnerable to transport and possibly represents a significant source of modern,
              labile carbon to the other components in the McMurdo Dry Valleys ecosystem.
              While their exact extent is unknown, a preliminary estimate suggests that the
              coastal pond reservoir may constitute at least 11% of the carbon to the Dry
              Valleys soil reservoir. Therefore, these ponds may significantly impact the
              carbon cycle of the Dry Valleys ecosystem and they must be considered if a
              complete carbon budget is to be developed for this polar desert. This project
              will (1) determine the extent of the coastal pond reservoir, (2) assess how
              productive the reservoir is as a whole and (3) to determine if coastal pond
              reservoir is a source or sink within the organic carbon dynamics and overall
              structure of the terrestrial ecosystem in the dry valleys region. Much of this
              work will focus on understanding the biogeochemistry of these ponds in terms of
              the factors affecting organic carbon production and nutrient cycling. The
              results of this study will provide a more detailed understanding of the
              linkages between modern ecosystem components, provide insights into the
              biogeochemical cycling within polar desert ecosystems and possibly identify
              mechanisms that help sustain life in extreme environments. This study will also
              involve Knoxville city school students from predominantly African-American
              neighborhoods. The K-5 students will be involved in question and answer
              sessions over the Internet and the older students will design ecological
              experiments and become introduced to the scientific method. Data analysis will
              be used in science and math classes to help develop analytical skills and to
              place the skills in a relevant context for the students.
