Title       : Modules Over Commutative Rings and Cohomology Operations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0230770

Award Number: 0230770
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6558               (Estimated)
Investigator: Luchezar Avramov avramov@math.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT,  AVRAMOV

In recent work Avramov has successfully used
              multiplicative structures to study problems on free resolutions over
              commutative local rings.  With the help of graded Lie algebras he exhibited
              many modules with minimal free and injective resolutions of maximal possible
              asymptotic size.  Using homotopy theory he proved a long standing conjecture of
              Quillen on the rigidity of the cotangent complex and applied it to problems on
              locally complete intersection homomorphisms.  He produced algebraic varieties
              that describe the action on cohomology of operations defined by Gulliksen and
              Eisenbud, and with Buchweitz used them to find unexpected growth and vanishing
              properties of Ext and Tor. Avramov proposes to develop systematic products and
              other higher order (co)homological structures for use in ring theory and module
              theory, and to apply it to specific problems, that usually involve only
              homological invariants.

Commutative algebra and algebraic geometry may be
              thought of as studying solutions of many equations in many unknowns when,
              typically, the solution is not unique.  The set of solutions can then be viewed
              geometrically, but one can use instead encode all the pertinent information
              about the equations in abstract algebraic objects called commutative rings. The
              two points of view interact in beautiful and productive ways.

