Title       : US-France Cooperative Research: Analysis and Evaluation of Combinatorial
               Structures and Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0230800

Award Number: 0230800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carla D. Savage savage@csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pawel Hitczenko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 0000,5918,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0230800
Savage

This three-year award for U.S.-France collaboration in
              applied mathematics involves Carla D. Savage, Pawel Hitczenko, and William
              Stewart of North Carolina State University and Sylvie Corteel and her team at
              the University of Versailles.  The project focuses on an integrated approach to
              the analysis of combinatorial algorithms arising in applications.  In many
              applications, there are problems whose solutions require examination of an
              exponential number of possibilities.  The current heuristic approach to these
              problems requires much time.  The investigators focus on an alternative
              approach that incorporates probabilistic modeling techniques for combinatorial
              problems.  The problems are drawn from areas of computational biology, routing
              in optical networks, resource management in distributed and multiprocessor
              systems, and classical combinatorics.  The objectives are twofold:  (1) devise
              new methods to attack classical problems in combinatorics with probability and
              Markov chains; and (2) develop an integrated
              combinatorial/algorithmic/probabilistic approach to applied problems for which
              traditional methods from a single area have proved inadequate. 

This award
              represents the US side of a joint proposal to the NSF and the French National
              Center for Scientific Research (CNRS).  NSF will cover travel funds and living
              expenses for the US investigators and graduate students.  The CNRS will support
              the visits of the French researchers to the United States.   US students will
              benefit from the exchange of scientific techniques and experience with an
              international research team.

