Title       : Synthesis of Lead-Doped Monazite Standards for Electron Microprobe Chemical
               Dating
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a0230019

Award Number: 0230019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51821              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniele J. Cherniak chernd@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cherniak
0230019

Monazite is a tremendously versatile and durable recorder
              of rock events. It resists high-temperature diffusive equilibration, yet is
              reactive at low temperatures in the presence of hydrothermal fluids or
              significant deviatoric stress fields. Monazite responds to major phase
              reactions, and tags specific major or accessory phase reservoirs participating
              in the reaction through compositional zoning of elements such as Y, Th, U, Ca,
              Pb, and Si. It also records temperature information via (Y+HREE) distributions,
              and as monazite may be highly thorogenic, it can preserve the ages of some or
              all whole-rock events it experiences. However, natural monazites are
              compositionally quite complex, leading to inherent difficulty in both
              conventional analysis and electron microprobe (EMP) chemical age determination.
              Moreover, calibration for EMP chemical age determinations usually involves a
              secondary standardization to monazite with a measured isotopic age. This is
              problematic because chemical age may be distinct from one or more isotopic
              ages, and calibration should be set to a concentration, not an age, as
              elemental concentrations are measured during analysis. We propose the following
              work: 1) Pb-doped REE phosphate will be synthesized and fully characterized via
              EMP and XRD as a chemical age standard. We demonstrate that minor amounts (to
              wt. % level) of lead are stable in monazite, and incorporation of known amounts
              of lead, along with Th- and U-monazite components, will allow  calibration to a
              standard of known composition rather than inferred age; 2) Pb-doped unary REE
              phosphates will be synthesized to aid EMP age analysis protocols, by isolating
              lead with a single rare earth element so as to examine Pb interferences as a
              function of detector gas plus detector and collimator settings; 3) Isotopic
              monazite standards will be synthesized by doping (REE, Th, U, Ca) phosphate
              with Pb of known isotopic composition. Standards will be freely distributed to
              interested analysts, fostering mutual collaboration and sharing of methods and
              results.

