Title       : CAREER: Resource Allocation Under Uncertainty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0230528

Award Number: 0230528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shane G. Henderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 1045,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Integer programming is a powerful technique for solving problems that are
              combinatorial in nature, such as staff scheduling problems. To ensure that the
              assumptions underlying integer programming models are satisfied, one must
              typically apply strong simplifying assumptions to the system under study. 
              Discrete event simulation is a powerful technique for estimating the
              performance that can be expected from complex systems. One can model virtually
              arbitrary complexity in (discrete-event) simulation models.  This CAREER award 
              aims to link these two management science techniques in an attempt to provide a
              powerful optimization approach that allows great model complexity.  The 
              approach to linking these methods requires that the simulation satisfies
              various structural properties, and that this structural information can be
              communicated to the integer program.  The focus of this research is in
              identifying general conditions under which the linkage will be successful,
              identifying methods to reduce the computational requirements of the approach,
              and exploring various application methods and areas.

In addition to
              potential contributions to the theory of management science, potential
              applications of this research include call centre staffing and ambulance
              allocation.  In the call centre staffing problem one wishes to assign staff to
              shifts in a way that minimizes staffing costs, while ensuring that customer
              service is satisfactory.  Many call centres exhibit complex customer routing
              and other characteristics that mean that simulation is the preferred method for
              predicting customer service for a given staffing level.  It may be possible to
              achieve satisfactory customer service at less cost than is currently the case. 
              In the ambulance allocation problem, one is trying to determine when and where
              to place ambulances to ensure satisfactory response time performance to calls.
              Again, simulation may be needed to predict response time performance, and
              again, it may be possible to achieve satisfactory response time performance at
              less cost than is currently the case.

