Title       : NSF/USDOT: Collaborative Research: Impact of Real-time Carrier-shipper
               Interaction on Transportation System Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0230981

Award Number: 0230981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick Jaillet jaillet@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1787,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The transportation sector continues to adopt telecommunication and information
              technologies that provide real-time information to enhance productivity and
              performance. Recently these technologies have started to modify the way
              contracts are negotiated, by enabling demand and supply to be matched
              dynamically through market mechanisms. A significant change may be taking place
              in the structure of the transportation market, with the development of auction
              markets for transportation services, in the form of Internet sites that match
              shipments (shippers demand) and transportation capacity (carriers offer).  The
              development of these virtual hubs and their characteristics have fundamental
              implications for the methodologies to both analyze the performance of such
              systems, as well as to incorporate these mechanisms in the operational
              decisions of carriers and shippers (and/or their agents).

This research
              project will develop modeling techniques to analyze carrier-shipper interaction
              in the context of an online electronic transportation marketplace. Carriers and
              shippers are modeled as entities that determine their interaction with other
              agents and with their environment on the basis of history (experience),
              learning, expectations about future consequences of current actions, and
              evolving strategies. In addition to developing methods to support individual
              player strategies in a non-cooperative decision environment with varying
              degrees of information sharing, the study investigates overall market behavior,
              its efficiency and resulting shipper service levels under different market
              settings and individual player strategies. The results obtained are of
              relevance to both shippers and carriers operating in online markets, as well as
              government agencies and policy-making entities concerned with the structure and
              efficiency of the transportation system. To take advantage of potential
              opportunities in real-time auction markets, both shippers and carriers require
              a new level of mastery of real-time information about not only the state of
              their shipments and./or fleets, but also about the entire system transacted
              through those markets.   The methodological contributions of the research have
              applications that extend beyond the realm of transportation systems to include
              various infrastructure services that are distributed over space and time.  

