Title       : Textural Analyses of Naturally Deformed Peridotite and Gabbro: Implications for
               the Interpretation of Geophysical Data and the Rheology of the Lithosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0230267

Award Number: 0230267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309039             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Gregory Hirth ghirth@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0230267
Hirth

The investigators will use their newly acquired electron
              backscatter diffraction (EBSD) system to measure lattice preferred orientations
              (LPO) and analyze microstructures in naturally deformed peridotites and
              gabbros.  The increased efficiency in the measurement of crystal orientations
              made possible by the EBSD technique, particularly for minerals with low
              symmetry such as plagioclase and clinopyroxene, makes it a powerful tool to
              investigate rheological processes in both experimentally and naturally deformed
              rocks. The investigators will concentrate on the analysis of microstructures
              preserved in naturally deformed rocks with well-constrained deformation
              histories.  This research will improve our understanding of the processes that
              control the rheology of both the lower crust and upper mantle. Specific
              projects include: (1) Determining the evolution of LPO with increasing strain
              in peridotite, concentrating on the influence of dynamic recrystallization, the
              effect of pyroxene content and the role of melt. The results of this project
              will provide constraints on the interpretation of seismic anisotropy in the
              mantle. (2) Using LPOs and grain size analyses to investigate conditions where
              a transition from dislocation creep to diffusion creep occurs under geologic
              conditions, and the possible role this process has in strain localization.  The
              results of this part of the project will provide constraints on the mechanisms
              responsible for weakening lithospheric-scale fault zones at plate boundaries
              (3) Combining measurement of LPO with microstructural studies on oceanic
              gabbros to constrain the viscosity of lower crustal rocks under geologic
              conditions.
