Title       : Collaborative Research: A Land Surface Model Hind-Cast for the Terrestrial
               Arctic Drainage System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0230317

Award Number: 0230317
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199425             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Ackerman stevea@ssec.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey R. Key  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1079,5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This study will combine data synthesis and land surface modeling to assemble the
              best possible time series (20+ years) for the Arctic terrestrial drainage of
              land surface state variables (snow water equivalent, soil moisture, soil
              temperature) and moisture and energy fluxes (sensible, latent, and ground heat;
              radiation). Development of forcing fields will draw in part from an ongoing NSF
              effort known as Arctic-RIMS, geared at historical analysis and monitoring of
              the Arctic terrestrial hydrologic budget. The present effort both complements
              Arctic-RIMS and lays groundwork for a next-generation monitoring and prediction
              capability. The generated time series will be used to address spatial-temporal
              variability in sensible heat flux and evapo-transpiration, land surface
              feedbacks on precipitation, and development of the summer Arctic frontal zone.
              

This study will attempt to produce the best possible quality model forcing
              over the pan-Arctic domain by blending output from the new ERA-40 atmospheric
              reanalysis project with gridded in-situ observations and satellite data
              streams. Major challenges include maintaining physical consistency between time
              series of variables at different native spatial and temporal resolutions and
              providing realistic diurnal cycles.  A particularly novel aspect of the
              proposed work will be use of a multi-model ensemble approach. Five different
              Land Surface Models will be used, all of which have been extensively tested for
              Arctic applications under the Project for Intercomparison of Land-Surface
              Parameterization Schemes (PILPS) Experiment 2e. The multi-model LSM ensemble
              average for each output variable should be superior to the values provided by a
              single run with any one LSM.

The data will also be useful for model
              validation efforts, such as the Arctic Regional Climate Model Inter-comparison
              Project, and in providing a source of high latitude evaluation data for the
              Atmospheric Model Inter-comparison Project. The project will contribute to
              educational goals through support of a graduate student and post-docs. Results
              from this study and related projects will be used as part of seminar course on
              the Arctic climate system to be taught at University of Colorado.

