Title       : Stem and Tendril: Vertically Integrated Statistics Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a0230803

Award Number: 0230803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74836              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Poje poje@math.csi.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Verzani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah S. Franzblau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Staten Island
	      2800 Victory Boulevard
	      Staten Island, NY  10314    718/982-2254

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              General statistical knowledge and hence undergraduate statistics courses play an
              important role in the growing emphasis on ensuring a basic level of
              quantitative literacy in the nation's post secondary school graduates. The
              data-driven economic and political landscape of the 21st century places
              enormous demands on an individual's ability to manipulate, organize and compare
              numbers and express quantitative ideas fluently, among other things.
              Knowledgeable citizens should possess the quantitative skills necessary to make
              informed decisions based on data in a variety of forms. In addition, they will
              be required to analyze evidence, to  question assumptions and to recognize
              sources of error that may lead to a misunderstanding of the problems and issues
              at hand. 
 
The intellectual merit of  "Stem and Tendril: Vertically
              Integrated Statistics Laboratory" is that it aims to assist in the teaching of
              statistics and applied mathematics at multiple levels. The objective is to
              develop, implement and assess a collection of computer-based learning modules
              that are vertically integrated across the undergraduate and master's level
              statistics curriculum. The collection of lab materials consists of 15-20
              distinct projects are developed to provide faculty teaching statistics at a
              number of levels with a set of inquiry-based, student-centered alternatives to
              augment traditional lecture instruction. The goal is to create
              application-oriented computer laboratories employing relevant and topical data
              sets, which address basic themes of the statistics curriculum.

 The broader
              impact of " Stem and Tendril: Vertically Integrated Statistics Laboratory" is
              realized through the development these modules that can be explored from
              multiple levels allowing students to revisit approaches from different
              perspectives as they move through the curriculum. The modular nature of the
              material will allow students with different backgrounds and training to have
              different yet rewarding, learning experiences. In addition, these materials
              address needs of quantitative literacy, computer fluency and written expression
              as appropriate for mathematics.

