Title       : A Plan for Competency-Based Individualized Curriculum for Engineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0230717

Award Number: 0230717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan L. Shunk dan.shunk@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Esma S. Gel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary L. Hogg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Moor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donovan L. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to plan different strategies that enable
              a
competency-based individualized education in such a diverse engineering
              school.

While education is significantly different than industrial
              production of goods and services, we
believe that there exist several concepts
              one can borrow, modify and implement to education
systems to answer today's
              increasing demands. At the very least, one such concept is mass
customization
              of goods and services, which translates into a competency-based
individualized
              education system. This concept aims to provide a set of measurable
outcomes
              (namely, skills, knowledge base and competency of graduates) by characterizing
              and
Individualizing each student's learning process and
              potential.

Ultimately, we envision the development of a competency-based
              learning system that would
reflect a unified academia-industry perspective,
              provide for the immediate needs of the industry
and facilitate scholarly
              development of future engineers and researchers. In this project, we
propose
              to develop a plan to implement a systems approach and the manufacturing
              strategy of
mass customization to the education process. More specifically, we
              propose to develop a
fundamental framework for curriculum design, which allows
              for individualized education while
still optimizing the capacity of the
              teaching assets we have for each academic year.

The findings from the
              project will be published in various journals on education
research. We also
              intend to work with local industry to extend our findings and insights to
              the
mass customization of their education and training systems. 

