Title       : Laboratory Studies of Photochemistry in Antarctic Snow and Ice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0230288

Award Number: 0230288
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343699             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cort Anastasio canastasio@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1043,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Photochemical reactions in snow can have important effects on the chemistry and
              composition of the snowpack as well as the overlying atmosphere.  For example,
              recent measurements in the Antarctic and Arctic have revealed that sunlit snow
              releases a number of important pollutants to the atmosphere.  Our ability to
              understand and model this chemistry is currently limited, in part because we
              lack fundamental photochemical information for a number of important chemical
              species in snow.  This award supports research that will help fill this gap by
              characterizing the low-temperature photochemistry of three of these key
              species: nitrite (NO2-), nitrous acid (HNO2), and hydrogen peroxide (HOOH).  We
              will measure quantum yields for these reactions on ice using a sensitive
              technique that we recently developed during a study of nitrate (NO3-)
              photochemistry.  In addition to this basic research, we will also measure the
              rates of formation of hydroxyl radical (OH), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and HOOH in
              illuminated Antarctic snow samples.  These measurements will be important
              inputs for future models, and will allow us to test whether known species
              (e.g., NO3-, NO2- and HNO2) are responsible for most of snowpack reactivity
              (e.g., OH formation).  Overall, results from this award will significantly
              improve our ability to understand snowpack chemistry, and the resulting effects
              on the atmosphere, both in the Antarctic as well as in the many other regions
              with permanent or seasonal snow.  These results will also strengthen efforts to
              use ice core records to monitor global change.  In addition to these impacts,
              this award will help train students and a postdoctoral fellow, and results from
              this work will be integrated into two classes in order to expose students to
              some of the important issues facing polar regions.
