Title       : Structural and Seismologic Investigation of Blind-thrust Earthquake
               Segmentation, San Joaquin Basin, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  2002  
File        : a0230141

Award Number: 0230141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158795             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Shaw shaw@eps.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The nature of blind-thrust earthquake segmentation is being examined through
              integrated geologic and seismologic analyses of the 1982 New Idria (Mw=5.4),
              1983 Coalinga (Mw=6.5), and 1985 Kettleman Hills (Mw=6.1) earthquakes, which
              occurred in the western San Joaquin basin of central California. These
              earthquakes occurred beneath the New Idria, Coalinga, and Kettleman Hills
              anticlines, which form an en echelon system of structures that extend south to
              Lost Hills. Patterns of coseismic uplift and subsurface studies have
              demonstrated convincingly that these structures are fault-related folds that
              develop in response to motions on the underlying blind-thrust system. The
              limits of the rupture areas for the three earthquakes are defined by the
              distinct en echelon offsets of this fold system, which are thought to overlie
              geometric segment boundaries in the underlying blind-thrust fault. The folds
              have excellent surface exposures, and the subsurface structure is defined by a
              wealth of industry seismic reflection and well log data. Thus, this area
              presents an excellent opportunity to study processes of blind-thrust earthquake
              segmentation, insights into which can help to assess earthquake hazards in
              other regions of active thrusting.

The geometry and kinematics of the Lost
              Hills - Kettleman Hills - Coalinga fold and thrust chain is characterized
              utilizing seismic reflection profiles, well control, surface geology, remote
              sensing imagery, and precisely relocated seismicity. The analysis is
              documenting the occurrence of tear (strike-slip) faults, lateral ramps, and
              other types of fault linkages at the earthquake segment boundaries. Insights
              into the fault geometries of these boundaries will translate into helping to
              develop a better methodology for defining potential segment boundaries on other
              blind-thrust systems, which often dictate the locations and magnitudes of
              earthquakes, two key parameters in probabilistic seismic hazard assessment.
              Moreover, these detailed structural models can provide a well-documented case
              study for numerical investigations of dynamic rupture propagation and
              aftershock distribution during blind-thrust events. Additionally, these
              investigations will provide a seismotectonic model that addresses the rates and
              temporal variability of fault activity, which can be compared to more regional
              measurements such as space geodesy and to earthquake activity on adjacent
              faults systems, including the San Andreas.
