Title       : Engineering Bridges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0230623

Award Number: 0230623
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99708              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Tapia rat@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia Lanius  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Rice University engineering faculty, Texas Southern University education
              faculty, and Houston
Independent School District teachers and administrators,
              propose Engineering Bridges, a
planning project to develop a comprehensive
              program to systemically change science,
technology, mathematics, and
              engineering instruction and culture in high-minority high schools
in order to
              increase the number of underrepresented minority students excited and
              well-prepared
to enter engineering university (STEM) majors.

For over
              thirty years our nation has attempted to increase participation of African
              American,
Hispanic, and Native Americans in STEM fields. And even though there
              has been some growth
in engineering degrees granted to those groups over the
              last twenty years, that growth has not
kept up with those groups population
              growth in general. This program brings together a strong
and varied
              collaborative to develop a systemic, coherent plan to tackle this problem in a
              systemic
way.

To develop a plan that will

Prepare underrepresented
              minority high school students so they will succeed with
confidence and
              enthusiasm in university STEM courses;
Inform, excite, and motivate
              underrepresented minority high school students towards
engineering careers,
              and
Increase underrepresented minority students admission into university
              engineering
majors.

To meet these goals, the planning team will research
              and design engineering

. Curriculum materials with appeal to students of
              underrepresented groups;
. Career-driven professional development for
              teachers, principals, and counselors;
. Content-driven professional
              development for science and mathematics teachers; and a
. Multi-level (high
              school through university faculty/industrial worker) support
community that
              provides academic support and personal and professional role models.


