Title       : Development of a Textbook and Companion Websites for Chemistry-Specific Writing
               Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0230913

Award Number: 0230913
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2003       
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498420             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marin S. Robinson Marin.Robinson@NAU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fredricka Stoller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In response to the national challenge to improve literacy skills, the
              overarching goals of this project are to enhance the chemistry-specific writing
              skills of upper-division chemistry majors, promote writing-to-learn-chemistry,
              and assist students in becoming better readers of the chemical literature. In
              this project, instructional materials are being developed in the form of a
              textbook and companion websites that comprise writing modules associated with
              genres typical of chemistry. Materials target students of different
              backgrounds, including language minority students, and chemistry instructors
              with minimal training in teaching writing. Special features of the materials
              include (a) "canned" research, making it possible for students without research
              experience to complete scientific papers; (b) the use of corpus linguistics to
              develop instructional materials based on actual patterns of the language of
              chemistry; (c) accessibility to nonnative speakers; and (d) reflection and
              collaborative-learning activities. Materials developed from a previous project
              are being fine-tuned and tested at our home institution with different
              instructors and students; two years of the four-year project are dedicated to
              piloting materials in 15-20 institutions, with a cross-section of student
              populations. Assessment, linked to student learning and instructor/user
              objectives, is an integral part of the project. Formative and summative
              assessment will be conducted, in part, with instruments and procedures adapted
              from Classroom Assessment Techniques (CATs) developed for SMET instructors,
              with the assistance of an assessment coordinator and ten external evaluators. 
