Title       : Response of Terrestrial Ecosystems along the Antarctic Peninsula to a Changing
               Climate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0230579

Award Number: 0230579
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deneb Karentz                           
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2003  
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $594474             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Day tadday@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey M. Klopatek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The striking increases in air temperatures and ultraviolet-B radiation (UVB)
              documented along the west coast of the Antarctic Peninsula over the past 50
              years represent a profound climatic change, arguably larger than experienced by
              any other region on earth over the last half century. Along with these
              well-documented changes, annual precipitation and the depth of winter snow pack
              also appear to be increasing along the Peninsula. These rapid changes in
              climate provide a unique opportunity to examine the effects of climate change
              on terrestrial ecosystems. Building on past work that focused on the impacts of
              warming and UVB on the performance of terrestrial vascular plants on the
              Peninsula, this project will examine how climate change alters nutrient (carbon
              and nitrogen) pools and cycling among plants, litter and soils in
              vascular-plant dominated communities, with the overall goal of predicting
              long-term effects on plant primary productivity. Two complementary approaches
              will be employed: experimental manipulation of the climate of plant communities
              and examining patterns in plant communities along environmental transects that
              represent long-term climatic gradients. In the first approach, shorter-term
              system responses to climate change will be examined by manipulating
              temperature, water availability, and UVB exposure of vascular-plant microcosms
              over three growing seasons. Scientists will assess how these manipulations
              influence plant growth and primary productivity, carbon dioxide fluxes, litter
              quality and decomposition, pools and turnover rates of C and N, and the
              structure of soil microbial and arthropod communities. These realistic
              environmental manipulations will allow for an accurate assessment of the
              effects of different future warming scenarios, as well as the effects of solar
              UVB. In the second approach, longer-term responses to warming will be evaluated
              by measuring pools of carbon and nitrogen in plants, litter and soils in plant
              communities along transects that represent gradients of long-term temperature
              regime. Analyzing the results from short-term warming manipulations in the
              context of patterns found along these gradients will make it possible to
              develop a conceptual model of warming impacts over longer time scales. 

The
              broader impacts of this project include: (1) Recruiting and training
              underrepresented, undergraduate students. (2) The dissemination of findings to
              the general public. (3) Contributing to society at large by improving our
              understanding of how climate change impacts plant productivity and ecosystem
              carbon storage. These impacts are societal concerns because they relate to crop
              production, as well as whether ecosystem responses to climate change will
              mitigate or promote continued buildups of greenhouse gases. 
