Title       : Neogene Evolution of the Sonoran Margin: The Transition from Backarc Extension
               to Transtensional Rifting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0230439

Award Number: 0230439
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360347             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip B. Gans gans@geol.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5922,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The fundamental processes that govern continental rifting and ultimately lead to
              rupturing of continental lithosphere and opening of an ocean are still poorly
              understood.  The transtensional Gulf of California represents a superb natural
              laboratory to investigate these processes because it provides both along-strike
              and across-strike views of the rifting process, from distributed continental
              extension to the final rupturing of the North American lithosphere and the
              capture of Baja California by the Pacific Plate.  However, models for the
              kinematics and dynamics of this rift depend critically on understanding exactly
              how extensional and transcurrent strains are distributed in space and time on
              the adjacent continental margins - particularly the Sonoran Margin.
This
              project, supported by the Tectonics Program and the International Program, is
              quantifying the distribution, magnitude, timing, and style of Neogene
              deformation and magmatism across the Sonoran rifted margin in order to evaluate
              the kinematics of the transition from earlier (pre-12 million years ago)
              distributed backarc extension to post-12 million year old transtensional
              deformation associated with the cessation of subduction and transfer of Baja
              California to the Pacific Plate.  This multi-disciplinary study has brings
              together scientists and students from the U.S. and Mexico to unravel the
              history of extension and strike-slip faulting across the widest and most
              completely exposed, but least well understood rifted continental margin
              adjacent to the Gulf of California.
New geologic mapping is being carried out
              to identify the important fault systems and to work out the details of local
              structural, volcanic, and sedimentary histories.  Investigators are deciphering
              in detail the structural evolution of a 60 by 100 km area in southwestern
              Sonora, from the coast near Guaymas to the Sierra Mazatan metamorphic core east
              of Hermosillo.  In addition, structural and stratigraphic studies are being
              carried out on two representative Neogene basins in eastern Sonora to assess
              whether significant late Miocene deformation affected areas further inboard. 
              Approximately 60 new high-precision Ar-Ar age determinations are being obtained
              on key pre-, syn-, and post-tectonic volcanic units to document local volcanic
              and sedimentation histories and to bracket the timing of structural events. 
              K-feldspar Ar-Ar multi-domain diffusion, apatite (U-Th)/He, and fission track
              analyses are being employed to determine low temperature cooling histories in
              the footwalls of large normal fault systems to assess the timing, magnitude,
              and rates of extensional slip.
