Title       : "How Things Work" - A Model for Introducing Engineering Concepts to Primary
               Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0230705

Award Number: 0230705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve Watkins watkins@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Evalee Lasater  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kristine Swenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Owen Robert Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230705
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Watkins, Steve
INSTITUTION NAME:
              University of Missouri-Rolla
TITLE: "How Things Work" - A Model for
              Introducing Engineering Concepts to Primary Students


ABSTRACT

This
              project will create educational resources for primary school teachers dealing
              with technical literacy and to develop significant interactions between
              engineering programs and K-12 schools. Unfortunately, many K-12 students lose
              interest and motivation for science, mathematics, and technology early in their
              school years. Consequently, technical programs and resources dealing with high
              school students and, to some extent, middle school students are too late in the
              educational process. Primary school instruction needs a strong technical
              component that captures the imagination and stimulates interest of students.
              Too little work is currently being done to develop the technical abilities of
              primary teachers and to provide level-appropriate resources for our youngest
              scholars. 

The project will build a foundation that connects engineering
              faculty, programs, and resources to elementary teachers, schools, and students.
              In particular, a comprehensive, multi-course program in science, mathematics,
              and engineering for primary teachers is a long-term aim. The specific goals for
              this planning proposal are to facilitate the collaboration among university
              faculty in education, engineering, and arts and sciences; to increase
              pre-college student interest and motivation in engineering concepts by
              developing an innovative prototype course; and to enhance the synergy among
              university programs, K-12 curriculum, and Missouri teachers. A fundamental
              aspect of the plan is to involve university faculty, university students,
              in-service teachers, and parents as partners in the developments. 

