Title       : Planning Grant to Establish the Center for Engineering Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0230659

Award Number: 0230659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Evans evanse@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rex D. Ramsier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harry M. Cheung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francis Broadway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230659
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Evans, Edward
INSTITUTION NAME:
              University of Akron
TITLE: Planning Grant to Establish the Center for
              Engineering Learning

Abstract

This planning grant presents a novel
              strategy for engaging teams comprised of faculty
and students from
              engineering, education, and the sciences in structured collaborative learning
              of
engineering and engineering pedagogy. Through collaboration between
              faculties of engineering and
education, team design projects that involve
              pre-service elementary education students and engineers at
the freshman
              through senior levels will be developed. Using planning grant funds, a working
              group will
be formed to develop and pilot-test the multi-disciplinary team
              design project.. In the long run, the CEL will participate in developing 1)
              high quality teachers prepared to include engineering in the K-12 curriculum,
              2)
engineering faculty applying pedagogy, assessment and learning theory to
              engineering curriculum, and 3)
a body of scholarship on how students learn
              engineering at every developmental level.

Our approach is that
              multi-disciplinary team design projects, when effectively mentored
by
              engineering and education faculty and practicing engineers, will increase
              students' engineering
competency and improve pedagogy in undergraduate
              engineering. The development of the
multidisciplinary team design project will
              be driven by the input of in-service teachers and faculty from
the College of
              Education. The engineering content of the design project will come from the
              expertise and
resources of academic and industrial engineers. The
              administrators and industrial advisor on the working
group will address issues
              regarding institutional policy and industrial involvement, respectively.

The
              starting point of our development will be the Vertically Integrated Team Design
              Project
conducted in the Department of Chemical Engineering. Engineering
              design will be learned by solving an
authentic engineering problem with a team
              of education students and engineers at all levels (students
(freshman-senior),
              faculty, and industrial). Each team will be mentored by faculty members
              from
education and engineering, a practicing engineer, and a teacher. In this
              planning grant activity, four teams
will include pre-service elementary
              education teachers as active engineering members. Formative
assessment of the
              project will be discussed and disseminated by all stakeholders within the
              working
group. t our efforts will proceed at a rapid pace.

