Title       : Background Imaging of Cosmic Extragalactic Polarization (BICEP): An Experimental
               Probe of Inflation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2002  
File        : a0230438

Award Number: 0230438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vladimir Papitashvili                   
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1864218            (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew E. Lange ael@astro.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Bock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian G. Keating  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Holzapfel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 5115      ANTARCTIC AERONOMY & ASTROPHYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  The Cosmic Microwave
              Background (CMB) provides three strong but circumstantial pieces of evidence
              that the visible Universe was created by the superluminal inflation of a tiny
              volume of space: the near isotropy of the horizon, the flatness of space, and
              the phase-synchronicity of acoustic oscillations in the early universe. The
              goal of better understanding the origins of the Universe requires probing this
              epoch of Inflation directly. The most promising probe of Inflation is the
              unique signature that the GWB imprints on the polarization of the CMB. The
              amplitude of this signature depends on the energy-scale of Inflation. If the
              energy scale is typical of Grand Unification Theory (GUT) (10^15 > 3 x 10^16
              GeV), the signature may be detectable. The signature of the GWB-induced
              polarization is expected to be less than an rms amplitude of ~300 nK of the
              CMB; more than two orders of magnitude below the amplitude of the temperature
              anisotropies that have only recently been resolved. Detection will require only
              modest angular resolution (~ 1 deg.), but will require long integration (~1
              year) on a restricted (~3%) and contiguous patch of sky. The six-month night,
              the extremely dry and stable weather, and the precise rotation of the sky about
              the zenith make South Pole Station the ideal terrestrial site for this
              ambitious project. A CMB polarimeter (BICEP) uniquely capable of detecting the
              signature of the GWB is now under construction and will be available for
              deployment to the South Pole in 2003. The team that is building BICEP includes
              four senior experimentalists who have successfully fielded sophisticated
              bolometric instrumentation to the Antarctic. BICEP will operate simultaneously
              at 100 and 150 GHz in order to both minimize and recognize confusion from
              polarized astrophysical foregrounds. At these frequencies, a modest (and thus
              relatively easy to deploy and maintain) 20-cm primary aperture will provide a
              resolution of 1deg. at 100 GHz and 0.7 deg. at 150 GHz. By combining a new
              polarization-sensitive bolometric detector technology developed for Planck
              (2007 launch) with four independent levels of signal differencing and a
              carefully optimized observing strategy, BICEP will reach the current limit on
              CMB polarization in the first hour of integration, reach the sensitivity of
              Planck over 1% of the sky in the first week, and precisely measure CMB
              polarization on the critical angular scales of 1 deg. to 10 deg. BICEP will
              serve the broader community of cosmologists and astrophysicists by  
(i)
              pioneering an orders-of-magnitude improvement in this exciting new field, (ii)
              characterizing the diffuse astrophysical foregrounds that will ultimately limit
              measurements of this type (and which are of direct interest to Galactic
              astronomers), (iii) demonstrating  new technologies and methodologies that
              promise to be of broad importance to millimeter-wave polarimetry, and (iv)
              providing excellent  training  for  graduate students and postdoctoral fellows
              in labs which have a very strong track-record in this regard. Observational
              cosmology is currently enjoying a renaissance that has captured the public
              imagination, and serves as one of the most effective vehicles for stimulating
              interest in science in general. Detection of the signature of the GWB in the
              CMB would represent a triumph of fundamental physics and cosmology that would
              revolutionize our understanding of the origins of the Universe. 

