Title       : Recruitment and Retention of STEM Majors in the First Year: A Pilot Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0230129

Award Number: 0230129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth L. Johnson ejohnson@xu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dena S. Morton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marco Fatuzzo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Amy Vanderbilt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Xavier University
	      3800 Victory Parkway
	      Cincinnati, OH  452071035    513/745-3000

NSF Program : 1796      STEM Talent Expansn Pgm (STEP)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks to increase the number of students receiving baccalaureate
              degrees in STEM fields at Xavier University. The pilot program focuses
              particularly on first-year students in computer science, mathematics, and
              physics. The objectives for the project are: to increase the numbers of
              undeclared majors who become majors in computer science, mathematics, or
              physics by the end of their first year; to increase the retention rate from
              first to second year of students who enter Xavier with a declared major in
              computer science, mathematics, or physics; to increase the number of
              underrepresented minorities majoring in computer science, mathematics, and
              physics, and the number of women in computer science and physics; and to assess
              the impact of these efforts so that the successful parts can be expanded to all
              mathematics and science departments at Xavier after the end of the grant
              period. The pilot effort includes components that support both the recruitment
              of STEM majors from the undecided majors and the retention of incoming STEM
              majors: a first-year STEM exposure program for prospective majors; an
              undergraduate teaching assistant program that assigns current majors to be
              tutors/mentors in the first-year, major-level courses; a grants program
              providing funds for computer science, mathematics, and physics students to do
              student-planned activities aimed at outreach both on- and off-campus; a summer
              bridge program to help at-risk students between the first and second years to
              acquire the mathematical and scientific skills necessary to continue in the
              major; and a workshop series for STEM faculty to raise awareness of STEM
              recruitment and retention issues, particularly those of underrepresented
              groups. Current STEM majors are used extensively in the project. This
              involvement strengthens the bonds of the existing STEM community and provides
              essential role models for incoming students. The project provides an
              opportunity to test several approaches towards increasing STEM majors in a
              liberal arts environment, thus providing results that can be used across the
              nation. It focuses particularly on approaches that create a supportive learning
              environment for underrepresented groups in science and mathematics.

