Title       : Infrared Measurements of Atmospheric Composition over Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2002  
File        : a0230370

Award Number: 0230370
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vladimir Papitashvili                   
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $614262             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank J. Murcray fmurcray@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pierre F. Fogal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald D. Blatherwick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 5115      ANTARCTIC AERONOMY & ASTROPHYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1318,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed project is to develop a program of observations of atmospheric
              chemistry using passive infrared instruments at McMurdo and the South Pole. The
              measurements will be made year round for two years, and will provide
              significantly more and better data and constraints for photochemical transport
              models. Since these models are used to predict future ozone depletion and
              climate change, it is important that they be as accurate as possible. The
              Antarctic ozone hole has shown the sensitivity of the southern polar
              stratosphere to chlorine, and it is expected that the gradual healing of the
              hole to mark the success of the policy. However, model predictions indicate the
              possibility of a delay in recovery due to the impact of global warming on the
              catalytic ozone destruction process. Since most current satellite instruments
              do not sample the polar regions in the winter, ground based instruments can
              make important contributions and data from the proposed instruments would also
              provide validation for new satellite sensors. These instruments are the four
              Fourier Transform Spectrometers (FTS) operated at Arrival Heights (in
              collaboration with the New Zealand National Institute for Water and Air
              Research) and at South Pole. Two of these FTS (0.1-1.0 cm resolution
              atmospheric emission) will be placed at South Pole and at McMurdo for year
              round operation, and a 0.003 cm-1 resolution solar FTS will be deployed at
              South Pole to be operated during the summer. The emission instruments will
              provide important information during the polar night regarding HNO3 and
              denitrification, as well as dehydration. The transmission FTS's will provide
              high resolution spectra from which we will derive vertical profiles as well as
              vertical column amounts of many molecules important in the ozone destruction
              process as well as atmospheric tracers such as HF. The spectra from the
              emission instruments will provide year round column abundance measurements of
              HNO3, CH4, O3, H2O, N2O, the CFC's, ClONO2, and NO2 prior to its conversion to
              other odd nitrogen. The solar instruments will additionally provide some
              altitude profile information about those molecules, as well as HCl, ClONO2, NO,
              NO2, HNO3, HF, and others. The obtained spectral data set will be used to
              determine the current state of NOx partitioning, to measure the extent of the
              denitrification, to measure water vapor profiles into the stratosphere, to
              measure dehydration, to determine the current CFC 11, 12, and 22 levels as well
              as stratospheric Cl in the form of HCl and ClONO2, and to perform comparisons
              between the two Antarctic sites in an effort to gain more insight into vortex
              related chemical and dynamical effects. In addition, the collected data will
              provide photochemical transport modelers the ability to compare model outputs
              to actual measurements, especially at intermediate stages. It is important at
              this time when we are approaching the beginning of the recovery from
              Cl-catalyzed ozone destruction, that we have a data set that comprehensively
              covers the major constituents of both the catalytic ozone destruction sequence
              and global warming, so as to be able to place in perspective the relative
              influence of the two mechanisms.

