Title       : Testing Southern Ocean Control of Atmospheric CO2 using Diatom-based
               Paleo-proxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0230514

Award Number: 0230514
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Altabet maltabet@umassd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass, Dartmouth
	      285 Old Westport Road
	      North Dartmouth, MA  02747    508/999-8953

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports a project to investigate the role of the
              Southern Ocean in regulating atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) during
              glacial-interglacial cycles. The polar Southern Ocean is the primary region
              where the deep-sea exchanges carbon dioxide (CO2) with the atmosphere due to
              shoaling of very-cold seawater to the near-surface layer. Consequently, of the
              numerous theories that have been advanced to explain oceanic control of
              atmospheric CO2, most of those that remain viable point to a dominant role for
              this region. Increasing consumption of upwelled CO2 and nutrients (e.g.
              increasing export production) or decreasing rates of supply to the surface
              (e.g. increasing stratification or sea-ice cover) may thus be responsible for
              reduced atmospheric CO2 during glacial maxima. Since at present only a small
              fraction of available macronutrients (nitrates and phosphates) are consumed in
              Southern Ocean surface waters, either scenario would produce a substantial
              increase in relative nutrient utilization, thus making it a master
              variable.

The history of Southern Ocean surface nutrient utilization will be
              reconstructed for the last 60,000 years at three Ocean Drilling Program (ODP)
              sites that span the polar front. These remarkable Atlantic sector sites have
              continuous, high sediment accumulation rates (>15 centimeters per thousand
              years (cm/kyr)) for the entire period to be studied. They are also unique for
              the Southern Ocean in being within the modern zone of high biogenic opal
              content as well as having sufficient foraminiferal abundance for oxygen isotope
              chronostratigraphy. Centennial resolution will be achieved over the past 60,000
              years to determine phasing with changes in climate and atmospheric CO2 to
              within 500 years with emphasis on millennial-scale events between 20,000 and
              60,000 years ago as well as the last glacial termination. Since sea-ice has
              been implicated as a driving mechanism, detailed comparisons will also be made
              for existing sea-ice proxy data from the ODP sites as well as the Vostok ice
              core climate and CO2 record. Nitrogen isotopic ratio will be the primary proxy
              for nutrient utilization, which has been verified in detail through studies of
              the modern Southern Ocean. To avoid artifacts associated with organic matter
              diagenesis, we will conduct analyses primarily on diatom-frustule bound organic
              matter. The three ODP sites have relatively high biogenic opal content over the
              time period of interest. Though not completely unambiguous, diatom carbon
              isotopic data obtained at no extra cost will be useful for constraining
              possible scenarios particularly since it will be obtained synoptically with the
              other tracer data. It will reflect primarily changes in surface CO2 and/or
              diatom growth rate. In collaboration with Dr. Christina De La Rocha (Cambridge
              U.), silicon isotopes will be measured on a subset of the samples analyzed for
              nitrogen and carbon isotopic ratio. 

To achieve the best possible chronology
              for nutrient utilization for the last 40,000 years, we will explore radiocarbon
              dating of diatom frustule-bound organic matter using preparation methodology
              recently developed by John Hayes' group at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
              Institution (WHOI) Accelerator Mass Spectrometry (AMS) facility. Subsets of
              samples analyzed for nitrogen, carbon, and silicon isotopic ratio will be sent
              to WHOI for sample preparation and AMS radiocarbon analysis. This approach not
              only permits dating of critical intervals where there is insufficient foram
              material for radiocarbon dating but also ensures that the dates obtained
              pertain directly to our nutrient utilization record. Verification of this new
              method will be made at each site by dating diatom frustules and forams from the
              same sediment depths where the latter are sufficiently abundant.

The
              following major hypotheses will be tested:
#1  Southern Ocean surface relative
              nutrient utilization is the primary driver of past changes in atmospheric CO2
              and hence global climate change.
#2  Seasonal sea ice cover is an important
              regulator of Southern Ocean relative nutrient utilization and CO2 providing a
              positive feedback between Antarctic and global climate.
#3  Glacial reduction
              of the silicate to nitrate utilization ratio resulted in elevated silicate in
              Subantarctic surface waters, northward movement of opal-rich sediments, and
              changes in the nutrient composition of intermediate waters formed in polar
              frontal region.

