Title       : Quantifying the Temporal Evolution of Eocene Lake Gosiute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0230123

Award Number: 0230123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley S. Singer bsinger@geology.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan R. Carroll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Lacustrine deposits provide some of the best available archives of
              many critical Earth surface processes, due to the relatively continuous
              sedimentation in lakes compared to other terrestrial environments. In addition
              to preserving various paleoclimatic proxies, cyclic sedimentary facies
              successions may provide records of periodic forcing of climate. Lacustrine
              strata also offer a unique and underutilized window on the complex interactions
              between climate, landscape denudation, and rising orogenic topography. The
              rapid biological speciation that can occur in large lakes may make them
              important evolutionary incubators. However, the remarkable utility of lake
              deposits to measure rates of change in all of these processes has been hampered
              by generally poor chronostratigraphic control. 

The Eocene Green River
              Formation (GRF) is perhaps the most studied system of lacustrine deposits in
              the world. Eocene climate records are of particular interest because the Early
              Eocene represents the warmest interval of the Cenozoic, and as such may shed
              light on the potential long-term effects of modern global warming. Recent
              studies suggest that deposition of the GRF may have also coincided with
              unexpectedly rapid uplift of adjacent Laramide mountain ranges. Numerous
              tephras interbedded in lacustrine facies have long aided in correlating these
              classic deposits, but until recently the best age resolution was one million
              years or more. Our intitial NSF-funded project has vastly improved the
              geochronologic framework for the GRF in Wyoming by determining laser fusion
              40Ar/ 39Ar ages of sanidine and/or biotite from seven tuffs. Ages for six of
              the tuffs are between 50.700.14 and 48.940.12 Ma (2 sigma), thus we can resolve
              temporal differences on the order of 100 kyrs over most of the 2.3 myr span of
              the dated deposits. To accurately place these tuffs within their broader
              sedimentologic and stratigraphic context, we have also constructed basin-scale
              cross sections of the Wilkins Peak and Laney Members. Our results have already
              permitted several significant new conclusions: 1) We have found that the GRF
              was deposited 3-4 myr earlier than suggested by previous K-Ar ages, and
              therefore coincides with the the latter half of the globally warmest period in
              the Cenozoic. 2) The age of the Bridgerian-Wasatchian faunal transition can now
              be constrained to 50.55 0.43 Ma. 3) The evaporative facies of the Wilkins Peak
              Member accumulated three times more quickly than the deeper lacustrine facies
              of the Tipton and Laney Members. 4) The average duration of lake cycles in the
              Tipton and Laney Members is consistent with precession, but previously
              interpreted "precession" cycles in the Wilkins Peak Member are actually of much
              shorter duration (~10 kyr). 5) Although our initial study focused on climatic
              issues, we fortuitously discovered a desiccation event that appears to record
              catastrophic emplacement of the Heart Mountain Detachment. We have submitted
              three papers to top journals to document our prior results. To capitalize and
              build upon these achievements, we propose the following new objectives:
_
              Increase accuracy and temporal resolution via U-Pb and 40Ar/ 39Ar dating. By
              conducting U-Pb analysis of volcanic zircon grains we hope to cut our already
              small relative dating errors in half, and to reduce fully propagated errors by
              an order of magnitude.
_ Test the ability of statistical models to delineate
              lacustrine cycles. Radioisotopically-measured accumulation rates will be used
              to scale bed thickness spectra into time, and to determine permissible cycle
              periods for different GRF Members. Also, we will evaluate the effect of varying
              stratigraphic "completeness" on such spectra.
_ Explore the temporal record of
              basin-margin alluvial fans. Coarse-grained alluvial strata that interfinger
              with the GRF offer a unique record of the timing of uplift of basin-bounding
              ranges. We will correlate these deposits with dated tuffs to provide a
              high-resolution record of Laramide fault movements.
_ Extend temporal
              correlations into adjacent basins. By dating selected tephras from the Uinta,
              Piceance Creek, Fossil, and Bighorn basins we will establish a regionally
              consistent chronostratigraphic framework that will facilitate the correlation
              of important tectonic, climatic, and biologic events.

This project will draw
              upon cross-disciplinary expertise from the fields of sedimentology,
              stratigraphy, and geochronology to address fundamental questions concerning
              rates of Earth surface processes. This integrated approach to one of the worl's
              best known lacustrine deposits will provide a new benchmark for reading the
              terrestrial record of paleoclimate preserved in the deposits of large lakes.

