Title       : Engineering Connections in Grades 11-13 Science and Math Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0230642

Award Number: 0230642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99938              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Gilbert tgilbert@lynx.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donna Qualters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Sheahan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacqueline A. Isaacs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230642
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Gilbert, Thomas
INSTITUTION
              NAME: Northeastern University
TITLE: Engineering Connections in Grades 11-13
              Science and Math Courses

ABSTRACT

This proposal describes  a  year-long
              planning process to develop  a model of teaching 
that  reflects  current 
              cognitive  learning  theory  and  that  will  create  a  common  pedagogical
              framework for science  and math  courses taken by  juniors and seniors in high
              school  and college freshmen. The  overarching  goal of this project is to
              recruit and retain a large and diverse population of young people to programs
              of study leading to careers as: 1) engineering professions in which they are
              master problem  solvers and developers  of new solutions to engineering
              challenges; and 2) high school math and science teachers who understand and are
              critical consumers of technology, and who can extrapolate fundamental concepts
              to engineering applications.  
 
The planning team consists of Northeastern
              University (NU) faculty from engineering, 
biology,  chemistry,  mathematics 
              and  physics  and  Boston  Public  School  (BPS)  math  and science  teachers. 
              They will  form  a  community  of reflective teaching practitioners spanning
              across disciplines and the high school-university divide.  These communities
              will meet to assess and enhance their own teaching practices and will
              collaboratively design: 1) a 3-week Urban Engineering Summer Camp for juniors
              from the John D. O'Bryant School of Mathematics and  Science in Boston; 2) 
              engineering activity modules for G11 and 12 math and science courses; 3) math
              and science courses taken by first-year  engineering majors that are based on
              solving a series of engineering problems; 4) math and science courses taken by
              undergraduates in NU's School of Education that emphasize the connections
              between these courses  and issues from engineering  and technology; and 5)
              comprehensive, conceptual tests to assess student understanding of the
              principles of math and science and their abilities to apply these principles.
              
 
 


