Title       : Curriculum Revitalization in Chemical Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0230655

Award Number: 0230655
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Armstrong rca@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230655
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Armstrong, Robert
INSTITUTION
              NAME: Massachusetts Institute of Technology
TITLE: Curriculum Revitalization
              in Chemical Engineering

Abstract

The discipline of chemical engineering
              has evolved dramatically over the past forty years, yet the core curriculum has
              undergone only minor changes. The engineering science paradigm that began in
              chemical engineering around 1960 still dominates the core curriculum and major
              educational texts used throughout the field. That paradigm has served us well;
              indeed, it has been enabling for chemical engineering to become a central
              engineering discipline . The unique focus of chemical engineering on molecular
              transformations, processes, quantitative analysis, and multiscale treatment of
              problems provides an ideal platform for productive interactions with a wide
              range of other science and engineering disciplines at boundaries that are among
              the most exciting technology areas of our time. This broad applicability of
              chemical engineering fundamentals has become a defining feature of the
              discipline, and we are challenged to convey this breadth to our students. Hence
              a major driver for curriculum reform is the need to connect students to these
              many applications. Inasmuch as engineering curricula are often taught largely
              through example problems, this is a major undertaking if it is to be done well.
              A second major driver for curriculum reform in chemical engineering at this
              time is the advent of molecular biology. Our disciplinary focus on molecular
              interactions and transformations makes for a natural and exciting connection
              with molecular biology. Finally, we find ourselves in an era of rapid
              educational reform, in which both methods of engaging students in classrooms
              and laboratories are being reexamined and methods of incorporating new
              technology for education are being explored.

The opportunities for reform in
              chemical engineering curricula are so compelling and broad that an appropriate
              response requires wide-ranging participation across the entire discipline. In
              addition to providing a richer response to this opportunity, extensive
              engagement of the academic community will facilitate wide adoption of the
              results of the reform. Hence this proposal is directed to a broad planning
              exercise to engage the chemical engineering discipline in responding to the
              challenges of breadth, biology, and new teaching methods. This will be done
              through a series of workshops, broadly advertised to the community. The first
              workshop will be focused on (re)defining the core curriculum in chemical
              engineering, with the product being enumeration of themes for a series of
              smaller topical workshops in these core areas. The theme workshops are charged
              with developing proposals for creation of texts, web-based supporting material,
              and modular experiments, design problems, and subtopics for augmenting and
              supplementing subjects.

 



