Title       : Pilot Study for a "Course-Less" Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0230681

Award Number: 0230681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Knox rknox@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Teri R. Rhoads  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt C. Gramoll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randall L. Kolar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230681
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Knox, Robert
INSTITUTION NAME:
              University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
TITLE: Planning Grant: Pilot Study for a
              "Course-less" Curriculum

Abstract

Work in this planning grant would build
              upon the Sooner City project, which is a comprehensive, integrated,
              infrastructure design project that is threaded throughout the Oklahoma
              University civil engineering curriculum, beginning in the freshman year.
              Freshmen are given a plat of undeveloped land that, by the time they graduate,
              is turned into a blueprint for Sooner City's infrastructure. Among other
              things, the project promotes five outcomes not always addressed by traditional
              curricula, but which are emphasized by ABET 2000: team building, communication,
              leadership, design, and higher level learning skills. For practical purposes,
              the original Sooner City project was implemented in the context of the
              traditional "course-dictated" curriculum. While this strategy promotes faculty
              buy-in and minimizes institutional cost, the above outcomes may be more fully
              realized if the curriculum were more flexible, viz, provide basic engineering
              science skills and tools to the students on an as-needed basis to complete the
              project. Thus, the objective of this planning grant is to pilot a move toward a
              project-driven, "course-less" curriculum. In this setting, "course-less" does
              not refer to "no courses." Rather, there would be "less" of them because
              traditional courses that teach basic concepts would be replaced with self-paced
              modules.

Specifically, the Sooner City project, through water supply and
              distribution design tasks, will provide context for learning the principles of
              engineering fluid mechanics. When students are faced with a new analysis or
              design task for which they do not have the prerequisite fluids background, the
              tools will be provided to them on a just-in-time basis via interactive modules.
              Within this framework, the proposed pilot project can be broken down into three
              subtasks: development of self-paced learning modules for core areas of fluid
              mechanics that take full advantage of information technology; development of
              Sooner City design projects that integrate these modules in a just-in-time
              fashion; assessment of the efficacy of the methods. Outcomes from the project
              will provide the needed insight to direct future steps toward a more robust
              "course-less" educational experience.

