Title       : Purchase of 800 MHz NMR Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0230966

Award Number: 0230966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur Pardi arthur.pardi@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah S. Wuttke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Arthur Pardi at University of Colorado, Boulder
              that provides partial funding for purchase of a state-of-the-art 800 MHz
              nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer.  A consortium of three
              Universities in the Rocky Mountain Region; the University of Colorado, Boulder,
              the University of Colorado Health Science Center (UCHSC) and the University of
              Utah School of Medicine, will equally share this instrument.  This high field
              NMR will benefit the research programs of the seven major users (Drs. A. Pardi
              and D.S. Wuttke at Boulder; Drs. W.L. Sundquist and D.R. Davis at Utah; and
              Drs. B. K. Bendiak, D.N.M. Jones, and M.J. Overduin at UCHSC) as well as other
              minor users at the three institutions and in the Rocky Mountain Region.  The
              various research programs are focused on structure-function studies of
              proteins, nucleic acids and carbohydrates.  Recent methodological developments
              allow acquisition of very high-resolution NMR spectra on much larger
              macromolecules than was previously possible.  These powerful new techniques are
              most effective at ultra-high magnetic fields, and the requested 800 MHz NMR
              will make it possible for the members of this consortium to dramatically
              enhance their research programs on larger and more complex
              macromolecules.
	This instrument will accelerate new and ongoing research
              projects in the following areas: Oligosaccharide Structures and Cell Surface
              Carbohydrate-Protein Interactions - B. K. Bendiak; Structural Studies of HIV
              Primer/Template Complex - D. R. Davis; Structure-Function Studies of Proteins
              and Carbohydrates Involved in Disease - D. N. M. Jones;  Structures,
              Interactions and Dynamics of Membrane-Associated Proteins - M. J. Overduin; 
              Structure-Function Studies of RNA - A. Pardi;  Structural Studies of HIV-1
              Assembly and Budding - W. I. Sundquist;  Structural Studies of Biologically
              Important Molecular Recognition - D. S. Wuttke.  The major users currently have
              access to lower magnetic field NMR instrumentation so the 800 MHz NMR will be
              exclusively used for projects that have a demonstrated need for the higher
              field, higher resolution and higher sensitivity of this instrument.  In
              addition to using the 800 MHz NMR to determine solution structures of
              biologically important macromolecules, some of the major users are actively
              involved in development of improved techniques for determining structures of
              biomolecules in solution.  Thus this ultra-high field NMR will also be used to
              aid in the development of new methods for probing the structures and dynamics
              of larger proteins, RNAs, DNAs, and carbohydrates than was previously
              possible.
	There is a growing awareness of the potential of structure/function
              studies of biomolecules for revolutionizing human medicine and health care. 
              Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography are the two
              techniques for determining high-resolution structures of biomolecules.  The
              research performed on this 800 MHz NMR instrument will lead to technological
              innovations that maximize structural and dynamical information on potential
              drug targets which can aid in the development of improved therapies for cancer,
              viral and microbial infections and developmental diseases. The acquisition of
              this state-of-the-art 800 MHz NMR will also have significant impact on the
              educational training of graduate students, postdoctoral researchers,
              undergraduates, and faculty at the three Universities in the consortium.  The 7
              major users groups together support a large number of graduate and
              undergraduate students, postdoctoral researchers and technical staff.  Access
              to this state-of-the-art instrument for solution structural studies of
              proteins, carbohydrates and nucleic acids will provide an outstanding training
              opportunity, leading to much higher level of expertise of these NMR users.

