Title       : Forensix: Large-scale Tamper-resistant Computer Forensic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0230960

Award Number: 0230960
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $749811             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wu-chang Feng wuchang@cse.ogi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Maier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wu-chi Feng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan Walpole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1766      Strategic Tech for Internet
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9150,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Computer forensic systems are large-scale auditing systems that are
              complementary with on-line intrusion and anomaly detection and have been a
              relatively understudied field in network security. Whereas intrusion and
              anomaly detection systems attempt to do an active on-line analysis of events,
              forensic systems seek to log all of the information being processed for
              subsequent, off-line analysis. For the most part, computer forensics is still
              an ad-hoc activity that is applied to a system that has already been
              compromised.

Leveraging the advances in computing, networking, and storage
              systems and building on the work within the IDS community, the project will
              build an experimental computer forensics system that will allow system
              administrators, law enforcement officials, and security experts to quickly and
              easily track down sources of security incidents after they have happened. There
              are a number of unique aspects of proposed approach including:
(i) Actively
              tracking changes to the system being monitored at the operating system kernel
              level before an attack occurs to capture forensic data
(ii) Backing the audit
              information to a locally connected logging host. This logging host exports only
              one service: the audit trail information from the host being monitored. All
              other access to the logging host is allowed only through the console. Thus, the
              logging host is a system that will provide extremely detailed system
              information.
(iii) A database system to hold logging information. With an
              investigation of techniques for populating a database to allow advanced queries
              on the logging information. The goal of this is to allow complex queries to be
              performed while monitoring the system.

The main questions to answer as a
              result of this research are:
(i) Can a scalable proactive logging hosts be
              built to capture a large number of attacks?
(ii) Can database technologies be
              used to actively mine fore malicious activities?
(iii) How can file systems
              and database technologies be developed to support scalable logging?

