Title       : I-SEE Paradigm for Multi-Disciplinary Learning and Collaboration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0230691

Award Number: 0230691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis A. Siginer siginer@engr.twsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mara Alagic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glyn M. Rimmington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jharna Chaudhuri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Krishna K. Krishnan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wichita State University
	      1845 Fairmount
	      Wichita, KS  67260    316/689-3456

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230691
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Siginer, Dennis
INSTITUTION
              NAME: Wichita State University
TITLE: I-SEE Paradigm for Multi-Disciplinary
              Learning and Collaboration

Abstract

The ultimate goal of this
              implementation project is to develop a plan to produce the multi-disciplinary
              engineering-team graduate. This will be a person, who exhibits all the
              attributes required by the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology
              (ABET), along with a new attribute, being collaborative-engineering and team
              skill savvy. The implementation project will facilitate transformation of the
              curriculum from a set of separate unconnected programs and courses to one in
              which they are connected via a common unifying theme on design. This
              transformation involves more than including the design in the courses but also
              the integration of multiple perspectives into the learning process. In the
              planning project, the planning team will devise methods for assisting faculty
              and students with this transformation. At the completion of the planning
              project, the methods and scaffolding will be documented ready for
              implementation and dissemination.

This process will be facilitated in ways
              that incorporate the best teaching practices validated through current
              educational research and current research about learning and cognition.

