Title       : Multi-Device Rendezvous Architecture (MuDRA): An Architecture for Mobile and
               Heterogeneous Multi-Device Information Access
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0230812

Award Number: 0230812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan R. Blatecky                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aura Ganz ganz@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1766      Strategic Tech for Internet
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : ,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A casual observer of the current trend in computing devices today will see an
              increasing tendency towards more mobile and compact computing devices, even in
              not so obvious places such as the family car.  Unlike in the past, these
              devices tend to perform specialized tasks and are limited in functionality, but
              posses a great deal of potential if used together as a single unit.  The
              starting premise of this proposal is that future communication environments
              will be characterized by multi-device, deeply networked physical spaces, and
              that users want access anywhere, anytime.

The objective of this proposal is
              to develop a platform where different technologies may be integrated and
              bridged across to add value to services provided to users.  The goal is to
              develop a network-based middleware MuDRA (Multi Device Rendezvous Architecture)
              which will empower the network infrastructure to enable multi-device,
              multi-modal communication for mobile users.  The approach is to adopt a
              multi-device user scenario, where multiple devices may be used simultaneously
              for content delivery and communication.  The solution will work with open
              standards, making the work interoperable with other third party services and
              approaches as they are developed.  The proposal is an evolutionary development
              of existing technologies.

The results of the work will have a broad impact
              on a number of fields including Ubiquitous Computing, Wearable Computers,
              Computer Aided Collaborative Work, and so forth.  The results of the work will
              also be available for use in other application scenarios such as distance
              education and delivery of content to people with disabilities.

