Title       : Pathways to Success in STEM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0230131

Award Number: 0230131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249519             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah F. Perkins sperkins@stlcc.cc.mo.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ashok K. Agrawal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chaya Gopalan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donna Friedman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laurencin Dunbar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Louis Cmty Col Adm Ctr
	      300 S. Broadway
	      Saint Louis, MO  631022810    314/539-5000

NSF Program : 1796      STEM Talent Expansn Pgm (STEP)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Building on the existing framework at St. Louis Community College that supports
              recruitment and retention, we are developing an integrated program, Pathways to
              Success in STEM, to increase recruitment and retention of students seeking STEM
              degrees at the College. Through piloting the program at the SLCC Florissant
              Valley and Meramec campuses, we are focusing our efforts on both increasing the
              number of students entering STEM programs as well as increasing the number of
              students completing STEM degrees.
Our efforts are also expanded to recruit
              traditionally underrepresented students in STEM areas by reaching to school
              districts with 50% or more minority student populations. The project activities
              include: (1) Windows to STEM Opportunities program--designed to bring high
              school students and parents to the college campus to meet faculty and to be
              introduced to STEM laboratories and to career opportunities, (2) Gateway to
              Math and Science program-designed for under prepared students to gain skills
              and knowledge in math, reading, writing, and science needed to enter
              college-level STEM programs, (3) Advising/Career Counseling Workshops--given to
              STEM faculty, support staff in academic advising, counseling, and the ACCESS
              office (whose personnel work with students with disabilities), (4) Models of
              Success seminars--developed to bring STEM professionals to the campus to meet
              with STEM students in small groups to share experiences in pursuing STEM
              education and careers, and (5) Expanded Articulation Agreement-- to ensure
              seamless transitions for students from their two-year STEM programs to four
              year institutions. Our overarching goal is to develop an innovative,
              sustainable structure for on-going recruitment and retention efforts across all
              disciplines within the STEM division in the College. 

