Title       : Opal Burial in the Pacific Sector of the Southern Ocean: A Test of the "Silicic
               Acid Leakage Hypothesis."
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0230268

Award Number: 0230268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $414805             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lloyd H. Burckle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports a project to investigate the "Silicic Acid
              Leakage Hypothesis" as it relates to global carbon dioxide fluctuations during
              glacial-interglacial cycles.

Intellectual Merit
This project will evaluate
              the burial rate of biogenic opal in the Pacific sector of the Southern Ocean,
              both during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) and during the Holocene, as a
              critical test of the "Silicic Acid Leakage Hypothesis". 

The "Silicic Acid
              Leakage Hypothesis" has been proposed recently to explain the glacial reduction
              in the carbon dioxide content of the atmosphere that has been reconstructed
              from Antarctic ice cores. Vast amounts of dissolved Si (silicic acid) are
              supplied to surface waters of the Southern Ocean by wind-driven upwelling of
              deep waters. Today, that dissolved Si is consumed almost quantitatively by
              diatoms who form skeletal structures composed of biogenic opal (a mineral form
              of silicon). According to the "Silicic Acid Leakage Hypothesis", environmental
              conditions in the Southern Ocean during glacial periods were unfavorable for
              diatom growth, leading to reduced (compared to interglacials) efficiency of
              dissolved Si utilization. Dissolved Si that was not consumed biologically in
              the glacial Southern ocean was then exported to the tropics in waters that sink
              in winter to depths of a few hundred meters along the northern fringes of the
              Antarctic Circumpolar Current, and return some decades later to the sunlit
              surface in tropical regions of wind-driven upwelling.  

An increase in the
              amount of dissolved Si that "leaks" out of the Southern Ocean and later upwells
              at low latitudes could shift the global average composition of phytoplankton
              toward a greater abundance of diatoms and fewer CaCO3-secreting taxa
              (especially coccolithophorids). Consequences of such a taxonomic shift in the
              ocean's phytoplankton assemblage include:
	a) an increase in the global
              average organic carbon/calcium carbonate ratio of particulate biogenic material
              sinking into the deep sea;
	b) a reduction in the preservation and burial of
              calcium carbonate in marine sediments;
	c) an increase in ocean alkalinity as
              a consequence of the first two changes mentioned above, and;
	d) a lowering of
              atmospheric CO2 concentrations in response to increased alkalinity of ocean
              waters. 

A complete assessment of the Silicic acid leakage hypothesis will
              require an evaluation of:  (1) Si utilization efficiencies using
              newly-developed stable isotopic techniques; (2) opal burial rates in
              low-latitude upwelling regions; and (3) opal burial rates in the Southern
              Ocean. This project addresses the last of these topics. 

Previous work has
              shown that there was little change in opal burial rate between the LGM and the
              Holocene in the Atlantic and Indian sectors of the Southern Ocean.  Preliminary
              results (summarized in this proposal) suggest that the Pacific may have been
              different, however, in that opal burial rates in the Pacific sector seem to
              have been lower during the LGM than during the Holocene, allowing for the
              possibility of "Si leakage" from this region. However, available results are
              too sparse to make any quantitative conclusions at this time. For that reason,
              we propose to make a comprehensive evaluation of opal burial rates in the
              Pacific sector of the Southern Ocean. 

Significance and Broader
              Impacts
Determining the mechanism(s) by which the ocean has regulated
              climate-related changes in the CO2 content of the atmosphere has been the focus
              of a substantial effort by paleoceanographers over the past two decades. The
              Silicic Acid Leakage Hypothesis is a viable new candidate mechanism that
              warrants further exploration and testing.  Completion of the proposed work will
              contribute significantly to that effort. 

During the course of this work,
              several undergraduates will be exposed to paleoclimate research through their
              involvement in this project. Burckle and Anderson are both dedicated to the
              education and training of young scientists, and to the recruitment of women and
              under-represented minorities. To illustrate, two summer students
              (undergraduates) worked in Burckle's lab during the summer of 2002. One was a
              woman and the other (male) was a member of an under-represented minority.
              Anderson and Burckle will continue with similar recruitment efforts during the
              course of the proposed study. A minority student who has expressed an interest
              in working on this research during the summer of 2003 has already been
              identified.


