Title       : SGER: Paleogenetics of an Arctic Herbivore
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0230733

Award Number: 0230733
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela Groves pam.groves@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,9150,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
0230733
Groves

At the end of the last ice age 10,000 years ago, a period
              of dramatic climate change coincided with the extinction of many large mammals.
              Depending on location, terminal Pleistocene extinctions were caused by some
              combination of rapid climatic change and over-hunting by humans. In the Arctic,
              where few humans lived 10,000 years ago, climatic change was probably the major
              culprit. Understanding phylogeographic patterns and aspects of population
              dynamics of species during this time of change can lead to insights of
              responses of species to climate change. Analysis of DNA from long-dead animals
              can be used to answer questions about changes in genetic patterns in relation
              to climate change during the late Pleistocene. These questions, unapproachable
              only a decade ago, now can be addressed using new techniques of DNA analysis
              applied to ancient bones preserved in permafrost. Recent studies of ancient DNA
              from late Pleistocene brown bears (Ursus arctos) suggest their genetic history
              is more complicated than that implied by the fossil record. This project is a
              pilot study to investigate patterns of genetic change in an herbivore that
              survived the terminal Pleistocene extinctions in northern North America and
              continues to inhabit the Arctic. 

The study species is the muskox (Ovibos
              moschatus), for which there is an extensive collection of carbon-14 dated bones
              recently collected from permafrost in northern Alaska. Modern muskoxen have
              extremely low levels of genetic variability, and this pilot project will
              investigate whether there is sufficient variability in the ancient muskox bones
              to provide information on phylogeographic patterns and population genetics
              during the late Pleistocene and how any genetic changes might relate to climate
              change. Fragments of mitochondrial DNA from bones of ages spanning 5,000 to
              40,000 years will be amplified and sequenced using accepted ancient DNA
              techniques. Replications of all stages of analysis of some bones will be
              performed at the University of California Los Angeles. The DNA sequences will
              be analyzed to determine if they can be used to infer population level
              parameters of genetics. Changes in genetic patterns will be compared to the
              paleoclimate record based on Greenland ice core records and other, more local
              paleo-environmental data from the North Slope of Alaska. 

Though this
              project is exploratory, and risky, if the field and laboratory methodologies
              are successful, this eork should lead to valuable advances in understanding
              paleo- population genetics and the influence of climate change on genetic
              changes. This understanding could benefit the field of conservation genetics
              and management of endangered species. 

