Title       : Promotion, Recruitment and Retention: STEM Initiatives for a Public Liberal Arts
               College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0230030

Award Number: 0230030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95965              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Nostrand nostrab@potsdam.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence Brehm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Potsdam
	      Pierrepont Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13676    315/268-2700

NSF Program : 1796      STEM Talent Expansn Pgm (STEP)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              


This project is a multi-part planning and pilot testing effort design to
              increase enrollment in the ten science, technology, engineering, and
              mathematics (STEM) programs at the college. Specifically the four pilot
              projects and two planning studies cooperatively attack the challenge of low
              enrollment and low degree production in STEM programs at SUNY Potsdam. Through
              a variety of activities the project is developing planning strategies to
              address program promotion, recruitment, and retention. The goal is to study how
              best to plan for and attract students into science courses and programs. These
              plans and pilot studies involve exploring ways to help students to enter the
              program through bridge programs that support their learning, by encouraging
              experiential learning and undergraduate research, and by providing a bridge to
              post-graduate life. The college is also studying the development of new
              interdisciplinary minor and major programs in Informatics. The curriculum
              planning in Informatics models another way to introduce interdisciplinary
              science-based programs for students in the future. The impact of the pilot
              projects is being disseminated through campus and regional newsletters, a
              website, and at the national level through annual meeting at the Association
              for Institutional Research Forum, National Education Association, and the
              Consortium for Computing in Small Colleges.
