Title       : A Laboratory Study of Texture Development During Grain Size Sensitive Creep of
               Ice, with Applications to the Flow of Glaciers and Ice Sheets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2002  
File        : a0230190

Award Number: 0230190
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137422             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Goldsby David_Goldsby@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a project to conduct laboratory experiments to investigate
              textures formed in ice during superplastic flow.  Superplastic flow has
              recently been discovered in the laboratory and can be considered a new flow
              mechanism for ice.  A simple extrapolation of these new data for superplastic
              flow from laboratory to natural conditions suggests that glaciers and ice
              sheets flow via this mechanism.  Furthermore, several grain-scale features in
              ice (e.g., crystal shape) produced during superplastic flow in the laboratory
              are remarkably similar to those observed in glaciers and ice sheets.  Despite
              this exciting discovery, however, important questions remain before we can
              apply with full confidence these new flow data in mathematical models of
              glacier and ice sheet flow.  The textures seen in laboratory studies will be
              compared with those observed in field studies of glaciers and ice sheets. 
              These comparisons, coupled with comparisons of the new superplastic flow data
              from the laboratory with flow measurements from field studies, will provide a
              powerful method for further assessing the importance of superplastic flow in
              nature and thereby improve our understanding of glacier and ice sheet dynamics
              and global climate change. Experiments will be conducted by the PI and an
              undergraduate research assistant. Experimental results will be published in
              relevant refereed journals, presented at glaciology meetings and incorporated
              into coursework.  


