Title       : Collaborative Research: Plankton Community Structure and Iron Distribution in
               the Southern Drake Passage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0230443

Award Number: 0230443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $736481             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Gregory Mitchell gmitchell@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Farooq Azam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah T. Gille  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine Barbeau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Osmund Holm-Hansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Shackleton Fracture Zone (SFZ) in the Drake Passage defines a boundary
              between low and high phytoplankton waters. West of Drake Passage, Southern
              Ocean waters south of the Polar Front and north of the Antarctic continent
              shelf have very low satellite-derived surface chlorophyll concentrations.
              Chlorophyll and mesoscale eddy kinetic energy are higher east of SFZ compared
              to values west of the ridge. In situ data from a 10-year survey of the region
              as part of the National Marine Fisheries Service's Antarctic Marine Living
              Resources program confirm the existence of a strong hydrographic and
              chlorophyll gradient in the region. An interdisciplinary team of scientists
              hypothesizes that bathymetry, including the 2000 m deep SFZ, influences
              mesoscale circulation and transport of iron leading to the observed
              phytoplankton patterns. To address this
hypothesis, the team proposes to
              examine phytoplankton and bacterial physiological states (including responses
              to iron enrichment) and structure of the plankton communities from virus to
              zooplankton, the concentration and distribution of Fe, Mn, and Al, and
              mesoscale flow patterns near the SFZ. Relationships between iron concentrations
              and phytoplankton characteristics will be examined in the context of the
              mesoscale transport of trace nutrients to determine how much of the observed
              variability in phytoplankton biomass can be attributed to iron supply, and to
              determine the most important sources of iron to pelagic waters east of the
              Drake Passage. The goal is to better understand how plankton productivity and
              community structure in the Southern Ocean are affected by the coupling between
              bathymetry, mesoscale circulation, and limiting nutrient distributions.
The
              research program includes rapid surface surveys of chemical, plankton, and
              hydrographic properties complemented by a mesoscale station grid for vertical
              profiles, water sampling, and bottle incubation enrichment experiments.
              Distributions of manganese and aluminum will be determined to help distinguish
              aeolian, continental shelf and upwelling sources of iron. The physiological
              state of the phytoplankton will be monitored by active fluorescence methods
              sensitive to the effects of iron limitation. Mass concentrations of pigment,
              carbon and nitrogen will be obtained by analysis of filtered samples, cell size
              distributions by flow cytometry, and species identification by microscopy.
              Primary production and photosynthesis parameters (absorption, quantum yields,
              variable fluorescence) will be measured on depth profiles, during surface
              surveys and on bulk samples from enrichment experiments. Viruses and bacteria
              will be examined for abundances, and bacterial production will be assessed in
              terms of whether it is limited by either iron or organic carbon sources. The
              proposed work will improve our understanding of processes controlling
              distributions of iron and the response of plankton communities in the Southern
              Ocean. This proposal also includes an outreach component comprised of Research
              Experiences for Undergraduates (REU), Teachers Experiencing the Antarctic and
              Arctic (TEA), and the creation of an educational website and K-12 curricular
              modules based on the project.


