Title       : Simulation Tools to Monitor Inquiry-Based Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0230740

Award Number: 0230740
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126341             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eli Meir meir@beakerware.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Klopfer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SimBiotic Software
	      148 Grandview Ct
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    212/658-9104

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The emphasis of science education is shifting away from memorizing facts and
              moving towards understanding concepts and learning how to do experiments. This
              new focus is known as inquiry-based learning, and computer technology has
              played a large role in expanding the diversity of fields in which such learning
              is possible.  In particular, simulation software provides opportunities for
              students to conduct experiments that would otherwise be too time-consuming,
              expensive, or simply impossible to carry out.  Concurrent with the technology
              boom, assessment is becoming an increasingly important component of education,
              both as a way of deciding whether students have mastered a topic, and as a way
              of judging the quality of instructional materials or teaching methods. Yet
              there are currently no good technology-based tools for assessing whether
              simulation software works for inquiry-based learning. This project is
              developing a prototype for a technology-based set of tools for assessing
              students' abilities to think critically, understand concepts, and design and
              conduct experiments.  The tools being developed include: 
1) Methods of
              instructing simulation software to create on-the-fly random tests that require
              students to apply what they have learned to the design and completion of simple
              experiments.
2) Tools to follow students' progress through a laboratory, and
              modify the trajectory of the laboratory based on the students' actions.
3)
              Tools to track and evaluate the steps taken by a student to solve problems,
              much as an instructor would ask a student to "show their work" and assign a
              grade to that work as well as to their final answers.

Together, these tools
              allow teachers to assess how well students have learned an area conceptually
              (as opposed to most currently used tests which primarily evaluate how many
              facts a student can recall). They aim to help teachers utilize simulations in
              the classroom using a much richer inquiry-based methodology, as students are
              provided with detailed feedback that a single teacher could not possibly give. 
              These tools also allow both educational software developers and potential users
              of software to test computer labs much more rigorously for their effectiveness
              across a wide range of students and teaching situations. The tools, or the
              methods that they pioneer, should be useful well beyond the scope of this
              project as both assessment and computer technology become increasingly
              important at all levels of education in the U.S.  As a platform for developing
              assessment tools, this project is developing a new software program for
              teaching osmosis, diffusion, and related topics such as the formation and use
              of biological electrochemical gradients.

