Title       : Collaborative Research: Variability and Forcing of Fluxes Through Nares Strait
               and Jones Sound, a Freshwater Emphasis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0230236

Award Number: 0230236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2052912            (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas Munchow muenchow@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kuo-Chuin Wong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1079,5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The flux through the Canadian Archipelago is known to be a missing variable in
              the freshwater flux calculations for the Arctic Ocean. This effort will be part
              of a combined US-Canadian-Japanese research team that will apply a combination
              of proven and innovative technologies to do among others; monitor water
              properties and currents over a 3.5 year period in Nares Strait, Cardigan St.
              and Hell Gate using moorings; measure ice-fluxes through satellite-based and
              mooring observations; create a tracer hydrographic time-series, explore bivalve
              shell records as a proxy for historical through flow variability; and use
              Arctic and global models to parameterize oceanic through flow. Outreach to
              secondary education and general public levels via teacher participation in
              cruises, media and internet interactions with local communities, i.e. the
              Nunavut Federation, undergraduate, graduate and technical training and
              communication with the broader scientific community are part of the research
              plan.

The following are components of the field research plan:
1) Mooring
              arrays at Nares Strait and Jones Sound. The array will be deployed across the
              Kennedy Channel and will resolve the spatial and temporal scales required to
              develop accurate estimate of fluxes, errors and dynamical responses to remote
              and local forcing.
2) Use of Advance Microwave Scanning Radiometer (AMSR) and
              AVHRR imagery to determine ice advection. Comparing staelliite data to upward
              looking sonar measurements will assess errors in ice motion estimates. These
              measurements will be used to estimate ice fluxes across defined sections of
              Nares Strait, Jones Sound and Lancaster Sound.
3) Various chemical species
              will be measured as hydrographic tracers to decipher water mass origins. Stable
              carbon and oxygen isotopic compositions of modern mollusks will be measured to
              trace seasonal and interannual variations in hydrographic conditions. 
4)
              Models will be used to determine wind stress fields in the Strait. A regional
              and global system modeling effort will assess ice dynamics and freshwater flow
              both east and west o Greenland.

