Title       : Self-reversal in Titanomaghemite: Implications for the Magnetization of Oceanic
               Crust
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0230230

Award Number: 0230230
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129549             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Tarduno john@earth.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Tarduno
EAR-0230230

Self-reversal of natural remanent magnetization, the
              remarkable 
ability of some rocks to acquire a magnetization in a direction
              
antiparallel to that of the Earth's geomagnetic field, is thought to 
be
              rare; it has been established only in a few igneous rocks bearing
              
hemoilmenite. The investigators have have found two pervasive, nearly
              
antipodal
components of magnetization (revealed through detailed
              
demagnetization studies) from pillow basalts in which hemoilmenite is
              
absent. Laboratory thermoremanent magnetization experiments suggest 
that
              the component
isolated at lower temperatures represents a partial
              self-reversal of 
the primary magnetization. This self-reversed magnetization
              is 
carried  by titanomaghemite formed by low temperature oxidation. 
Because
               maghemitization of ocean crust is ubiquitous, partial 
self-reversals may
              play an important role in controlling changes in 
marine magnetic anomaly
              amplitudes with age.

the investigators propose to investigate the extent and
              mechanism of 
self-reversal carried by titanomaghemite in oceanic basalt
              recovered 
by the Deep Sea Drilling Project and the Ocean Drilling Program.
              
Through a
study of sites having ages ranging from recent to 170 Ma, they
              hope 
to constrain the time scales of acquisition of self-reversed
              
magnetizations. Techniques to be applied will include paleomagnetism, 
rock
              magnetism, x-ray diffraction, microprobe, scanning electron 
microscopy and
              transmitted electron microscopy. The work proposed 
will support a Ph.D.
              thesis and the studies of several undergraduate 
students at theUniversity of
              Rochester.
-- 

