Title       : Integrating Knowledge Capture and Knowledge Reuse in the Engineering
               Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0230698

Award Number: 0230698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Hale rhale@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Ewing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Adel Chemaly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230698
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Hale, Richard
INSTITUTION NAME:
              University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
TITLE: Integrating Knowledge
              Capture and Knowledge Reuse in the Engineering Undergraduate
              Curriculum

Abstract

Engineering problem solving consistently uses models
              in various forms (mental, physical,
analytic, computational) and relies on
              expert inputs from multiple disciplines (manufacturing, supportability, cost,
              loads, structural performance, etc.). Such modeling involves first mapping from
              the actual physical system to a suitable abstraction that can be manipulated to
              yield results that are then mapped back on the physical system to predict or
              describe its behavior. A serious obstacle to productivity in engineering design
              is the lack of information technology (IT) to support exchange and reuse of
              knowledge at a higher level of abstraction than shared databases. In
              particular, the engineering knowledge base includes models and programs for
              analysis of complex physical systems, but these models and programs are not
              sharable. Engineering disciplines are actively pursuing a standard for
              knowledge representation that can be viewed, understood and maintained by
              humans and which can be interpreted by computers. As such, there is a need for
              emerging engineers with skills in knowledge-based systems and the practice
of
              capturing knowledge from disparate "experts." The Aerospace Engineering 
              Department at the University of Kansas (KUAE) proposes to incorporate
              state-of-the-art knowledge-based development tools into the curriculum, and to
              facilitate shared use of these tools by providing suitable indexing, retrieval,
              and visualization mechanisms. Such tools will formalize the KUAE desire to
              introduce a system-level design approach, and will serve to decompartmentalize
              courses in specific disciplines. Exercising these tools in design and
              implementation of an aerospace vehicle will expose students to a design project
              more reflective of the commercial world, and will introduce the importance of
              knowledge integration across a commercial enterprise.


