Title       : Neuroendocrine Control of Salinity-Mediated Carbonic Anhydrase Expression in the
               Gills of Euryhaline Crustaceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0230005

Award Number: 0230005
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $484261             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond P. Henry henryrp@auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study will examine mechanisms of how organisms sense environmental changes,
              and how they adapt to cope with these changes by turning on specific genes that
              give them new physiological abilities.  The focus is on crustaceans. 
              Euryhaline crustaceans are those that tolerate a wide range of salt
              concentrations in water, from the open ocean to freshwater rivers.  In general,
              they do so by taking up salts (sodium and chloride), thus maintaining constant
              concentrations of vital blood salts.  The molecular basis of this ability is a
              suite of transport proteins that are expressed in the gill.  A number of
              proteins have been identified that are responsible for the transport of
              individual ions. The mechanism of transport usually involves the uptake of a
              vital ion in exchange for the ionic form of a waste product (e.g., Na+/H+ and
              Cl-/HCO3- exchange).  The waste products are produced from the reaction of CO2
              and water, which is catalyzed by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase (CA).  Because
              H+ and HCO3- are used in exchange for cations and anions in general, CA is
              believed to be a central support enzyme in the overall mechanism of ion uptake.
               Furthermore, the expression of CA is up-regulated when these organisms are
              exposed to low salinity.  Preliminary evidence indicates that the regulatory
              mechanism is present only in euryhaline species and that it is under inhibitory
              control by a CA repressor (believed to be a neuropeptide) found in the major
              endocrine system of crustaceans, the X-organ/sinus gland complex.  This peptide
              will be identified by HPLC, and its action on CA expression investigated
              through the use of quantitative PCR and reporter enzyme assays.  This research
              also has broader impacts, because estuaries are highly productive environments,
              and one species being studied is economically important (e.g., Callinectes
              sapidus) whereas the other (Carcinus maenas) is an invasive species that has
              been both ecologically and economically disruptive.  The project will also
              involve the training of undergraduate students, graduate students, and
              postdoctoral associates in all phases of the research.
