Title       : Whole House Design Through the Application of Multi-functional Precast Panels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0230274

Award Number: 0230274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149974             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Ellis mwellis@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yvan J. Beliveau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1624,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Whole-house Design through the Application of
Multi-functional Precast
              Panels


Multi-functional Precast Panel (MPP) systems for residential
              construction promise to advance the goals of whole house design by providing
              homes that are more durable, more resistant to natural disasters, more energy
              efficient, and more affordable than homes constructed with current practices. 
              With MPP systems, high performance precast concrete materials comprise the
              structure of the house as well as the interior and exterior finishes. 
              Insulation is embedded within the concrete assembly where it forms a continuous
              barrier to heat and moisture transfer.  Utility distribution systems including
              radiant heating and cooling and electrical raceways are incorporated directly
              in the precast concrete panels.  Energy collection is achieved from sunlit roof
              surfaces.  The entire system is formed in panels at a precast manufacturing
              plant and shipped to the job site where the exterior of the home can be erected
              on a concrete slab in a matter of days.  Properly designed manufacturing
              processes, reduced site labor, and the benefits of system integration can help
              to keep the first cost of the home at or below the cost of current construction
              while the durability and energy saving advantages can dramatically reduce the
              long-term costs of ownership.
The objectives of the proposed research include
              the development of: (1) conceptual plans for manufacturing systems for MPP
              systems; (2) methods for on-site assembly; (3) designs for embedded energy
              collection and distribution systems; (4) detailed estimates of the effect of
              MPP construction on the cost of ownership; and (5) implementation plans for MPP
              technology.  These objectives will be pursued in collaboration with housing
              industry participants and will support the development and deployment of an
              entirely new technology for the housing industry.

