Title       : Collaborative Research: Circulation in the Freshwater Switchyard of the Arctic
               Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0230238

Award Number: 0230238
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1310480            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Schlosser peters@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Smethie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1079,5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research will document the circulation, variability, and driving
              mechanisms of the upper ocean in the freshwater switchyard of the Arctic Ocean.
              This unexplored region lies to the north of the eastern Canadian Archipelago
              and Greenland, extending about 500-800 km into the central Arctic Ocean. It
              lies just upstream of the freshwater exit points in Fram and Nares Straits,
              i.e., where freshwater from various sources is finally delivered to some of the
              main channels that lead to the North Atlantic Ocean. The main hypothesis is
              that this area is a bifurcation point for freshwater transfer between the
              Arctic and North Atlantic Oceans, and that small changes in the overall
              circulation of this region may have large downstream effects. This study will
              measure ocean temperature, salinity, currents, and geochemical freshwater
              tracers such as oxygen, oxygen isotopes, tritium/3He, CFC.s, barium, and
              nutrients. The focus will be on the upper ocean (0-300 m) where freshwater
              resides. This will be an aircraft-based operation, because thick sea ice
              prevents access by most surface ships and political realities prevent access by
              submarine.  There will also be a satellite-based study of sea ice motion and
              thickness in the switchyard region which will determine how much ice
              recirculates westward within the Beaufort Gyre, how much exits through Fram
              Strait, and how much exits within the various passages of the Canadian
              Archipelago.  

Results from this study will be made available via an
              internet web site that will be linked to other similar ongoing projects, as
              well as through presentations and articles in both scientific and popular
              formats.  Additionally, they will be used for educational purposes through
              involvement of both graduate and undergraduate students, and in course
              material.  A special link to numerical modeling studies is planned via
              incorporation of our data into a gridded ocean database as well as raw
              validation data. The appropriate logistics infrastructure at NSF has been
              developed over the past several years as part of various projects, in
              particular the North Pole Environmental Observatory, an aircraft-based project
              staged out of Alert/Eureka.

