Title       : RUI: Paleomagnetic Study of Transitional Fields Recorded Throughout the Cenozoic
               by Australasian Lavas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2002  
File        : a0230347

Award Number: 0230347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Hoffman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,5912,5941,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hoffman
0230347


The most remarkable feature of Earth's magnetic field is
              its ability to reverse polarity, and much of our knowledge of this phenomenon
              has come from the paleomagnetic record found in rocks.  The goal of this
              project is to locate, sample and analyze transitional field behavior recorded
              in Australasia by hotspot-erupted lavas that comprise the Great Dividing Range
              of Eastern Australia and New Zealand's South Island volcanoes.  These volcanics
              are known to span the past 70 Ma, that is, the entire Cenozoic period, and thus
              offer an unprecedented opportunity to investigate aspects of Earth's reversing
              geodynamo from a single regional site over considerable geologic time.  In
              particular, the investigators plan to test the claim that an inordinate number
              of transitional virtual geomagnetic poles (VGPs) associated with several
              available paleomagnetic reversal records are found near Australia.  This
              observation has prompted an intriguing possibility, namely, that a
              concentration of magnetic flux emanating from Earth's fluid outer core below
              Australasia has largely dominated the field structure during many past
              reversals, and further, that this flux feature is a consequence of
              long-standing physical conditions of the lowermost mantle.  Because the
              volcanics of Australia and New Zealand are almost directly above the claimed
              flux concentration, the project is designed to test this hypothesis.  It is
              anticipated that results from this project will shed light on whether the lower
              mantle has had such a pronounced effect on the transitioning field over much,
              or all, of the Cenozoic period, and if so, whether any observable variation, or
              drift, of the flux feature has occurred since the end of the Mesozoic.  In
              addition, an attempt will be made to determine both paleointensity over this
              span of time as well as precise radiometric ages of the lava sections.  The
              project will be assisted by undergraduate physics majors working on their
              senior projects (a mandatory requirement for graduation at Cal Poly State
              University), exposing them to many aspects of original basic research.  Dr Gary
              Acton of Texas A& M University and Professor Brad Singer of the University of
              Wisconsin will collaborate on this research.
-- 


