Title       : Pathways to Interdisciplinary Science, Engineering and Mathmetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0230670

Award Number: 0230670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599984             (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Gosser gosser@scisun.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Calhoun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Brennan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1796      STEM Talent Expansn Pgm (STEP)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project is developing a progrThe project is developing a program to attract
              more promising undergraduates to STEM majors and to establish a solid
              foundation for the student participants' future careers. The City College of
              New York (CCNY), the Bronx Community College of New York (BCCNY), and Lehman
              College have diverse student bodies and the majority of the students are
              under-represented minorities. These partners are creating an institutional
              culture and infrastructures that ensure students work with faculty as a
              community of scholars throughout their undergraduate experience. This
              interaction is facilitated through a Science Community Center, which is being
              established at CCNY to provide ample space, powerful computational facilities
              and state of the art multi-media devices to facilitate student research,
              presentations and communication. The emerging interdisciplinary field of
              bioinformatics is used as a unifying theme to integrate study and research in
              biology, chemistry, biophysics, biomedical engineering, computer science and
              applied mathematics. Students participate in the program as Pathway Scholars in
              three sequential modes: as a Peer Leader Scholar, as a Bioinformatics Scholar,
              and as a Research Scholar. Promising CCNY, BCCNY, and Lehman undergraduates at
              the freshman level are recruited to the Pathway program as leaders of Peer-Lead
              Team Learning workshops in the introductory science courses for majors. By
              serving as Peer Leader Scholars and participating in the activities of the
              Science Community Center, they begin to appreciate a scholarly learning
              atmosphere and get a sense of belonging to this science community. During the
              second semester of their sophomore year, the Pathway Scholars learn more
              computer skills and are introduced to bioinformatics. In the summer of the
              sophomore year, there is a three-week workshop on bioinformatics. After that
              training, the Pathway Scholars work in research laboratories for their junior
              and senior years. 
am to attract more promising undergraduates to STEM majors
              and to establish a solid foundation for the student participants' future
              careers. The City College of New York (CCNY), the Bronx Community College of
              New York (BCCNY), and Lehman College have diverse student bodies and the
              majority of the students are under-represented minorities. These partners are
              creating an institutional culture and infrastructures that ensure students work
              with faculty as a community of scholars throughout their undergraduate
              experience. This interaction is facillated through a Science Community Center,
              which is being established at CCNY to provide ample space, powerful
              computational facilities and state of the art multi-media devices to facilitate
              student research, presentations and communication. The emerging
              interdisciplinary field of bioinformatics is used as a unifying theme to
              integrate study and research in biology, chemistry, biophysics, biomedical
              engineering, computer science and applied mathematics. Students participate in
              the program as Pathway Scholars in three sequential modes: as a Peer Leader
              Scholar, as a Bioinformatics Scholar, and as a Research Scholar. Promising
              CCNY, BCCNY, and Lehman undergraduates at the freshman level are recruited to
              the Pathway program as leaders of Peer-Lead Team Learning workshops in the
              introductory science courses for majors. By serving as Peer Leader Scholars and
              participating in the activities of the Science Community Center, they begin to
              appreciate a scholarly learning atmosphere and get a sense of belonging to this
              science community. During the second semester of their sophomore year, the
              Pathway Scholars learn more computer skills and are introduced to
              bioinformatics. In the summer of the sophomore year, there is a three-week
              workshop on bioinformatics. After that training, the Pathway Scholars work in
              research laboratories for their junior and senior years. 

PROPOSAL NO.:
              0230670
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Gosser, David
INSTITUTION NAME: CUNY City
              College
TITLE: Pathways to Interdisciplinary Science, Engineering and
              Mathmetics
NSF RECEIVED DATE: 06/04/2002
