Title       : Collaborative Research: Block Kinematics of the Northwestern US
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2002  
File        : a0230054

Award Number: 0230054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83325              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert McCaffrey mccafr@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is investigating the active deformation of the western United
              States by representing the region as a series of elastic, rotating, interacting
              blocks. The goal is to see if such a block representation satisfies the
              constraints as well as or better than continuum, viscous-flow models.
              Understanding the relative importance of the two possible representations is
              vital in order to understand what drives the deformation. This work is designed
              to lead to better understanding of the tectonics of the western US, how
              continents deform in general, and earthquake potential in this region. A
              regional, surface velocity field is being developed using Global Positioning
              System (GPS) measurements and applying an inversion technique that
              simultaneously estimates block motions and elastic strain accumulation near
              block-bounding faults. The concept of describing the regional tectonics by a
              finite number of rotating blocks on a sphere is similar to plate tectonics and
              is in contrast to continuum models of continental deformation. The study region
              contains the important transition from Pacific-North America shear to Juan de
              Fuca - North America convergence. This work will elucidate how this transition
              is manifested in deformation within the continent. While block models have been
              proposed and evaluated before, this approach fundamentally differs in that it
              explicitly models the short-term elastic strains. Hence it is able to
              incorporate a geodetic data set that includes tilt rates and strain rates in
              addition to the primary constraints on the regional deformation from GPS.
              Furthermore, it can use geologic data such as fault slip directions and rates,
              spreading rates, rotation rates, and fault orientations. Hence, geodetic data
              from the short-term that are subject to elastic strains are combined with
              longer-term geologic data that reflect permanent deformation - the combination
              will improve our understanding of the active tectonics of the western United
              States.
