Title       : Collaborative Research: Impact of Solar Radiation and Nutrients on
               Biogeochemical Cycling of DMSP and DMS in the Ross Sea, Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0230499

Award Number: 0230499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338730             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Kieber djkieber@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Env Sci&Forestry
	      
	      Syracuse, NY  13210    315/470-6500

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Areas of the Southern Ocean have spectacular blooms of phytoplankton during the
              austral spring and early summer. One of the dominant phytoplankton species, the
              haptophyte Phaeocystis antarctica, is a prolific producer of the organic sulfur
              compound dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) and Phaeocystis blooms are
              associated with some of the world's highest concentrations of DMSP and its
              volatile degradation product, dimethylsulfide (DMS). Sulfur, in the form of
              DMS, is transferred from the oceans to the atmosphere and can affect the
              chemistry of precipitation and influence cloud properties and possibly climate.
              DMSP and DMS are also quantitatively significant components of the carbon,
              sulfur and energy flows in many marine food webs, although very little
              information is available on these processes in high latitude systems. 

This
              project will study how solar radiation and iron cycling affect DMSP and DMS
              production by phytoplankton, and the subsequent utilization of these labile
              forms of organic matter by the microbial food web. Four interrelated hypotheses
              will be tested in field-based experiments and in situ observations: 1) solar
              radiation, including enhanced UV-B due to seasonal ozone depletion, plays an
              important role in determining the net ecosystem production of DMS in the Ross
              Sea; 2) development of shallow mixed layers promotes the accumulation of DMS in
              surface waters, because of enhanced exposure of plankton communities to high
              doses of solar radiation; 3) DMSP production and turnover represent a
              significant part of the carbon and sulfur flux through polar food webs; 4)
              bloom development and resulting nutrient depletion (e.g., iron) will result in
              high production rates of DMSP and high DMS concentrations and atmospheric
              fluxes. Results from this study will greatly improve understanding of the
              underlying mechanisms controlling DMSP and DMS concentrations in polar waters,
              thereby improving our ability to predict DMS fluxes to the atmosphere from this
              important climatic region. 

Both Drs. Kieber and Kiene actively engage high
              school, undergraduate and graduate students in their research and are involved
              in formal programs that target underrepresented groups (NSF-REU and the
              American Chemical Society-SEED). This project will continue this type of
              educational outreach. The PIs also teach undergraduate and graduate courses and
              incorporation of research experiences into their classes will enrich student
              learning experiences.
