Title       : Converging Technologies: The New Frontier in Engineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0230544

Award Number: 0230544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert T. Balmer balmerr@union.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      
	      Schenectady, NY  12308    518/370-6000

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230544
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Balmer, Robert
INSTITUTION NAME:
              Union College
TITLE: Converging Technologies: The New Frontier in Engineering
              Education
NSF RECEIVED DATE: 06/04/2002

Abstract
 
 	 In recent years the
              intersection of a wide variety of industries and technologies have been used to
              create new products and solve new problems. Since these new technologies
              typically occur at the interfaces of science and engineering, we refer to this
              intersection as .Converging Technologies.. Union College has made a commitment
              to bring converging technologies into the engineering classrooms, integrating
              nanotechnology, mechatronics, bioengineering and pervasive computing into our
              undergraduate engineering program. 

 To achieve our goals, we have
              undertaken the initial phase of planning - a full year of interdisciplinary
              discussions to identify our focus technologies, establish working groups, and
              outline preliminary goals.  Our strategy does not include developing entirely
              new engineering or science programs; rather we want to build on our strengths
              as an engineering and liberal arts college to enhance and expand our curricula
              in an interdisciplinary way, eliminating the .silos. of traditional liberal
              arts and engineering programs.  

In the second phase of planning we will
              determine the impact of the Converging Technology program on college resources,
              and develop plans to allow integration of Converging Technology  components
              into existing programs as well as the possibility of developing new programs
              within Converging Technology.  Based on our initial 
discussions, we
              anticipate various engineering and science courses from the freshman through
              the senior years will touch on elements of these new emerging technologies, as
              well as provide enhanced exposure to the latest software tools.  The program
              will also feature increased opportunities for industrial internship programs
              and further weave internationalism throughout the curricula. 
 


