Title       : STEM Talent Expansion Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0230148

Award Number: 0230148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $595530             (Estimated)
Investigator: Taryn M. Bayles tbayles@gl.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne M. Spence  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michele Wolff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Claudia Morrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1796      STEM Talent Expansn Pgm (STEP)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) in partnership with the
              Community College of Baltimore County (CCBC) is piloting a series of
              initiatives to increase the number of students, particularly those from
              underrepresented groups, pursuing and receiving associate or baccalaureate
              degrees in established or emerging fields within science, technology,
              engineering, and mathematics (STEM). The primary objective of this pilot study
              is to identify the effectiveness of these initiatives. The following
              initiatives are being examined: 1. We are creating an increased interest in
              STEM fields among high school students through a pilot program in which 90
              upper level UMBC mechanical and chemical engineering students, divided into
              teams, are visiting ten high schools to introduce students to physics,
              chemistry, biology, mathematics, or technology concepts using engineering
              applications. (This is reaching approximately 540 students annually.) 2. We are
              identifying the relative effectiveness of a two-week summer bridge program, a
              scholarship program, and an internship program on student enrollment and
              retention in STEM programs compared to partial or no intervention. 3. We are
              enhancing the current informal consortium arrangement between UMBC and CCBC to
              increase STEM program articulation, student transfer, and the development of a
              formalized internship program at CCBC with science and technology-related
              companies. An evaluation of these activities should provide valuable insights
              into the importance of economic and academic support components in the
              long-term retention of all students in STEM areas, with a special emphasis on
              underrepresented students. The project involves 10 UMBC faculty and 7 CCBC
              faculty from each of its three campuses (Catonsville, Dundalk and Essex) The
              project is under the guidance of an advisory board composed of academic
              officers from the participating campuses and representatives from participating
              private firms: AT&T, FMC Corporation, Becton Dickinson, and Northrop Grumman.
              Upon completion of the pilot, the following elements will be in place to
              support sustainability: 
- Curriculum resources for a two-week STEM summer
              bridge program. 
- A collaborative experience involving 18 faculty and staff
              from CCBC and UMBC. 
- An internship program at CCBC where there had not been
              one before. 
- Additional knowledge to appreciate the value of academic and
              financial intervention and how they independently and interactively benefit
              non-exceptional students. 
- An increased enrollment, retention, and
              graduation of students, and particularly underrepresented women and minorities,
              in STEM areas at UMBC and CCBC. 

