Title       : STI: NetReact Services: Middleware Technologies to Enable Real-time
               Collaboration across the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0230841

Award Number: 0230841
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $859998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karsten Schwan schwan@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Calton Pu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew Wolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Greg S. Eisenhauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Constantinos Dovrolis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1766      Strategic Tech for Internet
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9150,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Modern science is a distributed wide-area enterprise, requiring real-time
              coordination of scientific instruments and remote sensors, computational
              resources, large data repositories and teams of researchers in different
              locations, even on different continents. The high-bandwidth networking demands
              of any such real-time and data-intensive collaborations tax the largest network
              pipes, and when conducted across the Internet, their Gigabit/sec data streams
              must utilize heterogeneous platforms with network link speeds that vary from
              10Gbps to 10Mbps and with end user machines that range from desktop PCs to
              large supercomputers. However, effective scientific collaboration demands that
              team members be able to interact with each other and with critical remote
              resources in real-time, despite platform heterogeneity and despite dynamic
              variations in the availability of platform resources.

The key idea of the
              NetReact middleware services is to utilize the substantial server and
              processing resources associated with distributed collaborations to improve end
              user performance and compensate for potential deficiencies in network
              capabilities. NetReact provides rich functionality for dynamically
              reconfiguring both middleware and applications in response to network and
              platform monitoring, and to coordinate (1) middleware and application-level
              reactions to changes in network state with (2) the possibly simultaneous
              actions taken at the transport level. NetReact's monitoring (NRM) services
              dynamically determine available network bandwidth and communication latencies.
              NetReact uses such information to adjust middleware and application actions, to
              tune the underlying network transport, and even to dynamically select suitable
              network paths for ongoing middleware-enabled scientific collaborations. By
              embedding NetReact services into the grid computing middleware commonly used
              for scientific collaboration, the functionality of such NetReact-enriched
              middleware is improved substantially, enabling end users to collaborate in
              real-time even when they do not have access to high end machines or high
              capacity network links, thereby supporting scientific applications that
              currently remain out of reach for existing networking and grid computing
              technologies.
