Title       : Partners to Attract and Sustain Adult Learners (PASAL)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0230158

Award Number: 0230158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99938              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bonnie H. Simon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Audrey Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Erianne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Naugatuck Valley Community
	      750 Chase Parkway
	      Waterbury, CT  067083000    /   -

NSF Program : 1796      STEM Talent Expansn Pgm (STEP)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through Partners to Attract and Sustain Adult Learners (PASAL), this project is
              increasing enrollment at the college in science, technology, engineering and
              mathematics (STEM) degree programs by 3% annually; and increasing the total
              STEM graduates or transfers 2% annually. Using multiple strategies necessary
              for the very heterogeneous community college population (which includes many
              who are underrepresented in STEM careers), PASAL is helping the 1100 current
              STEM degree students succeed as well as attracting new students; by motivating
              and reinforcing them through direct, visual, and multiple connections with STEM
              industry work sites, work experiences, and one-on-one support. In addition to
              external populations, PASAL focuses activities to attract students on the large
              pools of students in General Studies and Continuing Education programs. 

The
              PASAL planning and pilot project objectives and methods are:
1. Accelerating
              an ongoing college effort to expand the number and support level of Industry
              Partners (IP's). The ideal IP relationship is evolving to include involvement
              in attraction activities; and/or provision of jobs, scholarships, program
              financing, tutoring and mentoring.
2. Facilitating prospective and current
              STEM student exposure to STEM careers, by embedding in college recruitment,
              orientation, advising, and instruction a variety of Web-based links to STEM
              employers and Web-based virtual tours which enable visualization of real work
              sites and tasks.
3. Combining Industry Partner involvement and Web-based
              material in a concerted effort to attract the college's large population of
              General Studies majors and Continuing Education students to STEM degree
              programs.
4. Sustaining STEM student interest and effort through abstract
              mathematics study that is particularly challenging to community college
              students with relatively less rigorous preparation, by emphasizing the
              application of mathematics principles to STEM careers.
5. Sustaining STEM
              pursuit among the many community college students whose financial, family, and
              job responsibilities cause even the best students to be at-risk for attrition;
              through an Early Alert service which proactively identifies, supports and
              refers students showing early signs of difficulties.

PASAL's intellectual
              merit is that it helps answer the question of how to increase the supply and
              success rate of future STEM personnel, including underrepresented groups, who
              are coming through the large nationwide community college pipeline. PASAL
              findings are expected to shed light on the extent to which visualization and
              exposure to STEM careers positively influences students to engage and persist
              in STEM degree programs, and whether early intervention is an important and
              effective tool to prevent attrition among community college
              students.

PASAL's broader impact is that the model is specifically designed
              to be readily replicated by any community college. Nearly half of U.S.
              undergraduate student enrollments are in community colleges, and two-year
              colleges account for over one-third of all undergraduate student enrollments in
              STEM degree programs. PASAL findings help identify cost-effective strategies
              that under-resourced colleges can use to attract and sustain students who tend
              to have multiple barriers, and effective ways to convert the substantial pool
              of Continuing Education and General Studies students to STEM degree programs.
