Title       : An Education and Engineering Partnership for Development of an Institutional
               Model for Bridges to Student Success in Science and Engineering at an HBCU
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0230645

Award Number: 0230645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith A. Schimmel schimmel@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen Guy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric A. Cheek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry Powers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kimberly Pemberton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230645
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Schimmel, Keith
INSTITUTION
              NAME: North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
TITLE: An
              Education and Engineering Partnership for Development of an Institutional Model
              for Bridges to Student Success in Science and Engineering at an HBCU
NSF
              RECEIVED DATE: 06/04/2002

ABSTRACT

The need for a larger pool of
              African-American students prepared for careers in engineering has
been
              documented in many reports. An additional need that has been well documented is
              the
need for K-12 teachers who can provide students with interesting,
              real-world applications of
math, science, and engineering. The need for
              faculty who apply the latest advances in pedagogy,
assessment, and learning
              theory to engineering curricula has also been clearly demonstrated.
This
              planning grant proposal addresses these needs through a comprehensive plan to
              be
implemented initially through a partnership between the College of
              Engineering and the School
of Education at North Carolina A&T State
              University.

In this planning grant, education and engineering faculty will
              work together to develop a
comprehensive plan that will enhance the role of
              education pedagogy in the engineering college
and establish a presence of
              engineering material in the education curriculum. Current A&T
linkages with
              K-12 schools in North Carolina will be exploited to help them develop
              effective
strategies for meeting newly established State guidelines in
              science. Interactive workshops with
nationally recognized experts on
              integration of engineering into K-12 and cognitive science will
be used to
              develop effective partnerships.

The long-term vision is a novel coordinated
              effort between the A&T College of Engineering,
A&T School of Education, A&T
              College of Arts and Sciences, K-12 partner schools, industrial
partners, and
              nationally known centers of cognitive science to train A&T faculty in
              pedagogy
that is effective with HBCU students, train School of Education
              students in math, science, and
engineering applications that can be used to
              excite K-12 students about careers in these areas,
train engineering students
              in education topics that will allow them to excite K-12 students
              about
engineering, and provide resources to current K-12 math and science
              teachers. The ultimate goal
is to couple A&T experience with teaching minority
              scientists and engineers with state-of-the-
art pedagogy to increase the
              quality and quantity of African-American engineering graduates.
The successes
              of this institutional model would then be shared with other HBCU as well
              as
other universities with engineering programs.

