Title       : Integrating Empirical Methods into the Computer Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2002   
File        : a0230950

Award Number: 0230950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74996              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Reed davereed@creighton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Grant Braught  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Creighton University
	      2500 California Plaza
	      Omaha, NE  68178    402/280-2360

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Empirical skills are playing an increasingly important role in the computing
              profession and our society. Despite this, computer science curricula have paid
              little attention to developing empirical investigative skills such as forming
              testable hypotheses, designing experiments, critiquing their validity,
              collecting data, explaining results, and drawing conclusions. The goals of this
              project are (1) to formalize a set of core empirical concepts and skills needed
              by today's computer science graduate, (2) to develop and evaluate resources for
              integrating the presentation and development of those concepts and skills
              throughout the computer science curriculum, and (3) to disseminate our approach
              for adoption at other institutions.

Following an incremental approach
              similar to the way programming skills are developed, this project advocates the
              early introduction of fundamental empirical concepts and skills. Once an
              empirical foundation has been laid, applications and laboratories with
              empirical components may then be integrated into courses across the curriculum,
              reinforcing the student's understanding of empirical methods and also
              demonstrating the utility of experimentation in computer science and related
              disciplines. Via publications and a Web repository, instructors at other
              institutions will be encouraged to integrate these applications into their
              courses and provide feedback as to their effectiveness.

The
              cross-institutional nature of this proposal is explicitly designed to ensure
              the broad applicability of developed materials (with perspectives taken from a
              regional university, a national university, and a national liberal arts
              college). The applications and laboratories developed will be reviewed and
              classroom tested by faculty at each school, followed by outside review and
              assessment.


