Title       : Microscale Mineralogic Controls on Microbial Attachment to Rock Surfaces:
               Implications for Microbial Mineral Dissolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0230204

Award Number: 0230204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84745              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer Rogers jrrogers@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Microorganisms are ubiquitous in the shallow subsurface, attached to sediment
              surfaces and in the aqueous phase. When attached, microorganisms can alter the
              geochemical microenvironments at the point of attachment, shifting mineral
              equilibria and driving weathering reactions. However, microbial attachment on
              sediment grains is heterogeneous and the variability of microbial occurrence
              cannot be simply explained by electrostatic interactions between the cell and
              the mineral surface. Several studies have shown that other factors such as,
              solution chemistry, surface coatings, and surface roughness can change
              attachment behavior.
Previous research by the PI on subsurface microbial
              colonization in a petroleum-contaminated aquifer suggests that the distribution
              of microorganisms on different mineral surfaces in situ is related, in part, to
              the nutrient content of the mineral. Microorganisms preferentially colonize and
              destroy silicate minerals that contain limiting trace nutrients, such as P and
              Fe, occurring as trace apatite and iron oxyhydroxides (Rogers et al., 1998;
              2001). It is still unclear, however, whether the mineralogy of the point of
              attachment is nutrient-rich inclusion or silicate matrix. Nor is it known if
              these inclusions impact only initial attachment, or if they influence permanent
              attachment, subsequent growth and colonization, and surface etching.
The goal
              of the proposed research is to study the influence of nutrient-bearing mineral
              inclusions on microbial surface attachment. Specifically, this study will
              examine how apatite and iron oxide inclusions in feldspars influence microbial
              attachment. It is hypothesized that microorganisms will preferentially attach
              to surface expressions of these inclusions leaving the silicate groundmass
              barren. Inclusions may increase attachment through increased surface charge or
              chemotactic behavior to nutrients or terminal electron acceptors.
The proposed
              research will use laboratory experiments to characterize microbial attachment
              to silicate rocks that are compositionally heterogeneous. Laboratory
              experiments will be used to examine attachment under static (no-flow)
              conditions and will approximate "maximum" initial attachment. Pure strain
              cultures, including Geobacter metallireducens and Methanosaeta concilii and
              native anaerobic consortia will be used in experiments to characterize any
              changes in attachment behavior due to type-specific interactions, competition,
              and/or symbiosis. The solid phases used in these experiments will consist of
              feldspars containing inclusions of P and Fe minerals, as well as controls
              without these nutrient phases. Pyrex glasses will also be manufactured
              containing dispersed P and Fe as well as, included P and Fe minerals. Glasses
              will serve as "artificial" rocks to test whether cells preferentially attach to
              inclusions or if patchy behavior is prevalent when nutrients are dispersed. For
              all attachment experiments the underlying surface mineralogy/composition will
              be mapped and correlated to attachment patterns. Finally, field microcosms
              using the same suite of solids will be reacted with the native consortia in
              situ. It is assumed that attachment of microbes to mineral surfaces is
              necessary for substantial mineral etching to occur, and field results will be
              used to link attachment to microbial weathering processes observed in situ.

