Title       : Geochemical and Textural Constraints on Eruptive Behavior of Merapi Volcano,
               Indonesia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2002   
File        : a0230208

Award Number: 0230208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas P. Wagner                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170512             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tanya Furman furman@geosc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry Voight  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Furman
EAR- 0230208

Merapi Volcano in Central Java, Indonesia, is one of
              Earth's most active and dangerous volcanoes.  This stratovolcano has been
              active for over 40,000 years, with nearly continuous eruptive activity over the
              past century.  Merapi is particularly feared because of the potentially
              explosive nature of its activity, and because several hundred thousand people
              live in high-risk areas on the volcano flank.  This project uses a combination
              of tephrostratigraphic, geochemical and CSD techniques to address the
              rheological (e.g., thermal state, magma composition, glass chemistry, crystal
              nucleation and growth rate) controls on the full spectrum of Merapi's eruptive
              behavior.  The results of this project will provide fundamental information on
              magma reservoir and conduit conditions and processes, as well as insights on
              the potential for future larger-scale explosive activity.

The intellectual
              merit of the research derives from the application of detailed textural
              analysis of lavas and tephras to the identification of intensive parameters
              associated with eruptive activity.  That is, one can relate crystal size
              distribution patterns of individual eruptive units to the detailed chemical,
              barometric and thermal history of Merapi volcano.   Analysis of melt inclusions
              in olivine crystals also provides insight into late-stage magmatic processes,
              including helping to distinguish crystal growth related to decompression from
              that resulting from magma mixing or hybridization.  When used in conjunction
              with our textural analyses, this technique provides a powerful method for
              evaluating magma ascent rates and residence times.  This information is
              critical to the study of explosive volcanic systems because the eruptive
              intensity is linked directly to both the residence time of magma within the
              chamber and the degree of solidification that occurs within the reservoir and
              conduit.  In volcanic systems that tend to be highly crystalline (e.g., Merapi
              lavas contain up to 50% crystals upon eruption), magma that is nearly
              solidified may fill the eruptive vent to substantial depths, effectively
              plugging the vent system and leading to infrequent but very dangerous
              eruptions.  Using chemical and textural data, it becomes possible to gauge the
              conditions leading to violent eruptions.  By recognizing precursor signals to
              major eruptions, the ability to anticipate catastrophic situations can be
              improved.  

The broader implications of this project include both human
              resource development and potential assistance for volcanic hazard mitigation. 
              This project will fund the doctoral research of one female graduate student at
              Penn State and the postdoctoral research of a female Indonesian volcanologist
              from the Volcanological Survey of Indonesia.  The work will strengthen an
              extant relationship between Penn State and the Volcanological Survey of
              Indonesia that has focused on monitoring active volcanoes with the goal of
              improving disaster preparedness.  In recent decades Merapi has had fairly small
              eruptive events with a frequency of two to five years.  The geologic record,
              however, indicates that this recent activity encompasses only a small portion
              of the full range of explosivity that has occurred in the past.  At least seven
              eruptions between 3000-250 years ago were larger and farther-reaching explosive
              events than any recorded in the 20th century.  Unfortunately, current hazard
              assessment and contingency planning is based primarily upon small eruptive
              events, while the earlier record of major explosive eruptions suggests that
              effective planning needs to consider the full range of Merapi's eruptive
              behavior.  It is anticipated that this study will enable researchers to
              identify precursor events to major eruptions that will prove useful in modern
              hazard mitigation efforts.  




