Title       : Reform of the Engineering Program at Sweet Briar College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0230542

Award Number: 0230542
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott David Hyman hyman@sbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Orvos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan B. Piepho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Wassell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sweet Briar College
	      
	      Sweet Briar, VA  24595    804/381-6100

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230542
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Hyman, Scott David
INSTITUTION
              NAME: Sweet Briar College
TITLE: Reform of the Engineering Program at Sweet
              Briar College

Abstract


Sweet Briar College (SBC) shares the national
              concern over the decline
in students graduating with bachelor's degrees in
              engineering over the last
two decades. Moreover, as a women's college, SBC is
              concerned with the
ongoing dramatic under representation of women in
              undergraduate and graduate
engineering programs and in the engineering
              workforce.
In response, SBC is requesting this planning grant in order to
              initiate
the reform and upgrade of its engineering curriculum. The objective
              of this
project is to develop an extensive engineering curriculum at SBC,
              which would
be only the second such program in the nation at a liberal arts
              institution
for women.
SBC currently offers students a dual degree program
              with a number of
cooperating institutions. Students follow a pre-engineering
              curriculum and
complete a bachelor's degree from SBC and either a bachelor's,
              or in one case
a master's, degree in engineering from the other university.
              The program
upgrade will be to institute a true engineering curriculum at SBC:
              five
courses at the introductory and intermediate level that will comprise
              the
core sequence of an Engineering Science major, which will be supplemented
              by
research and internship opportunities. The curriculum will be designed
              to
complement the strong liberal arts and study abroad traditions of SBC and
              to
allow the students to take full advantage of the proven nurturing
              environment
of a women's college.

