Title       : Processes That Control Children's False-Memory Reports: Recollection, Rejection,
               and Phantom Recollection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0230205

Award Number: 0230205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298916             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. Brainerd brainerd@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Valerie F. Reyna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project continues the researchers' program of research on children's false
              memories. That program of research is theory-driven, and to date, it has
              produced a number of new findings about false memories that were originally
              predicted on theoretical grounds. This project consists of three large-scale
              developmental experiments. The experiments focus on two cognitive operations
              that are believed to be key controlling factors in children's false-memory
              reports: recollection rejection and phantom recollection. The existence of both
              operations is predicted by the researchers' theoretical account of false memory
              (i.e., fuzzy-trace theory), and evidence of the use of both operations by
              adults has been reported in previous experiments. Recollection rejection is an
              operation that suppresses the reporting of false events that are consistent
              with the gist of children's experience. Suppression is accomplished via the
              detection of mismatches between false-but-gist-consistent events and verbatim
              traces of actual events. For instance, after hearing a narrative containing the
              statement "The bird is inside the cage" and "The cage is under the table,"
              children could reject the unpresented statement "The bird is under the table"
              by retrieving verbatim traces of either presented sentence and noticing that
              the words "bird" and "table" do not appear together in the sentence. Phantom
              recollection, on the other hand, is an operation that supports the reporting of
              false events that are consistent with the gist of children's experience by
              generating illusory vivid phenomenologies for those events. Fuzzy-trace theory
              posits that gist memories sometimes cause false events to be accompanied by
              illusory vivid phenomenologies that are difficult to distinguish from the vivid
              phenomenologies that accompany true events. These phantom recollections cause
              things that were not experienced to be remembered as physical "occurrences"
              (e.g, they are seen in the mind's eye or heard in the mind's ear). Fuzzy-trace
              theory predicts that phantom recollection can occur when two conditions are
              met: (a) Experienced events repeatedly cue some familiar meaning, so that gist
              memories of that meaning are very strong, and (b) the false events that provoke
              phantom recollection are especially good retrieval cues for strong gist
              memories. 

The experiments implement a new paradigm, conjoint recognition.
              This paradigm provides a reliable behavioral method of measuring recollection
              rejection and phantom recollection in children. Children respond to memory
              tests under three types of instructions (accept only experienced events, accept
              only nonexperienced events that are consistent with the gist of experience, and
              accept experienced events + nonexperienced events that are consistent with the
              gist of experience). Recollection rejection and phantom recollection are
              identified with distinct patterns of responses across these different types of
              instructions. A mathematical model that is defined over the paradigm corrects
              raw response patterns for the influence of extraneous variables, which allows
              researchers to separate and quantify the effects of recollection rejection and
              phantom recollection. Implementation of this paradigm generates detailed
              findings on how recollection rejection and phantom recollection affect
              false-memory reports, on how these operations change with age, and on how they
              react to forensically-significant task variables. In Experiment 1, the effects
              of recollection rejection and phantom recollection on spontaneous false
              memories of narratives are studied in younger children (4- and 5-year-olds),
              older children (10- and 11-year-olds), and adults. Experiment 1 also determines
              how the two operations react to five forensically-significant task variables
              (repetition of events, recency of events, order of memory tests, timing of
              memory tests, and repetition of memory tests). Fuzzy-trace theory makes
              predictions about each of these variable's effects on recollection rejection
              and phantom recollection. In Experiment 2, the effects of recollection
              rejection and phantom recollection on implanted false memories of narratives
              are studied at the same three age levels by interpolating a memory-suggestion
              procedure following narrative presentation. Experiment 2 includes the same five
              task variables as Experiment 1. The aim of Experiment 3 is to determine how
              well the results of Experiments 1 and 2 generalize to more naturalistic
              eyewitness situations. The narrative false-memory procedure is replaced by a
              standardized quasi-forensic task involving a misdemeanor theft. The effects of
              recollection rejection and phantom recollection on both spontaneous and
              implanted false memories are assessed with this eyewitness procedure. The same
              three age levels are studied, and the design includes three of the five task
              variables that figure in Experiments 1 and 2 (repetition of events, timing of
              memory tests, and repetition of memory tests).  

