Title       : Collaborative Research: Mechanics of Dry-Land Calving of Ice Cliffs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2003  
File        : a0230338

Award Number: 0230338
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Hallet hallet@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a comprehensive study of land-based polar ice cliffs. 
              Through field measurements, modeling, and remote sensing, the physics
              underlying the formation of ice cliffs at the margin of Taylor Glacier in the
              McMurdo Dry Valleys will be investigated.  At three sites, measurements of ice
              deformation and temperature fields near the cliff face will be combined with
              existing energy balance data to quantify ice-cliff evolution over one full
              seasonal cycle. In addition, a small seismic network will monitor local "ice
              quakes" associated with calving events.  Numerical modeling, validated by the
              field data, will enable determination of the sensitivity of ice cliff evolution
              to environmental variables.  There are both local and global motivations for
              studying the ice cliffs of  Taylor Glacier. On a global scale, this work will
              provide insight into the fundamental processes of calving and glacier terminus
              A better grasp of ice cliff processes will also improve boundary conditions
              required for predicting glaciers' response to climate change. Locally, the
              Taylor Glacier is an important component of the McMurdo Dry Valleys landscape
              and the results of this study will aid in defining ecologically-important
              sources of glacial meltwater and will lead to a better understanding of moraine
              formation at polar ice cliffs.  This study will help launch the career of a
              female scientist, will support one graduate student, and provide experiential
              learning experiences for two undergraduates. The post-doctoral researcher will
              also use this research in the curriculum of a wilderness science experiential
              education program for high school girls.


