Title       : Exploring Geometry: Integrated Textbook and Software for College Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0230788

Award Number: 0230788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66707              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Hvidsten hvidsten@gac.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gustavus Adolphus College
	      
	      Saint Peter, MN  56082    507/931-8000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              National reports over the last decade have focused on the need for change in the
              way mathematics is taught at the secondary and post-secondary levels.
              Discovery-learning and the increased use of technology are two teaching
              strategies that have figured prominently in mathematics education reform
              efforts and are principal themes in the current standards for teaching
              mathematics at the secondary level.

Geometry is an ideal course in which to
              model discovery-learning and the use of technology for future teachers is
              college geometry, since most mathematics education majors take it as a required
              course. There are few, if any, materials that successfully integrate these two
              themes as fundamental ways of investigating geometry.

The development of a
              textbook and computer software materials that use discovery-learning and
              computer exploration for the teaching of geometry offers significant
              intellectual merit to this project. This materials developed from this project
              provides a national model for discovery-learning that integrates technology, so
              that mathematics education students will be well versed in both themes useful
              in investigating geometry 

 The broader impact of " Exploring Geometry:
              Integrated Textbook and Software for College Geometry" is realized through the
              development, testing, and revision of innovative materials that targets college
              and university faculty who teach geometry and pre-service teachers. In the area
              of teacher preparation, there are recognized needs for strengthening both
              subject knowledge and pedagogical technique of future teachers so that they can
              assist students from diverse backgrounds. This project is one attempt at
              addressing these needs. 


