Title       : Planning Grant to Reform the Undergraduate Engineering Program at the Colorado
               School of Mines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0230699

Award Number: 0230699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan P. Gosink jgosink@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marcelo G. Simoes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine K. Skokan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christian H. Debrunner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Pierre R. Delplanque  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230699
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Gosink, Joan
INSTITUTION NAME:
              Colorado School of Mines
TITLE: Planning Grant to Reform the Undergraduate
              Engineering Program at the Colorado School of Mines

Abstract

The
              Engineering Division at the Colorado School of Mines (CSM), plans to  reform
              the Engineering program at CSM through four strategies:

1)Consolidation of
              fundamental engineering curriculum through the elimination of
              legacy
materials.Our approach to curriculum consolidation begins with the
              development of
three "Fundamental Systems Courses "(FSC)to replace six
              traditional courses.The FSC
are linked to the traditional course materials
              through the similarity of mathematical
structures.We will offer two pilot
              classes in the new format during the planning grant.
2)Development of
              "two-plus-one-credit " courses to replace specific three-credit courses,
with
              the one-credit modules featuring project-based study of emerging engineering
              topics
and/or computational methods used by practicing engineers.The
              one-credit modules will
involve mentoring by industrial colleagues.
3)Further
              development of new and existing five-year BS/MS programs at CSM focusing
              on
the changing needs of US industry for the engineering
              workforce.
4)Implementing effective teaching methods,including
              mentoring,team-based and
experience-based learning,computer simulation,and
              web-based reinforcement of
learning materials.

To assess the effectiveness
              of these revisions,we will use formative and summati e instruments,
including
              surveys,data collection,a new outcomes assessment instrument,and
              anecdotal
information obtained from faculty,students,and our Corporate
              Advisory Board.Trained
professional evaluators will interview students
              participating in the pilot sections via focus group
settings.

