Title       : Ice at the Equator: The Record and Implications of Alpine Glaciation Within the
               Ancestral Rocky Mountains of Western Pangea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0230332

Award Number: 0230332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150288             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerilyn S. Soreghan lsoreg@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Soreghan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ice at the Equator:  The Record and Implications of Alpine Glaciation within the
              Ancestral Rocky Mountains of Western Pangea

Gerilyn Soreghan and Michael
              Soreghan

EAR-0230332, University of Oklahoma

ABSTRACT

The
              best-documented pre-Quaternary "icehouse" occurred during the Pangean
              supercontinent interval (300 My ago), when continental glaciers are known to
              have covered much of the southern polar region of Earth (Gondwanaland).   Owing
              to key similarities with our modern icehouse, the Pangean interval has
              intrigued geoscientists interested in improving our understanding of Earth's
              climate system.  Critical to improving both climatic and tectonic models,
              however, are key geologic constraints-in particular, on the possible existence
              and extent of mountains and mountain glaciers in low-latitude Pangea.  To date,
              evidence for (late Paleozoic) glaciers beyond the limits of the southern polar
              region has never been reported, and tropical mountain elevations for this
              interval remain unknown.  Documentation of low-latitude ice would contribute to
              our understanding of both equatorial climate conditions and mountain elevations
              for this time interval, thus impacting both climatic and tectonic issues.
This
              project involves investigation of the hypothesis that the Ancestral Rocky
              Mountains of equatorial western Pangea (300 My ago) were glaciated. 
              Preliminary evidence for this hypothesis occurs in the form of preserved
              sediments and landforms in the western U.S. (Colorado) that appear to have been
              shaped by (late Paleozoic) glacial processes.  Research on the depositional
              attributes, composition, and distribution of the Permo-Pennsylvanian (ca.
              310-280 My old) Cutler Formation and related rocks will be conducted to test
              the hypothesis that these sediments record a glacial influence. The research
              will also entail analysis of landforms and Quaternary sediments to assess the
              origin (fluvial or glacial) and age of buried topography preserved within
              highlands of the Ancestral Rocky Mountains.  Confirmation of alpine glaciation
              within equatorial Pangea would imply more extensive icehouse conditions and
              significantly higher elevations than previously envisaged for this time and
              region, and would provide needed boundary conditions for constraining climatic
              and tectonic models.  Accordingly, this research should provide benefits to
              geoscientists interested in earth history in general, as well as general
              society interested in and impacted by future climate change.

