Title       : STI/ MAST: A Mobile Agent-based Security Tool for Administration and Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0230927

Award Number: 0230927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $509991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Niranjan Suri nsuri@ai.uwf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marco M. Carvalho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of West Florida
	      11000 University Parkway
	      Pensacola, FL  325145750    850/474-2825

NSF Program : 1766      Strategic Tech for Internet
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9150,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The growth and globalization of the Internet have made computer and network
              security a paramount challenge.  In 1988, the Internet Worm caused much havoc
              and effectively shutdown the Internet. However, the systems that were affected
              were mostly at universities and other research centers.  Today, circumstances
              are very different from 1988. Many businesses rely on networks of systems
              connected to the Internet. Network attacks result in downtime that cost
              companies significant time and money due to lost productivity and/or loss of
              data. Moreover, critical infrastructural systems are being connected to the
              Internet thereby raising the potential for disruption through network-based
              attacks. Unfortunately, this same characteristic attracts attackers who wish to
              make highly-visible statements. 
 
This project, will build a security tool
              that serves two purposes: (a) Help system administrators find vulnerabilities
              and possible attacks on systems and networks and (b) Teach students and novice
              administrators about security concerns.  
 
Administrators will be able to
              use the tool to check for known vulnerabilities on their systems, to check
              whether the latest security updates and patches have been installed, and to
              monitor their systems for different forms of attacks or break-ins. The tool can
              be used in a classroom, laboratory, or in the field to help students and novice
              administrators learn about the security domain, the latest known
              vulnerabilities, and how to fix them. 
 
The security tool will integrate and
              build upon two key technologies: mobile software agents and concept maps.  The
              NOMADS mobile agent system will provide the agent framework and security
              kernels while the CMapTools software will be used as the application to build
              and maintain the knowledge base. The proposed security tool will integrate
              these technologies in an administrator console that will provide extreme
              flexibility, monitoring and control of the system through remote execution of
              mobile code. 
 
The security tool will consist of four components, the An
              administrator's console, the security kernel, the knowledge model and a set of
              security agents that will be provided and distributed with the tool.  
 
The
              Concept Map based knowledge model and the flexibility imbued by the use of
              mobile agents ensures that the proposed tool will be equally useful and
              effective in production, teaching and training environments.  The MAST security
              tool, proposed in this work will be freely distributed for academic and
              non-profit use.
