Title       : Geologic Versus Geodetic Rates of Convergence in the Southwestern Tien Shan,
               China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0230403

Award Number: 0230403
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272212             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas W. Burbank burbank@crustal.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research in the southern Tien Shan is defining geologic strain gradients, actual
              patterns and rates of long-term deformation at time scales ranging from 10,000
              -10,000,000 yr, and changes in those rates through time. The research area is
              characterized by two contrasting styles of structural deformation within an
              existing geodetic network. In the northern Tarim basin, north-vergent
              detachment folds presently deform the >9 km of Cenozoic basin fill. In a more
              proximal position farther north, south-vergent thrust faults cut purported
              Quaternary conglomerates and have carried their bedrock hangingwalls >15 km
              southward along very low-angle (perhaps at the surface) detachments. Field data
              being gathered in this region permit tests of the following hypotheses:

1.
              Geodetic strain rates in the southern Tien Shan are matched by Quaternary rates
              of shortening in the southernmost detachment folds (northern Tarim basin). 
2.
              Despite striking changes in both style and vergence of Late Cenozoic
              deform-ation across the Tien Shan margin, rates of shortening since
              approximately 5 My have remained steady.
3. Even though the detachment folds
              are north-vergent, the more northerly ones formed earliest.

If the first
              hypothesis is true, it suggests that geodetic shortening may be accommodated by
              large (approximately magnitude 8) earthquakes on low-angle detachments
              analogous to those in the Lesser Himalaya. Structural and chronologic data are
              being collected using four primary approaches: geologic mapping across the
              southern margin of the Tien Shan, chronologies of syn- and pre-tectonic, Upper
              Cenozoic strata via magnetostratigraphy, surveying and dating of deformed Late
              Quaternary fluvial terraces, and analysis of reflection seismic profiles. The
              end product will provide: a test of geologic versus geodetic rates in a
              contractional fold-and-thrust belt; a reconstruction of the pattern, style, and
              rates of deformation across the SW Tien Shan; insights into why contrasting
              deformation patterns developed here; a new model for propagating deformation
              during intracontinental mountain building; and an estimate of earthquake
              hazards.
