Title       : Geodetic Constraints on Arc Dynamics and Coupling on the Plate Interface in the
               Lesser Antilles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0230271

Award Number: 0230271
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268233             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela E. Jansma pjansma@uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY
Along obliquely convergent plate boundaries, the relative plate
              motion vector frequently is partitioned into arc-normal and arc-parallel
              components.  Complete separation of the normal and parallel components leads to
              arc-parallel thrusts and folds in the forearc and arc-parallel strike-slip
              faults in the volcanic arc.  The forearc thus translates relative to the
              interior of the overriding plate.  Partial separation of the two components,
              however, is more common, particularly when coupling occurs across the plate
              interface.  In addition, changes in obliquity of convergence along the plate
              boundary can create arc- parallel gradients in shear stress to produce internal
              deformation of the forearc.  Either arc-parallel extension or compression may
              occur. The northeastern Caribbean corner affords an excellent opportunity to
              use Global Positioning System (GPS) geodesy to examine strain partitioning,
              coupling along the plate interface, and arc-parallel extension in a slow
              subduction zone.  Caribbean-North American relative plate motion is ~20 mm/yr. 
              The
trend of the plate boundary changes from NNW in the Lesser Antilles to EW
              along the eastern Greater Antilles.  The ENE azimuth of the convergence vector
              predicts near normal subduction at Martinique and near strike-slip motion at
              Puerto Rico.  Horizontal slip directions derived from shallow-thrust
              earthquakes east of the Lesser Antilles lie between the predicted convergence
              direction and the normal to the subduction trace, suggesting that some
              partitioning occurs.  The focus is on the northern Lesser Antilles for four
              reasons.  First, The PI's have collected GPS data in the region since 1994 and
              have developed a Caribbean reference frame.  Second, GPS-derived velocities for
              the southern Lesser Antilles agree within error with those predicted for
              Caribbean motion relative to North America at those locations, implying little
              or no deformation of the overriding plate.  In contrast, a simple elastic
              half-space model shows that preliminary GPS geodetic results from the northern
              Lesser Antilles are consistent with coupling along the plate interface.  Third,
              the northern Lesser Antilles arc consists of two concentric island chains that
              provide subaerial exposure closer to the trench and over a greater arc
              transverse distance than do the islands in the south.  Fourth, NE-trending
              structures transverse to the arc in the northern Lesser Antilles accommodate a
              component of arc-parallel extension. In addition, volcanic centers on
              individual islands have migrated parallel to the arc at rates equivalent to
              those of the arc-parallel component of convergence.  Finally, EW-oriented
              extension along NS-trending structures has been measured by GPS geodesy for the
              EW-trending eastern Greater Antilles. The slow relative plate motion in the
              northeastern Caribbean requires long GPS time-series to yield robust velocities
              to assess potential arc-parallel strain gradients.  This five-year proposal,
              therefore, builds on data collected in the northeastern Caribbean since 1994.If
              no motion of the islands of the northern Lesser Antilles relative to the
              Caribbean plate can be detected over temporal scales of a decade or longer a
              scenario that is unlikely given our preliminary dataset these sites will be
              used to provide additional constraints for the Caribbean reference frame
              formulation.  The proposed work includes: collection and processing of GPS
              data; noise analysis, which is particularly important where motion is slow such
              as the Caribbean; and modeling of results.  The questions to be addressed are:
              Is oblique slip partitioned into trench parallel and normal components in slow
              subduction zones, i.e. the northern Lesser Antilles? If partitioning occurs,
              does it depend upon obliquity of convergence? What is the degree of coupling
              along the plate interface in the northern Lesser Antilles? Is arc-parallel
              extension of sufficient magnitude for detection by GPS geodesy? If so, does it
              increase in magnitude as obliquity of subduction increases?  Are the rates of
              arc-parallel slip and/or arc-parallel extension consistent with rates of
              migration of volcanic centers within the northern Lesser Antilles?  What are
              the implications of this for the dynamics of deep magmatic processes? 
              Determining whether the leading edge of the Caribbean plate corner in the
              eastern Greater Antilles and the Lesser Antilles is composed of distinct
              block(s)that move relative to the Caribbean interior also will constrain
              seismic hazard in the northeastern Caribbean, an area that is little studied
              and particularly at risk for seismogenic tsunamis.	  


