Title       : Experimental Study of the Role of Pore Fluid Pressure in Earthquake Nucleation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0230170

Award Number: 0230170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216872             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry E. Tullis terry_tullis@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas Beeler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0230170
Terry E. Tullis

ABSTRACT
	We will conduct a systematic study to
              understand the relationship between stress change and pore pressure change in
              experimental fault zones. It is important to understand the mechanical
              contributions of pore fluid pressure change during earthquake nucleation and
              how pore fluid pressure change may trigger seismicity. 	The geophysical purpose
              of this research is determine to what degree changing pore fluid pressure plays
              a mechanical role in earthquake occurrence and under what conditions. Geologic
              observations show that seismic faulting occurs in the presence of crustal
              fluids. However rarely is fluid behavior accounted for in models of seismicity,
              earthquake nucleation and triggered seismicity.
	It is most often assumed that
              shear induced dilatancy during seismic slip will decrease the pore pressure,
              tend to stabilize the slip, and discourage earthquake occurrence. However,
              recent laboratory observations suggest that for slip localized within thick
              fault zones, elastic dilation or compaction of the fault zone with stress
              change is of the opposite sense and greatly exceeds shear induced dilatancy.
              Thus, common assumptions about the role of pore fluid pressure in earthquake
              source mechanics require renewed scrutiny. No laboratory experiments where
              stick-slip sliding occurs have been conducted in the presence of pore fluids,
              no laboratory measurements of the poroelastic properties of fault zones have
              been made, and no poroelastic measurements have been made on unfaulted
              (country) rock at the significant differential stresses appropriate for seismic
              faulting. Therefore we will conduct two series of experiments; the first
              designed to measure the poroelastic properties of fault zones near the failure
              stress, the second to determine and compare the magnitudes of shear induced
              dilatancy (inelastic strain) and elastic strain during stick-slip in thick
              gouge layers. We will develop constitutive equations for seismic fault slip
              based on the experimental observations and extrapolate the results to crustal
              conditions. 

