Title       : Collaborative Research: Milankovitch-Scale Time Resolution to Determine Rates
               and Kinematics of Folding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0230087

Award Number: 0230087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20277              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maya Elrick dolomite@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Using sedimentary cycles generated from orbitally forced climatic
              changes
(~20,000-400,000 year duration Milankovitch rhythms), the PI's seek to
              elucidate the
complex kinematics of decollement folds, refine methodological
              approaches for
evaluating growth structures, and determine high-resolution
              deformation chronologies
with a multidisciplinary structural, stratigraphic,
              and magnetic study. Decollement folds
are an important structural style in
              most orogenic belts and dominate where strong
competency contrasts and thick,
              weak layers characterize deformed stratigraphic
sequences. The interpretation,
              evaluation, and reconstruction of tectonic structures
requires an
              understanding of kinematics and geometry alone cannot constrain
              the
distribution of deformation, fold kinematics, or fold mechanics. Growth
              structures
provide a unique opportunity to deconvolute the deformational and
              depositional
processes of orogenic landscapes. The PI's propose to evaluate
              spatial variations in deformation patterns as a function of structural
              geometry, lithology, and stratigraphic position throughout two well-exposed
              anticlinoria; one at Sierra del Fraile, northeastern Mexico and another in the
              central External Sierra, north central Spain. Both field areas contain
              large-scale, evaporite-cored, synsedimentary decollement folds. Prolonged fold
              growth occurred in varying water depths and depositional environments at each
              site and were recorded by a variety of unconformity geometries and changes in
              growth strata thickness. These relationships will allow comparison of the
              complex interaction between deformational topography and depositional processes
              and a means to evaluate kinematic controls on growth strata geometries. The
              PI's will map and sample rocks for magnetic susceptibility, anisotropy of
              magnetic susceptibility (AMS), and calcite twinning measurements. AMS
              measurements in pregrowth strata will be used as a proxy for deformation fabric
              and will be augmented by twinning studies to constrain fold kinematics. Growth
              strata geometry will be used to distinguish between fixed and migrating axial
              surfaces as a fully independent means of assessing fold kinematics.
              Milankovitch-scale correlation of magnetic susceptibility variations and
              absolute ages will be used to establish a chronostratigraphy allowing for
              ~20,000 year temporal control on depositional and deformational rates within
              both the Sierra del Fraile and External Sierra growth strata. Reconnaissance
              investigations in both field areas provided pilot data confirming unparalleled
              opportunities to generate high-resolution spatial and temporal analysis of fold
              kinematics. The combination of excellent exposures of climatically controlled
              cyclic stratigraphy and synsedimentary deformation in the two field areas
              provide an exceptional opportunity to determine the kinematics of large-scale
              decollement folding, an important structural style in most orogenic belts. 
