Title       : Cabled Observatories for Regional Oceanographic Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a0230797

Award Number: 0230797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kandace S. Binkley                      
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanne C. Bintz jbintz@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 5418      OCE SPECIAL PROGRAMS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ocean Studies Board Study on Cabled Observatories for Regional Oceanographic
              Research

For many years, Geoscientists have realized that Earth cannot be
              studied adequately in a static manner by simply characterizing it over limited
              regions or for short periods; instead, we must understand the myriad global
              processes that actively shape the Earth and ultimately impact society. These
              processes occur over a vast range of temporal and spatial scales and exhibit
              considerable co-variation and dynamic linkages.  To characterize the temporal
              behavior of these dynamic systems, the establishment of long-term observational
              capabilities has been proposed. 

The NSF proposed Ocean Observatories
              Initiative would provide new modes of access to the ocean in order to study
              these interconnected processes. The system would consist of three elements: 1)
              a regional-scale observatory consisting of interconnected sites on the seafloor
              that span several geological and oceanographic features and processes; 2)
              several relocatable deep-sea observatories that are based around a system of
              buoys; and 3) an expanded network of coastal observatories.  

In 1999, OCE
              funded a National Research Council study designed to examine the scientific
              merit of, technical requirements for, and overall feasibility of establishing a
              system of seafloor observatories. The Committee on Seafloor Observatories was
              formed and the "Symposium of Seafloor Observatories" was held in January 2000.
              This symposium and study resulted in the publication of  "Illuminating the
              Hidden Planet: The Future of Seafloor Observatory Science"     

As a follow
              on to the previous study, this study will describe the scientific problems that
              could most effectively be addressed through a regional-scale cabled ocean
              observatory. It will then discuss the strategies needed to design an
              observatory that can best carry out this science. Strategies considered should
              include criteria for locating a cabled observatory, sensor requirements, data
              transfer rates, power needs, and other design considerations.  In arriving at
              its findings and recommendations, the study committee will consider recent
              reports that outline ocean science research priorities, existing cabled
              observatory strategies and implementation plans, and input from the ocean
              research community.

