Title       : Collaborative Proposal: North Sister Volcano: A Window into Deep Crustal
               Processes in a Mafic Arc
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2002   
File        : a0230359

Award Number: 0230359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas P. Wagner                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136293             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anita L. Grunder grundera@geo.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Grunder
EAR-0230359 

Crustal contamination of melts formed in subduction
              zones is widely accepted for arcs formed on silicic continental crust, but the
              potentially profound and likely cryptic effects of contamination by mafic crust
              are not well understood. The intellectual merit of the proposed work is the
              assessment of processes acting in the deep crust above a subduction zone that
              affect the magmas rising from the mantle. North Sister volcano of the Cascades
              volcanic arc is selected for this study because it is the least evolved (mafic)
              and oldest member of an arc volcano suite represented in the Three Sisters
              volcanoes, and lies in an unusually mafic segment of arc where the primitive,
              mantle contributions are constrained. The study's objectives are (1) to
              identify the compositional variety and proportion of regionally distinctive
              mantle-derived basalts that contributed to the construction of the basaltic
              andesite at North Sister; (2) to evaluate how these mantle inputs mix and
              interact with the deep crust; and (3) to constrain the depth at which the
              magmatic processes took place. To achieve these goals we will combine
              compositional and isotopic analysis of rocks selected to represent the age and
              mineralogical spectrum of lavas sampled during the course of mapping North
              Sister Volcano. Microanalysis of minerals and their melt inclusions will
              supplement the bulk rock analyses to discern magmatic histories. Experimental
              work on natural samples will reveal the pressure, temperature and water
              conditions under which the North Sister magmas formed. 

The broader impact
              of this work includes training in field, analytical and experimental skills of
              two graduate students, one of which is female and from an underrepresented
              groups in science. Two undergraduates will also be given research
              opportunities. The results of the study will be disseminated at national and
              international meetings and as papers in refereed journals. Technique
              development for high-pressure experimental work and melt inclusion analysis by
              laser ablation will contribute to scientific infrastructure. The project is a
              carefully crafted partnership between Oregon State and University of Oregon
              taking advantage of complementary facilities and investigator expertise. The
              proposed work is also of particular societal benefit as it addresses the
              history of a volcano that is in a particularly active part of the Cascades arc,
              where recently identified uplift has focused attention on potential volcanic
              hazards. 

