Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intraregional Interaction and Long-Distance
               Exchange: Examining the Social Contexts of Chupadero Black-on-white Pottery
               Production and Distribution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0230567

Award Number: 0230567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle Hegmon michelle.hegmon@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret C. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The organization of regional economic and political systems has long been a
              major theme of archaeological study in the prehistoric American Southwest.
              Anthropologists have often relied upon ceramic production and exchange data to
              explore economic and social relations in precapitalist societies. Much of this
              work has traditionally focused on understanding the organization of a single
              component (production or exchange) of a regional economic system. A number of
              researchers have argued, however, that the analysis of these components must be
              integrated in order to more fully explore the social dimensions of economies.
              They maintain that it is through the examination of the connection between
              production and exchange that broader economic and social issues can be
              addressed.

Tiffany Clark's dissertation research will explore the
              relationship between ceramic production and exchange in two regions of central
              New Mexico during the early Pueblo IV period (AD 1200/1250-1450). This study
              will focus on Chupadero Black-on-white pottery, one of the most widely
              distributed ceramic types in the prehistoric American Southwest. Chupadero
              ceramics are found throughout central and southern New Mexico and in adjacent
              parts of Texas, Arizona, and northern Mexico. This integrative research will
              evaluate the organization of production systems across different scales of
              long-distance trade. Chupadero is particularly well suited for this type of
              comparative analysis as it was produced by pottery specialists in only two
              areas of central New Mexico - the Salinas and Sierra Blanca regions. In
              addition, substantial differences exist in the scale of Chupadero production,
              distribution, and consumption between the two producing regions. The existence
              of these different economic systems provides a unique opportunity to evaluate
              different types of specialized production and exchange systems using a single
              ceramic commodity.

To explore the relationship between production and
              exchange in early Pueblo IV regional economy, Ms. Clark will undertake a series
              of interrelated and complementary analyses. Using data from chemical and
              geological analyses, the location and intensity of Chupadero pottery production
              will be assessed for the Salinas and Sierra Blanca regions. In addition,
              chemical data will be used to examine the movement of pottery to consumers, as
              well as to evaluate the strength of local and long-distance trade relations.
              Conclusions regarding production and exchange patterns will then be used in
              conjunction with information from a study of ceramic designs to explore the
              networks of social relations that were present in prehistoric central New
              Mexico.

The proposed study constitutes a detailed examination of the
              regional economic systems in which Chupadero Black-on-white pottery was
              produced and exchanged. The significance of this project lies in its holistic
              approach to economy, rigorous methodology incorporating two powerful analytical
              techniques, and use of an ideal archaeological case study. As such, the results
              of this study will add to a growing body of anthropological literature focusing
              on the organization of regional economic and social systems in the prehistoric
              American Southwest. Furthermore, this project will also contribute to our
              general understanding of the roles that production and exchange play in the
              development and maintenance of the economic and social relations in
              precapitalist societies. 

