Title       : Engineering for Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0230737

Award Number: 0230737
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neda S. Fabris   (Principal Investigator current)
              Fawn Ukpolo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    323/343-4970

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230737
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Fabris, Neda
INSTITUTION NAME:
              California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
TITLE: Engineering for
              Teachers
NSF RECEIVED DATE: 06/04/2002
 -
ABSTRACT

Faculty from the
              College of Engineering, Computer Science and Technology and the Charter College
              of
Education at California State University, Los Angeles (Cal State L.A.) are
              joining efforts in the
ihEngineering For Teachers (ETP)lr program with the
              goal of educating teachers to include engineering
concepts in the science
              education in K-12 classes and encourage more high school graduates to
              study
engineering.

As a, Hispanic-Serving Institution, Cal State L.A. has
              inherently more opportunities to attract students from underrepresented groups
              into the engineering profession than the majority of other fellow universities.
              According to the 2000 census, there are more underrepresented minorities in
              California than other groups, which means the Charter College of Education at
              Cal State L.A. not only trains more students from underrepresented groups to
              become teachers, but their graduates are preparing more students from
              underrepresented groups to attend college. The Charter College of Education at
              Cal State L.A. graduates approximately 300 pre-service teachers a year with a
              full credential. Due to the shortage of teachers in California, currently 1,716
              students are enrolled in Cal State L.A. who teach via an emergency credential
              in local elementary, middle and high schools. Revising the science content of
              their study to include engineering will hopefully encourage them to do the same
              in their classes multiplying the effect of this grant greatly.
-
In order to
              achieve these goals the following activates will be designed and
              conducted:

1. Provide education faculty with the theory and practice needed
              to incorporate engineering design
and process methodology in their
              curriculum.

2. Provide engineering faculty with knowledge of learning
              theories to improve their teaching
pedagogy.

3. Redesign science-method
              courses for pre-service teachers to include engineering concepts and
              to
connect science and math with the real world. Also, provide K-12 teachers
              with information on
requirements needed for their students to become
              engineers.

