Title       : ANI/STI: Measurements, Models, and Simulation Scenarios for Internet Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0230921

Award Number: 0230921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599491             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally Floyd floyd@aciri.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Kohler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Internationl CompSci Inst
	      1947 Center Street
	      Berkeley, CA  947041105    510/666-2900

NSF Program : 1766      Strategic Tech for Internet
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9150,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Networking researchers work from mental models of the Internet's important
              properties. The scenarios used in simulations and experiments reveal aspects of
              these mental models, often including one or more of the following: 
(1) Flows
              live for a long time and transfer a lot of data. Simple topologies, like the
              "dumbbell" topology, with one congested link, are sufficient to study many
              traffic properties
(2) Flows on the congested link share a small range of
              round-trip times
(3) Most traffic across the link is one-way 
(4)
              Reverse-path traffic is rarely congested

All of these models can deeply
              affect simulation and experimental results, and therefore evaluations of
              research, but none of them are confirmed by measurement studies, and some are
              actively wrong. Some divergences from reality are unimportant, in that they
              don't affect the validity of simulation results, and simple models help people
              understand the underlying dynamics of systems. However, as a community we do
              not yet understand which aspects of models affect fundamental system behavior,
              and which aspects can safely be ignored. 

This project proposes to build a
              much richer understanding of the range of realistic network models, and of the
              likely relevance of different model parameters to network performance. The lack
              of good measurements, lack of tools for evaluating measurement results and
              applying their results to models, and lack of diverse and well-understood
              simulation scenarios based on these models, are holding back the field. This
              program will directly address the models used by network researchers in
              simulations and experiments. Building on the wealth of existing measurement
              results and generating new empirical results where needed, this will create
              high-quality tools to facilitate ongoing measurement by this group and the
              wider network research community, so that the results keep up with the
              Internet's high rate of change. Synthesizing the relevant body of measurement
              results will provide concise intuitions, and a range of simulation-ready
              models, for use by researchers. An illustration of how each aspect of the
              models can influence simulations and experiments will be given.

This work
              will not create a universal model of the global Internet (an immense and
              unnecessary undertaking). Instead, it will focus on models used by researchers
              in specific research areas, motivated by addressing their pressing modeling
              concerns. Focusing at first on the group's own areas of expertise, particularly
              modeling congestion-related mechanisms at a queue in a router, and later
              address other research areas, help others improve their measurements and
              measurement tools, along with the resulting models and simulation scenarios,
              and improve the relationships between experiments, models, and our shared
              understanding of simulation results.
