Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Prehistoric Urbanism and Lithic
               Technological Organization During the Middle Horizon: A Case Study from
               Conchopata, Ayacucho, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a0230595

Award Number: 0230595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7178               (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Isbell huari@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	Under the direction of Dr. William Isbell, Ms. Catherine Bencic will collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct an intensive
              archaeological analysis of approximately 10,000 stone artifacts excavated from
              the archaeological site of Conchopata in the Ayacucho Valley of central Peru.
              This research will demonstrate how the production and use of stone tools was
              integrated into the daily lives of Conchopata residents, and will provide new
              information on the rise of urbanism from a domestic perspective in the Ayacucho
              region.
	The prehistoric urban settlement of Conchopata is located
              approximately 10 kilometers from the Huari capital, one of South America's
              first great cities. The Huari culture dates to the Middle Horizon (A.D.
              550-1000) and Conchopata is believed to be a center of large-scale, specialized
              production of ceremonial pottery, perhaps beginning before Huari came to power.
              Recent excavations have revealed new information about royal elites, craft
              production and complex ritual activity. New areas suggesting extensive domestic
              activity were revealed as well, a previously unexplored aspect of life at
              Conchopata. 
	Andean prehistoric urbanism has typically been investigated
              through studies of regional settlement patterns and elite material culture,
              such as ceremonial pottery and monumental architecture. Few have studied
              everyday domestic artifacts, yet mundane artifacts such as stone tools reveal a
              great deal about essential domestic and ritual activities and the degree to
              which all classes of people were socially and economically differentiated. This
              research will represent one of the first complete analyses of stone artifacts
              conducted at Middle Horizon sites in the Andes. Studies of stone artifacts in
              the Andes still mainly focus only on formal, highly modified tools, emphasizing
              their typological classification. The majority of stone artifact assemblages,
              however, are composed of casually produced unmodified or slightly modified
              flakes that were used for most domestic activities. As a result of the
              typological emphasis on formal tools, many studies have ignored the vast
              majority of stone artifacts and the information they can provide. 
	This
              research is important for providing new information on how stone tools were
              used and produced as well as a new perspective on the daily lives of
              prehistoric Andean peoples in Peru's early cities. It will help develop a
              baseline for the analysis and interpretation of other stone artifact
              collections not only for Huari sites, but also for other archaeological
              cultures and centers throughout Andean South America. This research will also
              contribute to the growing interest in domestic contexts in Andean archaeology,
              and will assist in training a promising young scientist.

