Title       : PHASER: A Universal Simulator for Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0230612

Award Number: 0230612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299828             (Estimated)
Investigator: Huseyin Kocak hk@math.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian A. Coomes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Burton Rosenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In past two decades, undergraduate courses in differential equations and their
              applications have undergone revolutionary changes by embracing numerical
              simulations and scientific visualization. Several notable commercial software
              products, including Phaser, the winner of EDUCOM/NCRIPTAL "Best Mathematics
              Software in Higher Education" award in 1989, have made this revolution
              possible. The original Phaser has been completely rewritten in Java, a
              platform-neutral language with excellent Internet support. Many new
              visualization features have been added, notably a Gallery for viewing and
              organizing multiple simulations. 

This project is supporting three
              full-scale development activities for Phaser:
(a) Developing and distributing
              freely a browser version of Phaser, akin to AcrobatReader by Adobe; and
              facilitating wide distribution of dynamic Phaser Projects and Galleries over
              the Internet.
(b) Creating a portal of multidisciplinary differential and
              difference equations
projects in collaboration with mathematicians,
              scientists, and engineers, posting these projects on www.phaser.com, and
              creating Galleries for dynamical systems and their applications suitable for
              beginning and advanced undergraduate students.
(c) Testing and evaluating the
              use of Phaser with students and faculty at diverse institutions.

In
              addition, development continues on the Phaser numerical engine. Methods are
              being developed and tested for validating numerical simulations of chaotic
              systems using the concept of shadowing. 

