Title       : STI: Extending the X-Bone Overlay Deployment Tool for Research and Classroom Use
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0230789

Award Number: 0230789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph D. Touch touch@isi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1766      Strategic Tech for Internet
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9150,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              STI-XTend augments the X-Bone automated Internet overlay deployment and
              management tool to provide a secure environment for local and distributed
              network experiments, to support advanced research and classroom use. The X-Bone
              applies a Virtual Internet architecture to support secure, concurrent overlay
              networks (VPNs) using existing Unix operating systems, standard Internet
              protocols (IPsec, SSL, dynamic routing), and applications. It currently lacks
              some advanced facilities requested by a number of network researchers and
              faculty. STI-Xtend augments the X-Bone to support revisitation, dynamic
              topology control, ports it to additional platforms, and augments its API for
              integration with networked applications. The tool will be further packaged with
              additional support materials (examples, scripted demonstrations, and
              instructions) to enhance its use by the research and educational community. The
              extensions are:

Support large-scale network emulation: STI-XTend allows
              overlays to revisit network components, allowing a small set of devices to
              emulate a large network using real protocols and applications. 

Dynamic
              topology control: STI-XTend allows overlay topologies to be modified by adding
              or deleting nodes or links, and to specify subset of responding nodes used (vs.
              arbitrary selection). This provides precise control of the participants and
              topology, allowing repeatable deployments.

Support additional platforms: The
              X-Bone supports Unix hosts and host-based routers; STIXTend provides ports for
              other platforms (MacOS, Solaris) and adds IPv6, multicast, and a single-board
              system for modest installations and control of closed platforms.

Augment
              user interfaces, API, and components: STI-XTend augments the X-Bone's GUI and
              updates its modular components and capabilities, e.g., dynamic routing
              (currently using defunct GateD and MRTd). 

The X-Bone is based on the
              abstract Virtual Internet (VI) architecture, which describes concurrent
              parallel and hierarchical overlays. The VI model inspired two-layer
              encapsulation to uniquely integrate IPsec with dynamic routing, and is being
              used to unify web search, DNS lookup, IP forwarding, and ARP (media-layer
              address resolution) as instances of a single, generic service. STI-XTend
              augments the VI architecture to include revisitation and dynamic topology
              control (especially difficult with IPsec, IPv6, and dynamic routing), as well
              as ensuring the correctness of the X-Bone API.

Over the past 3 1/2 years,
              there have been 4 public code releases and 18 public demonstrations of the
              X-Bone software. It is part of the FreeBSD ports collection and available as a
              Linux RPM.
