Title       : In Answer to A National Challenge: A Pilot Program to Increase Participation in
               Science, Technology, and Mathematics (STEM) Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0230395

Award Number: 0230395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy A. Bohrson bohrson@geology.cwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha J. Kurtz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Piacsek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen P. Glasby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward M. Gellenbeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Washington Univ
	      400 E. 8th AVE
	      Ellensburg, WA  98926    509/963-2111

NSF Program : 1796      STEM Talent Expansn Pgm (STEP)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Over the last several years, the critical need to bolster participation in
              science at all levels in 
the United States has become an issue of national
              concern. As the number of people trained in 
highly technical fields in the
              sciences, mathematics and engineering grows, there is evidence 
to suggest
              that students who have aptitude and interest in the sciences and mathematics
              often 
become disillusioned with their college-level studies and opt for
              majors in non-science 
disciplines. These students abandon potentially
              promising careers in science, technology, 
engineering and mathematics (STEM)
              fields because of inadequate preparation during their 
high school years,
              feelings that they can not compete, inadequate and/or poor advising by
              
college faculty, and disinterest in university-level general education
              classes in STEM fields. A 
most harmful part of this trend is that many
              students make decisions to leave STEM majors 
during their first year of
              college when they have not yet had the opportunity to develop strong 
ties
              with STEM departments. This loss of talent is detrimental not only to the
              intellectual 
capital that is a source of national pride but also to the
              nation's ability to maintain the high 
standard of living that is one
              by-product of a technologically-advanced economy. The solution 
to this
              problem lies, in part, in the ability of colleges and universities to
              restructure science 
and mathematics courses and majors. 

To address this
              problem in which promising students switch to non-scientific majors early 
in
              their college education, funding is requested for a three-year initiative that
              has as its 
overarching goal to recruit and retain promising students in STEM
              majors. Our approach 
is to develop a pilot project that consists of three
              parts: (1) a Summer Science Institute 
for high school students; (2) a
              Freshman Year Science Seminar Series, and (3) a Sophomore 
Year Independent
              Research Experience. At the heart of each of these programs are common
              
themes, including introducing students to the joys of scientific discovery
              and the nature of 
team-based interdisciplinary research, informing students
              about exciting career choices in 
STEM fields, exposing them to the rich
              history of scientific thought and discovery, and 
providing them with the
              tools and support structure they need to complete a baccalaureate 
degree in
              one or more STEM disciplines. We integrate practices that have been shown to be
              
effective in improving participation, including close mentoring,
              extracurricular activities, 
development of a cohort, inclusion of parents,
              and professional development for faculty. 
According to recent studies, the
              problem of first-year flight disproportionately impacts 
women, minorities,
              low-income, and/or first-generation students. For this reason, our 
recruiting
              efforts are concentrate on these target groups.

This pilot program has been
              carefully overseen and assessed by an Advisory Board chaired by 
the chief
              academic officer of Central Washington University, Provost/Senior Vice
              President 
David Soltz. Assessment is coordinated by Associate Professor of
              Science Education 
and Chemistry Martha Kurtz and Vice Provost and Professor
              of Curriculum and Supervision 
Linda Beath. Twice per year, goals, assessment
              strategies and benchmarks are reviewed 
in order to improve the program.
              Should our approach be successful, full scale implementation 
at CWU would
              rely on funding from private sources and redirection of internal resources.
              
Because our proposed program relies on themes and resources that are
              fundamental to most 
colleges and universities, we anticipate that other STEM
              groups could adopt our program, 
thereby increasing its impact from a local to
              a national scope. Central Washington University 
is well poised to support a
              program that stresses outreach to minority populations, careful 
mentoring,
              and inquiry-based, interdisciplinary academic programs. CWU emphasizes small
              
class size, close professional relationships between faculty and students,
              and a culture that 
rewards innovative, inquiry-based teaching and learning.
              The University has a strong, 
well-supported program in undergraduate research
              and creative expression, and strengths in 
education promote effective use of
              assessment strategies. This project reflects a 
collaborative effort among 11
              faculty in six College of the Sciences departments. Co-PIs 
include Wendy
              Bohrson (Geological Sciences), Michael Braunstein (Physics), Eric Bullock
              
(Chemistry), Carey Gazis (Geological Sciences), Lisa Ely (Geological
              Sciences), Ed 
Gellenbeck (Computer Sciences), Stephen Glasby(Mathematics),
              Martha Kurtz (Science 
Education and Chemistry), Steven Lundblad (Geological
              Sciences), Andy Piacsek (Physics), 
and Holly Pinkart (Biological
              Sciences).


