Title       : Software Engineering Technology Program Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0230590

Award Number: 0230590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Brzoska mbrzoska@mail.ewu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Washington Univ
	      
	      Cheney, WA  990042444    509/458-6200

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230590
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Brzoska, Michael
INSTITUTION
              NAME: Eastern Washington University
TITLE: Software Engineering Technology
              Program Development

Abstract

The Department of Engineering Technology and
              Multimedia Design within the School of Computing and Engineering Sciences at
              Eastern Washington University plans to develop a new program in the emerging
              discipline of Software Engineering Technology ( SET). The SET program was
              conceived largely on the basis of three major factors: industrial demand within
              the region and state, the small number of qualified
graduates available to
              enter the workforce, and the increasing pool of potential students. It is 
              Eastern Washington University's goal to develop and offer a timely and
              high-quality SET  program that provides a thorough understanding of theory and
              design combined with the variety
of practical skills needed today. 

The
              principal components of the curriculum design to be developed under this grant
              include:
1.  A synthesis of research derived from surveys and site visits to
              industry and other undergraduate SET      programs,
2.  Program objectives and
              outcomes based on the research and internal discussions within the department, 
                  school and college,
3.  A final list of proposed SET courses including
              course descriptions based on the research
4.  Recommendations for integrating
              new learning strategies and problem-solving techniques in the     
              curriculum,
5.	An identification of potential industry mentors, internships,
              and industry-originated classroom projects,
6.	A final list of laboratory
              needs including identification of equipment, configurations, and numbers of
              workstations,
7.	A student recruitment and retention plan that focuses on
              nontraditional students,
8.	Increased advisory board membership to include
              persons with a background in SET and non-technical members who can assist with
              both curriculum development and student recruitment and retention,
9.	A
              timeline for obtaining final program approval, and
10.  A  checklist of TAC of
              ABET requirements.

