Title       : An Integrated, Modular Chemical Engineering Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0230613

Award Number: 0230613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. McCarthy mccarthy@engrng.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric J. Beckman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammad M. Ataai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Federspiel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230613
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: McCarthy, Joseph
INSTITUTION
              NAME: University of Pittsburgh
TITLE: An Integrated, Modular Chemical
              Engineering Curriculum

Abstract

As the scientific needs of tomorrow's
              industries are not well defined, the goal of an engineering educator should not
              be to train specialized experts in the perceived areas of future import, but
              instead to give students a broad spectrum of knowledge and to cultivate their
              ability to think analytically and critically while encouraging them to pursue
              learning throughout their careers. The challenge before us then is to develop a
              curriculum that prepares students for the engineering economy of today, while
              enabling them - through a strong and well integrated core of engineering
              knowledge -- to maintain versatility through life-long learning and continuing
              education.

In this proposal we will formulate a plan to (a) Give the
              students a strong fundamental foundation by concentrating on the essential core
              of scientific and engineering basics in a given discipline.(b) Enhance systems
              thinking by helping students to integrate their knowledge across courses and
              disciplines so that they are better prepared to address open-ended problems;
              and (c) Prepare and provide for continuing education and life-long learning. We
              hypothesize that an effective method of accomplishing these three tasks is to
              combine ideas from the NSF Coalitions with the well-established K-12 practice
              of Block Scheduling. Specifically, we propose to:

1. Modularize and
              integrate the critical "core" of Chemical Engineering (including mass balances,
              thermodynamics, kinetics, separations, transport phenomena, process systems,
              control, laboratory, and design) into six Pillar courses.

2. Re-evaluate and
              re-align supporting courses (mathematics, chemistry, physics, and biology) and
              elective courses into application-focused tracks.

3. Re-align each
              individual course so that, in addition to the traditional macroscopic and
              continuum-level descriptions, we also include "sub-continuum" or "fundamental
              unit" analysis.


