Title       : An Active Learning Environment for Information Technology Across the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0230700

Award Number: 0230700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100010             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sigurdur Olafsson olafsson@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Huba  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah M. Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank E. Peters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John K. Jackman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230700
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Olafsson, Sigurdur
INSTITUTION
              NAME: Iowa State University
TITLE: An Active Learning Environment for
              Information Technology Across the Curriculum
NSF RECEIVED DATE:
              06/04/2002

Abstract

The Iowa State Department of Industrial Engineering
              will reformulate its curriculum using information technology as the integrating
              common experience.  This project will perform a proof of concept study in
              designing and prototyping a  learning  environment  where  students  (a)  learn
               to  effectively  use  information  technology  solve real world engineering
              problems, (b) develop their cognitive ability to structure schemas in
              industrial  engineering  knowledge  domains,  (c)  develop  their 
              metacognitive  ability  to  apply discipline-specific knowledge to solve
              engineering problems and monitor their problem solving strategies, and (d)
              fully appreciate the connection between isolated relevant course content. The
              key concept of this proposal is therefore a learning environment based on new
              and emerging information technology tools and concepts that will integrate
              isolated course content. In addition, this learning environment will reflect
              current thinking in learning theory. The environment will thus be
              learner-centered, knowledge-centered, and assessment-centered.  

The
              proposed approach to achieving the objectives is through a set of active
              learning modules in 
which students use domain knowledge, data, methods, and
              software tools to achieve a pre-defined 
goal for a set of simulated
              industrial engineering scenarios. These scenarios will not only draw on 
the 
              knowledge  base from  each  course  but  also  explicitly make  connections
              with material  from other courses.  For each scenario, students must
              independently define goals, formulate problems, and develop solution strategies
              while mastering the course material.  This environment is thus a fundamental 
              shift  from  an  emphasis  on  the  traditional  lecture  format  to  active 
              learning.    The modules are also an ideal tool to encourage cooperation with
              other students. 


