Title       : The Future Role of Ecological Engineering Science in Undergraduate Engineering
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0230631

Award Number: 0230631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Loring Nies nies@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Inez Hua  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rabi Mohtar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marne Helgesen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julie Ann Stuart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230631
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Nies, Loring
INSTITUTION NAME:
              Purdue University
TITLE: The Future Role of Ecological Engineering Science in
              Undergraduate Engineering Education

Abstract

The impact of human
              engineering on ecosystems is undeniable and globally evident.  Ecological
              Engineering is an emerging discipline that is defined as the design of
              ecosystems for the mutual benefit of humans and nature.  Human engineering and
              natural systems must act in harmony if we are to sustain ecosystem biodiversity
              and improve human existence to a globally equitable and acceptable level.  
              

The project will develop an inclusive undergraduate degree program in
              Ecological Engineering Science that will integrate faculty, courses, and
              resources across current disciplinary boundaries.  Future graduates of
              Ecological Engineering Science will work in interdisciplinary teams to ensure
              that engineering practices are ecologically sustainable.  We call our program
              Ecological Engineering Science to acknowledge the natural and social science
              foundation of the program.  Although the initiation of this new degree program
              will be from within the Schools of Engineering, strong interdisciplinary
              linkages will be established with the Schools of Agriculture, Sciences, Liberal
              Arts, and Education during the planning process.  Our interdisciplinary team
              from the Schools of Engineering and the Center for Instructional Excellence at
              Purdue University is well suited to establish linkages across campus and to
              lead the curriculum planning process.  What sets Ecological Engineering Science
              apart from traditional environmental disciplines such as Environmental
              Engineering is the scale and complexity of the problems, the consideration of
              human institutions (social, political and economic), and the inclusion of
              sustainability issues in problem formulations.  There is a strong justification
              for the development of an Ecological Engineering Science degree program.  Over
              the next decade more than 35,000 new Environmental and Sustainable Systems jobs
              will become available in the US.  The National Research Council recommended
              increasing interdisciplinary education and they identified eight .Grand
              Environmental Challenges. that spans the spectrum of Ecological Engineering.  
              

