Title       : STI: Flexible Wireless Systems for Rapid Network Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0230786

Award Number: 0230786
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $820000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph B. Evans evans@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary J. Minden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1766      Strategic Tech for Internet
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : ,9150,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Ultra-wideband (UWB) systems portend to offer multiple communications
              advantages.
However, the conventional approach to UWB systems is to emit a
              short, possibly shaped, pulse at determined intervals. The effect is not unlike
              your car engine firing a spark plug at determined intervals. Advocates contend
              that by shaping the pulse and adjusting the interval between pulses, a robust,
              short-ranged communications system can be achieved. However, traditional UWB
              systems have only two degrees of freedom, pulse shape and pulse interval. This
              limits their ability to avoid interfering with critical (e.g. GPS) channels and
              comply with laws regarding spectrum management.

The project investigates
              solutions to these issues by developing, implementing, and demonstrating an
              ultra-wideband communications system based on hundreds to thousands of
              individual carrier channels. Called Hyper-Orthogonal Frequency Division
              Multiplexing, or HOFDM, such systems will allow the rapid deployment of new
              wireless Internet services by providing a platform that is flexible with
              respect to the ambient spectrum regulations and conditions. H-OFDM permits the
              mining of the existing spectrum to obtain bandwidth to support new networking
              services.

The H-OFDM system has the following attributes:
1. The radio
              frequency (RF) environment can be sensed and the system can adapt to the local
              environment.
2. The H-OFDM system can adjust to local (foreign) regulations
              regarding RF emissions.
3. The H-OFDM system can adjust to propagation
              conditions, using lower frequencies to penetrate foliage and/or reach longer
              distances or use higher frequencies to limit range and support covert
              operations.

Generation of a H-OFDM signal is the combination of hundreds of
              individual carriers at frequencies compatible with the requirements of the
              propagation environment, the degree of stealth, and the limitations of the
              applicable government. OFDM is selected because one can move carriers with
              relative ease, one can move carriers very close to existing channels, and one
              can easily control the modulation and bandwidth.

The system proposal is
              based on three components:
1. Ultra-wideband radio frequency transmitters and
              receivers.
2. Ultra-wideband antennas, power amplifiers, and low-noise
              receivers to support the H OFDM system.
3. High-performance digital signal
              processing (DSP) algorithms and components to generate and detect H-OFDM
              signals.

When successful, this project will provide a technology for
              providing wireless Internet services with greater bandwidth.
