Title       : Longwave Radiation Processes over the Antarctic Plateau
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2002  
File        : a0230114

Award Number: 0230114
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97657              (Estimated)
Investigator: Von Walden vonw@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The atmosphere over the Antarctic Plateau plays a unique role in the global
              climate system. It is the coldest and driest atmosphere on earth, and radiation
              processes dominate both the surface and the top-of-atmosphere energy budgets. 
              In summer, the four radiation components (downward and upward, shortwave and
              longwave) are each in the range of 100 to 400 watts per square meter, generally
              exceeding the sensible and latent heat fluxes by at least an order of
              magnitude. In winter, there is no shortwave radiation, so the downward and
              upward longwave fluxes are the dominant contributors to the surface energy
              budget. When spectrally resolved, longwave radiation is also useful for remote
              sensing of atmospheric and surface properties.  Thus it is desirable to develop
              methods for remote sensing by polar-orbiting satellites so that the entire
              continent can be characterized. Surface-based observations are invaluable for
              validating satellite observations, as well as for obtaining information about
              climatic processes that are best studied in situ.  
Five separate projects
              will be based upon analysis of data from South Pole Atmospheric Radiation and
              Cloud Lidar Experiment (SPARCLE), a full-year experiment of the effects of
              clouds, water vapor, atmospheric ice crystals, and surface snow, on the
              longwave radiation spectrum measured at the surface.   Project 1 will use the
              climatological database of longwave spectra to determine the contributions of
              different gases to the downward longwave flux at the surface and the surface
              cloud radiative forcing.  Project 2 involves longwave radiative properties of
              Antarctic clouds and their effects on the surface and atmospheric energy
              budgets.  Project 3 involves the measurement of humidity profiles and
              development of retrieval algorithms of boundary-layer temperature and humidity
              profiles for Antarctica.  Project 4 involves the simultaneous retrieval of the
              surface temperature and the spectral emissivity of snow.  Project 5 is a study
              of near-surface atmospheric temperature profiles. 
The experimental data and
              the subsequent analysis products are expected to generate research in other
              areas, including remote sensing, climate modeling, and weather forecasting in
              Antarctica for potential year-round logistical operations. The data analysis
              projects proposed here will also provide data from the Antarctic Plateau useful
              in constraining and testing general circulation models.
*** 

