Title       : U.S./Chinese Ship of Opportunity Sampling Program Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2002   
File        : a0230284

Award Number: 0230284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $515944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaojun Yuan xyuan@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas G. Martinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This work is the continuation of a joint project with the Polar Research
              Institute of China to make measurements of the structure of the upper ocean in
              the northern Weddell Sea along the route taken by the PRI's antarctic supply
              vessel, R/V Xue Long.   The observations, obtained from expendable instruments,
              complement existing hydrographic observations along various transects through
              the northwestern Weddell Sea region and data from moored current meter arrays
              in the Weddell-Scotia confluence zone.   This effort builds upon a successful
              series of expendable bathythermographs and conductivity-temperature-depth
              probes obtained by the science party on board the R/V Xue Long for the past
              four years.
The west-to-east transit of the Weddell Sea by the ship makes it
              possible to obtain a series of ocean soundings that are otherwise unobtainable.
               The information is particularly important because strong correlative links
              between the upper ocean temperature and salinity, the sea ice edge, and
              extra-polar climate features have been established.  It has been shown that the
              Indian Ocean sector is an anomalous region with respect to connections between
              antarctic and lower latitude climatic features and indices.   Here the
              Antarctic Circumpolar Current makes its closest approach to the continent and
              the Antarctic Circumpolar Wave is least well expressed in the existing data.  
              The necessary instrumentation, both software and hardware, has been installed
              in the ship and an excellent working relationship with Chinese antarctic
              scientists has been developed. 

