Title       : Engaging Preservice Science Teachers in Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0230617

Award Number: 0230617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99663              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janie E. Seat seat@tennessee.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dave R. Raman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Claudia T. Melear  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230617
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Seat, Janie
INSTITUTION NAME:
              University of Tennessee Knoxville
TITLE: Engaging Preservice Science Teachers
              in Engineering


ABSTRACT
 
Success in engineering is strongly dependent
              on the quality of a student's secondary 
mathematics and science education. 
              Unfortunately, many middle school and high school 
teachers in Tennessee do
              not know enough about engineering or the engineering 
education process to
              prepare their students adequately for the rigors of engineering 
degree
              programs.  Together with the University of Tennessee (UT) College of Education,
              
the UT freshman engineering engage program is proposing to develop and test
              novel 
methods of educating secondary science teachers about these topics, and
              to thereby 
increase the quantity and quality of students entering engineering
              degree programs. 
 
A pilot program will bring preservice science teachers
              from the UT College of Education will spend ten hours each week learning
              firsthand about engineering education by working in engages Physical Homework
              class.  Participants will also take a Special Topics course in Education in
              which they will be encouraged to apply the knowledge that they gain from their
              science education experiences in engage to the secondary science classroom.  At
              the end of the year, faculty members from both Education and Engineering will
              evaluate the pilot program to determine whether or not it would be an effective
              way to increase the engineering content in the existing preservice science
              curriculum. 
 
This program leverages facilities and expertise from two
              different colleges to work on the 
problem of science teacher preparation. 
              This problem is one of actual preparation as the 
role of the College of
              Education and from the College of Engineering, a customer of 
science
              preparation.  This program puts the best resources of teaching pedagogy and
              
understanding applied science together to improve and educational resource.
              
 


