Title       : Seismic Attenuation and Anisotropy in the Carpathians and Adjacent Basins: Upper
               Mantle Role in the Last Stages of Tethyan Closure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0230336

Award Number: 0230336
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72080              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond M. Russo ray@earth.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,5917,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0230336
Raymond M. Russo

The Carpathian arc marks the suture of a
              now-closed major embayment of
Tethys, the expansive ocean basin that once
              stretched along the southern
margin of Eurasia from the western Mediterranean
              to Indochina.  The arc
is unique in several respects:  Closure of the remnant
              Tethys here entails
some degree of very recent (Miocene-present)
              continent-continent collision
and disappearance of, most likely, a part of the
              Tethyan oceanic lithosphere
into the upper mantle.  However, study of
              Carpathian tectonics may have wide
application, since the processes now
              visible there must have taken place
elsewhere in the past along the
              diachronously closing Tethys margin.

The unusual seismicity, volcanism, and
              surface deformation at the Vrancea
bend zone of the Carpathian arc (45.5 N
              lat., 25.5 E long.) has yielded
a debate about their cause(s):  one viable
              tectonic scenario invokes
subduction of a piece of Tethyan oceanic
              lithosphere, a remnant of which
is presumed to be just detaching from
              continental lithosphere of the
East European and Moesian platforms.  A second
              model holds that oceanic
lithosphere subduction ended some time in the late
              Miocene, and that since
then a portion of East European or Moesian platform
              continental lithosphere
has been delaminating along a horizontal
              mid-lithospheric interface and
dripping down into the upper mantle.  The
              predicted distribution of high
velocity `slab' and low velocity asthenosphere
              in the upper mantle beneath
Vrancea zone differs between these models and can
              be determined seismically
by a combination of tomography (ongoing in Romania
              and independent of this
project) and measurements of seismic attenuation and
              shear wave splitting,
which delineate the distribution of cold lithosphere and
              warm asthenosphere,
and the flow directions of any upper mantle asthenosphere.
               The active
seismicity at Vrancea can be exploited to delimit both slab
              distribution
and upper mantle flow directions via measurements of seismic
              attenuation
and shear wave splitting.  Targeted tests of mantle responses to
              Tethys
closure will include establishment of the presence and thickness
              of
mantle asthenosphere beneath the study region, observations of mantle
flow
              directions, estimation of seismic attenuation and associated
inferences
              concerning mantle temperature fields, and, ultimately, a
strong test of
              competing hypotheses put forth to explain the unusual
seismicity and volcanism
              of the Carpathian arc.  Finally, improved
understanding of seismic wave
              propagation and attenuation in the study
region will directly enhance our
              understanding of seismic hazard in
this populous area.

-- 

