Title       : Enhancing Engineering Education Using Information Technology Tools: An
               Integrated Approach to building a design oriented chemical engineering
               curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0230476

Award Number: 0230476
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99017              (Estimated)
Investigator: Babu Joseph joseph@eng.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aydin K. Sunol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Eison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Llewellyn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Venkat R. Bhethanabotla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230476
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Joseph, Babu
INSTITUTION NAME:
              University of South Florida
TITLE: Enhancing Engineering Education Using
              Information Technology Tools: An Integrated Approach to building a design
              oriented chemical engineering curriculum


The plan for this engineering
              curricula revision is to use IT to enhance the way
we package and deliver
              engineering concepts in a practical and relevant way. This proposal addresses
              some of the major challenges faced by the academic engineering community in
              adapting to the shifting paradigms in presentation and assimilation of concepts
              and themes that are relevant to engineering practice today. The technology,
              hardware and software that help us make the necessary transition are now
              available. However, the major challenge lies in the development of the
              appropriate pedagogical structure and paradigms that motivate the student to
              think, to explore and to learn through interactive experiences. This is the
              central motivation behind the proposed work.

Specifically, we want to
              utilize IT to alter the organization, integration and delivery of core
courses
              in chemical engineering such as thermodynamics, mass and energy balances, fluid
              dynamics, heat transfer and process control. We want to improve retention while
              increasing the understanding and the capability of engineering students to
              tackle complex problems. Simultaneously, we propose curriculum revisions that
              will introduce engineering software early and often in the curriculum so that
              the students are at once comfortable with and able to utilize this evolving
              technology to the maximum extent in their education. The specific objectives
              are to:

While the focus is on development of chemical engineering
              curriculum, at the University of South Florida of the concepts can also be
              extended to other engineering disciplines with similar benefits.


