Title       : Extinction and Recovery in Terrestrial Ecosystems across the Permian-Triassic
               Boundary in South Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0230024

Award Number: 0230024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hallie J. Sims   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marion K. Bamford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Conrad C. Labandeira  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT ABSTRACT

EXTINCTION AND RECOVERY IN TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEMS ACROSS THE
              PERMIAN-TRIASSIC BOUNDARY IN SOUTH AFRICA

EAR-0230024

PIs: Hallie J.
              Sims, Marion K. Bamford, and Conrad C. Labandeira

The Permian/Triassic
              (P/Tr) boundary 252 million years ago is recognized as the largest mass
              extinction in the history of marine life.  The terrestrial fossil record
              indicates that there was widespread and elevated turnover in plants and insects
              during this interval, but interpretation of the event has been hindered by the
              apparent lack of a continuous terrestrial sequence spanning the boundary.  The
              Permian and Triassic compression floras in Karoo Basin of South Africa record a
              temporal series of snapshots of local vegetation, and thus provide a model
              system to assess extinctions and ecological restructuring in plant communities
              across the boundary.  In addition, the diversity and frequency of insect
              herbivory in these communities is preserved as damage on fossil leaves, wood,
              seeds, and other reproductive organs and can be used to assess patterns in
              plant-insect interactions.  PIs project combines examination of specimens in
              museum collections and new field work to bulk collect plant macrofossils from
              23 Karoo localities spanning the P/Tr boundary. Palynological analysis will
              allow them to integrate the sites with current geochronological information,
              including new radiometric dates and known vertebrate biozones in the Karoo. 
              The work will allow PIs to test hypotheses related to changes in the
              composition and relative abundance within plant communities.  By integrating
              quantitative data on plants and their associated insect herbivores, this
              research will help understand how terrestrial life responded to the most
              devastating extinction in the Phanerozoic by providing the first rigorous
              assessment of changes in ecosystems across the P/Tr boundary at multiple
              trophic levels.


