Title       : Partnerships to Enhance Engineering Education in K-16
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0230624

Award Number: 0230624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine Ebert cebert@gwm.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jed S. Lyons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230624
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Ebert, Christine
INSTITUTION
              NAME: University South Carolina Research Foundation
TITLE: Partnerships to
              Enhance Engineering Education in K-16


ABSTRACT
 
This Bridges for
              Engineering Education planning grant will develop a comprehensive program to:
              improve the pedagogical skills of engineering faculty, including their ability
              to assess student achievement of learning objectives; increase the engineering
              content in K-12 education; and increase the engineering content in pre-service
              teacher education.  The activities proposed during the planning process are
              built upon a foundation that increases the number of mutually beneficial
              partnerships  between  faculty  members  in  the  College  of  Education  and 
              the  College  of Engineering and  Information Technology.  The PIs will also
              personally demonstrate and document the effectiveness of pedagogy-development
              strategies that are known to education faculty but not to engineering faculty. 
              As a  vehicle for developing  a comprehensive and integrated program to enhance
              engineering education in grades K-16, the state-approved Center 
for
              Engineering Education Excellence will be activated.  

The core strategy is
              to identify  and support partnerships between faculty in the College of
              Engineering  and  Information Technology  and the College of Education at the
              University of South Carolina.    By partnering together to apply their unique
              expertise to address the  common interest of K-12 education improvement,  they
              have learned from  each other  and are able  to directly  apply their new
              knowledge in their separate disciplines.  This program is based on cooperative
              learning techniques.  By supporting good people to work together on good
              projects, each member of the 
partnership will have a greater awareness of
              what the other has to offer.  This is the cornerstone of a mutually beneficial
              and long-lasting relationship. 

