Title       : Palynostratigraphic and Paleoenvironmental Characterization of Upper Miocene
               Sediments from Western Ross Sea, Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0230001

Award Number: 0230001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sophie Warny sophie@geol.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Wrenn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports a project to investigate the interaction of
              the Antarctic ice sheet and the Southern Ocean during the late Miocene time
              period. Numerous lines of geological evidence show that the Earth climate
              system changed dramatically during the late Miocene. These changes include the
              largest pre-Pleistocene glacioeustatic sea-level low stands during the
              Cenozoic, a 300-km northward shift of the Polar Front, multiple pulses of ice
              rafting, a global carbon isotopic (d13C) shift, a global reduction in ocean
              salinity, and several episodes of Southern Ocean abyssal-plain erosion.
              Primarily on the basis of deep-sea proxy data, it has been inferred that late
              Miocene climatic changes were related to Antarctic glacial
              intensification.

Although these proxy data interpretations are based on
              fundamentally sound geological and geochemical principles, the conclusions
              concerning linkages to the Antarctic cryosphere are equivocal because the
              specific environmental conditions at the Antarctic continental margins have not
              yet been established. The fundamental purpose of this palynological study is to
              address the following question: What were the environmental conditions (i.e.
              salinity, temperature, and sea ice-cover) during late-Miocene interglacials and
              glacials on the western Ross Sea inner and outer continental shelf?
The
              secondary goals are to:
1. Enhance the existing Ross Sea palynostratigraphy
              developed from the Cape Roberts Project.
2. Determine if the major glacial
              advance to the Northern Basin shelf edge, described by Brancolini and
              colleagues in 1995 and Bart and colleagues in 2000, was indeed a late Miocene
              event, and if so, what were the environmental conditions existing during this
              glacial period.
3. Determine the effect of Antarctic environmental changes on
              low-latitude climate change, focusing on linkage with the Messinian Salinity
              Crisis and the reason behind the global salinity reduction. Indeed, new
              palynological data from the Atlantic coast of the paleo-Gibraltar threshold
              suggests that a significant Antarctic-linked lowering of sea level occurred
              during the late Miocene, restricting Atlantic inflow into the Mediterranean Sea
              at the beginning of the crisis.

In the first part of this study, the
              palynology of the well-dated, inner continental shelf cores DVDP 10 and 11 will
              be analyzed. Prior work by others showed, on the basis of benthic foraminifer
              and diatom distribution, that cycles of open-marine/glacial conditions existed
              on the Ross Sea inner continental shelf during the Mio-Pliocene. Dinocyst
              distribution should test this theory. In the second part of this study, a
              palynological analysis of previously acquired material from the Northern Basin
              outer continental shelf will be conducted. Recent seismic-stratigraphic
              analyses indicated that the sediments associated with a major late Miocene (?)
              glacial advance are exposed over a broad area, on the northwestern Ross Sea
              outer continental shelf. Palynomorphs contained in these sediments should test
              if indeed, the outcrops were deposited during the late Miocene. Because basic
              types of Antarctic and Arctic marine palynomorphs are similar,
              paleoenvironmental reconstruction will be based on existing ecological data
              from the Arctic, as well as that from Antarctic waters. The oxygen isotopic
              (d18O) record recently generated for DVDP sites 10 and 11 should provide a
              reasonable proxy for Antarctic ice-volume changes and evaluate if environmental
              changes were related to ice-volume changes. In addition to the environmental
              aspect, the biostratigraphic information generated by this study should provide
              improved chronostratigraphic support for future proposed Antarctic geological
              drilling programs, such as SHALDRIL and ANDRILL.



