Title       : Integrating Assistive Technology into an Undergraduate Computer Science
               Curriculum from an HCI Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  2002  
File        : a0230969

Award Number: 0230969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2003   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74898              (Estimated)
Investigator: Blaise W. Liffick liffick@cs.millersv.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millersville University
	      PO Box 1002
	      Millersville, PA  17551    717/872-3820

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proof-of-concept project develops a full course as well as independent
              topic modules to introduce assistive technology design and evaluation into an
              undergraduate computer science curriculum from a human-computer interaction
              perspective, (topic modules could be used within the content of a traditional
              HCI course.) including a model laboratory. 

This course provides CS students
              with an introduction to disabilities issues, computerized aids to compensate
              for physical disabilities and for providing accessibility to computer
              technology and electronic information (e.g., through the Internet). Curriculum
              materials include lecture notes on specific topics (e.g. devices for the
              visually impaired), descriptions of hardware and software related to the
              topics, and suggestions for assignments and projects. These modules are being
              used in the senior-level course CSCI 425 - Human-Computer Interaction, and then
              within a new course devoted to assistive technology topics. Students are
              strongly encouraged to participate in service learning projects and in
              collaborative projects with students in other courses such as Nursing 424 -
              Health Promotion and Rehabilitation Nursing.

An outcome of the inclusion of
              assistive technology within a computer science
curriculum is the attraction of
              more women to the field by providing an application area that is more socially
              oriented. In addition, students with disabilities are encouraged to study
              computer science by seeing how the field directly applies to them.

This
              project includes issues of faculty development through the use of workshops and
              the integration of assistive technology into the education of computer science
              majors.

