Title       : BEST: Bridging Engineering and Science Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a0230588

Award Number: 0230588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Pickett mpickett@eng.utoledo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Toledo
	      2801 West Bancroft
	      Toledo, OH  436063328    419/530-2844

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230588
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Pickett, Mark
INSTITUTION NAME:
              University of Toledo
TITLE: BEST: Bridging Engineering and Science
              Teachin

Abstract

BEST: Bridging Engineering and Science Teaching

The
              goal of this project is to improve the education of Education and Engineering
              students, while
simultaneously engaging Engineering and Education faculty in a
              collaboration that employs the best
available pedagogy. The project will
              develop lower level engineering courses that utilize the strengths of
both
              faculties. The result of this collaboration will be engineering courses that
              are more attractive to a
diverse range of students and the development of high
              school teachers who appreciate engineering design
and encourage their students
              to explore applied science design issues and careers.

With this planning
              grant, an inquiry-based pilot course in structural design will be used to
              explore
the role of an Engineering-Education collaboration in improving
              engineering education. A second-year
course, ioIntroduction to Structural
              Designlr, will be planned and taught. It will be accessible for
              Secondary
Education majors while maintaining the necessary technical content
              for Engineering students. The course
will provide the rudiments of structural
              design for Education majors and lower-level Engineering students.
Students
              completing the course will participate in jointly taught coursework, will learn
              both technical
content and educational methods, and will be prepared for
              higher-level coursework within their major. The
collaborators will develop a
              general methodology for team-teaching of modified engineering content that
can
              be employed throughout the curriculum in a series of courses to provide content
              for Education students.
If the first course is successful, a detailed plan for
              further collaboration including other collaborative
courses, possibly
              involving local engineering projects, will be developed.

