Title       : Engineering Our World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0230702

Award Number: 0230702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99560              (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine K. Skokan cskokan@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura L. Kosbar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara M. Moskal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230702
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Skokan, Catherine
INSTITUTION
              NAME: Colorado School of Mines
TITLE: Engineering Our World
NSF RECEIVED
              DATE: 06/04/2002

Abstract


Engineering Our World
 
The purpose of this
              proposal, Engineering Our World. is to plan and pilot a program 
for improving
              teacher knowledge and student understanding of the concepts of various
              
engineering disciplines and how these relate to their current science and
              mathematics curriculum.  
The program will be designed to both engage and
              educate middle school students through the use 
of hands-on, inquiry-based
              experiments in a mathematically rich environment.  One unusual 
feature of
              this program is the inclusion of teacher workshops and monthly follow-up
              classroom 
visits.  Another feature is development of a course for pre-service
              teachers.  The existence of this 
new course will increase the impact of this
              project in years to come. 

The focus of the summer teacher workshops will be
              threefold: 1) to improve the middle 
school teachers' backgrounds of
              engineering disciplines and their relevance to physical science 
and
              associated mathematical concepts in their current curriculum, 2) to introduce
              the teachers to 
techniques for integrating content and learning standards
              (including content literacy) into the 
curriculum, and 3) to provide teachers
              with instruction concerning how to use inexpensive 
materials to provide
              hands-on learning experiences in their classroom. .  The purpose of the
              
follow-up classroom visits will be to assist the teachers in implementing the
              hands-on engineering 
experiments in their classrooms and to respond to
              teachers' questions concerning science and 
engineering concepts.  In other
              words, members of the CSM faculty team will become a valuable 
classroom
              resource for both students and teachers alike.   

In parallel with this
              effort, a program for pre-service teachers will be developed.  The 
University
              of Colorado at Colorado Springs will pilot a one-semester course for
              pre-service 
teachers covering the .Fundamentals of Engineering..  The
              pre-service teachers will use 
materials developed through this project during
              classroom visits with in-service teachers and 
apply these materials during
              their student teaching experiences at the middle school level.  This 
proposal
              is intended to develop/adapt an appropriate set of course material for the
              teacher 
workshops and in-class lessons, and to test and evaluate the
              materials in urban and suburban 
classrooms.  The joint effort of addressing
              both in-service and pre-service teachers will provide a 
continuous stream of
              knowledgeable instructors that can use engineering principals to illustrate
              
the practical applications of science and mathematics to middle school
              students. 
 


