Title       : Establishing an Integrated Multibeam and Geophysical Database for the Antarctic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0230502

Award Number: 0230502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334349             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne M. Carbotte carbotte@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William B. Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports the construction, population, and operation
              of an integrated multibeam and geophysical database for the Southern Ocean and
              Antarctica (out to roughly the latitude of 45 S). The focus of our efforts will
              be to make multibeam bathymetry data collected aboard the R/V Palmer available
              to the community as a resource for science and education. The database will
              have strong similarities to the existing NSF supported RIDGE Multibeam database
              and will build upon that project's development efforts. A PostgreSQL relational
              database server will manage the database. It will be accessible through two
              web-based interfaces: pages that present a choice of a simple point, click and
              text-field entry in a browser window; and a map-based Java applet interface
              that provides the capability to browse and interact with the database.

The
              main attraction of the database will be access to maps, grids, and edited raw
              data files from the R/V Palmer multibeam data. These data have not yet been
              brought together in a synthesis and are typically only accessible to the small
              group of researchers aboard the expedition during which the data were
              collected. Multibeam data are perhaps unique among the geophysical data types:
              they reveal in exquisite detail a strange, hidden landscape; they include
              valuable information on geological processes occurring at the sea floor; and
              they are useful to scientists preparing base-maps for their particular studies
              and as an integrating framework for interdisciplinary work. These data are
              acquired at considerable cost to the NSF and represent an important part of the
              legacy of the Antarctic program as well as a valuable resource for future
              research activities. In addition to browsing and downloading multibeam data
              products, users will be able to interact dynamically with the data.
              Capabilities will be provided for generating bathymetric profiles and contour
              maps, for digitizing and downloading points and lines, and for customizing the
              map display.

In parallel and linked to the multibeam effort, a prototype
              database will be developed for sub-bottom profile data populated by recently
              collected ice-penetrating radar data from Lake Vostok. Available seismic
              reflection profiles from the ANTOSTRAT compilation and from the National
              Geophysical Data Center (NGDC) in Colorado will also be included. The map
              browser will provide access to all the ship-acquired trackline geophysical
              holdings at Lamont-Doherty and the NGDC, for the Antarctic Digital Gravity
              Synthesis and for other existing basemap compilations (e.g. BEDMAP) and sample
              data collections (e.g. ODP borehole data, RidgePetDB). Access to all these data
              types will be provided through the same map browser as the multibeam data,
              which will allow the user to explore diverse data sets from a single web
              site.

The multibeam and geophysical data synthesis that will be developed
              under this award is expected to significantly expand the utility of these
              under-utilized and often hard to find resources for a broad range of users,
              both academic and lay, who are interested in Antarctic science and fundamental
              earth processes.

