Title       : STEP: A Multidisciplinary Bridge Program in a Liberal Arts Setting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2002    
File        : a0230343

Award Number: 0230343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99909              (Estimated)
Investigator: George C. Shields gshields@hamilton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hamilton College
	      198 College Hill Rd
	      Clinton, NY  13323    315/859-4011

NSF Program : 1796      STEM Talent Expansn Pgm (STEP)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The program focuses on both recruitment and retention initiatives as ways to
              increase the number of SMET graduates.  Participation in an on-campus research
              bridge program in the summer leading into the freshman year is the enticement
              presented to high school students as part of recruitment efforts. The program
              is being advertised by the Admissions Office and through visits by science
              faculty and student researchers to math and science "magnet" schools.  Women in
              particular are targeted.  Participant selection is based on expressed interest
              in science and academic profile, with inclusion not only of students who have
              demonstrated academic excellence but also of those in the middle range of the
              applicant pool on a variety of measures. 

The pre-matriculation summer
              research experience is six weeks long. Participants work with individual
              faculty on the latter's research, spending a minimum of seven hours daily in
              the laboratory.  As a major part of developing a sense of community, they live
              in a "summer science" dorm. Weekly luncheons with faculty, followed by
              discussions on topics ranging from adjustment to college life to women in
              science, and special trips out of town to athletic and cultural events are also
              part of the effort to integrate them into a network of peers and faculty.
              Reinforcement of this feeling of community continues into the academic year
              with a poster-session in October,  at which students present reports of their
              summer research activities and findings, and with biweekly luncheons and
              seminars.  An important part of the project, made possible with matching funds
              from Hamilton College, is a second, 10 week-long, summer research experience
              for each participant with the same or different professor, as they choose. 
              Students are encouraged to internalize research into their personal academic
              vision through an apprenticeship relationship with their supervising professor
              and through opportunities to publish and to present their work at conferences. 
              They also serve as peer-mentors to a new group of incoming students, thereby
              ensuring continuity of the community.

Currently 10 faculty in biochemistry,
              chemistry, computer science, neuroscience, and physics have opened their
              laboratories to participants.


