Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Molecular Rydberg Wave Packets for Quantum
               Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a0230583

Award Number: 0230583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Leone srl@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5918,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0128826
Leone

This two-year award for US-France collaboration in
              experimental physical chemistry and quantum information science involves
              researchers and students at the University of Colorado and the Aime Cotton
              Laboratory in Orsay, France.  Stephen R. Leone in the US and Christian Jurgen
              in France lead this collaboration of experimentalists and theorists. The
              objective of their combined efforts is to investigate Rydberg molecular packets
              of complex sodium or lithium compounds (dimers) or nobelium as potential
              sources for quantum information.   The US group will assemble and prepare
              molecular wave packets with ultrafast pulsed lasers in order to construct
              coherent superpositions of states. Pairs of superposition states, called
              qubits, will then be used to investigate algorithms proposed for quantum
              information science.  The French investigators will provide the theoretical
              expertise to identify the states involved and to interpret the complex wave
              packet dynamics. 

This collaboration advances understanding of research in
              laser control of chemical reactions and molecular spectroscopy.  The new
              knowledge will be used in quantum information science, optical communications,
              and femtosecond laser optics.  The collaboration advances research training of
              graduate students and provides them with opportunities to establish
              international partnerships early in their careers. 

This award represents
              the US side of parallel proposals to the NSF and the CNRS.  NSF will cover
              travel funds and living expenses for the US investigator, postdoctoral
              researcher and students.  The CNRS will support visits by French researchers
              and students to the United States. 

