Title       : Enhancing STEM Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0230038

Award Number: 0230038
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99840              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charlotte Borst borstc@union.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert T. Balmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gloria Taylor-Neal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union College
	      
	      Schenectady, NY  12308    518/370-6000

NSF Program : 1796      STEM Talent Expansn Pgm (STEP)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This program is an effort to enhance an already strong foundation of education
              and support for disadvantaged students by adding 1) supplemental learning (SL),
               2) communication skills development, 3) career exploration, 4)
              internship/shadow opportunities, 5) alumni mentoring, 6) earlier summer
              research experiences, and 7) a five-year curriculum for engineering that will
              enable underprepared students to strengthen basic skills in mathematics,
              physics, and communication in their first year. The SL component is a section
              attached to "high risk" courses, the purpose of which is not remediation but
              the development of learning and problem-solving skills. Successfully tried in
              engineering courses at Union, it will be integrated into introductory courses
              in  Biology, Mathematics, Chemistry, and Physics.  Training of faculty in SL
              methods is being supported by the grant.  

The program targets retention of
              students who aspire to STEM majors.  It will be piloted using a small group of
              students with high attrition rates in STEM disciplines. The project is
              motivated in part by the observation that while similar proportions of students
              in advantaged and disadvantaged groups express interest in STEM majors or
              STEM-related careers when they enter college, a notable disparity between the
              groups in the numbers who actually complete a STEM major is evident. Although
              the immediate focus of the program is disadvantaged students, the expectation
              is that all students will benefit from those elements that prove to be
              effective. The ultimate goal is to expand successful components to include any
              student who wishes to participate in the program.



