Title       : Strategic Changes in Chemical Engineering Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0230648

Award Number: 0230648
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99771              (Estimated)
Investigator: Milorad P. Dudukovic dudu@poly1.che.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Radhakrishna Sureshkumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230648
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Dudukovic, Milorad
INSTITUTION
              NAME: Washington University
TITLE: Strategic Changes in Chemical Engineering
              Curriculum

Abstract

This project will plan major strategic restructuring
              in the chemical engineering (ChE) curriculum at Washington University (WU) in
              St. Louis. The strategic plan will address key issues such as: how to utilize
              to maximum potential the unique strengths of Washington University (WU) in
              bio-sciences, how to reach the clientele outside the St. Louis region in an
              interactive fashion via information technology, and how to reach out to
              minorities. The focus of the plan will be; i)on ways in which advances in
              biosciences can be incorporated into the engineering curriculum, ii) on methods
              by which ChE fundamentals can be applied to lead to product design that
              requires multiscale engineering, iii) on the use of information technology (IT)
              in creating and disseminating instruction modules that will contribute to
              multidisciplinary learning, promote collaborative design and vertical
              integration of curriculum and allow user customization, and iv) on involvement
              of minorities in the process and increased role of research. The plan will aim
              to establish a set of realistic goals, taking advantage of special
              opportunities at Washington University, for a modern curriculum based on
              biosciences and information technology leading to possible specialization
              tracts in product synthesis and design, environmentally benign processing, real
              time control and optimization. This planning will involve the entire faculty in
              the ChE department, affiliate faculty in the Biomedical Department, as well as
              faculty in Computer Science, Systems Science and Mathematics, Biology and in
              the School of Medicine, and distinguished outside consultants. The departmental
              advisory board, consisting of individuals with distinguished industrial and
              academic careers will actively participate in the formulation and evaluation of
              this strategic plan. Recent and past graduates, students and distinguished
              chemical engineering educators will be invited to workshops to evaluate and
              constructively criticize the strategic plan in its various phases of
              development.


