Title       : Engineering Design in Middle and Secondary Math & Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0230593

Award Number: 0230593
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99189              (Estimated)
Investigator: Satish S. Nair nairs@.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Reys  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lloyd H. Barrow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sanjeev K. Khanna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.: 0230593
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Nair, Satish
INSTITUTION NAME:
              University of Missouri-Columbia
TITLE: Engineering Design in Middle and
              Secondary Math & Science Education

Abstract

There is increasing consensus
              for the need to incorporate technological literacy into the curriculum
              of
future teachers. Innovative collaborations are necessary to affect such a
              change. The Colleges of
Engineering and Education at the University of
              Missouri-Columbia (MU) will lead a meaningful partnership with the Columbia
              school district, one rural school, an inner city school in Kansas City, a
              community college, engineering businesses, and the Missouri Department of
              Elementary and Secondary Education, to develop a strategy to increase the
              engineering content, with particular focus on design content, in the curriculum
              of future mathematics and science teachers in the 7-12 th grades, using
              hands-on engineering exemplars. 
The project will also test the hypothesis 
              that engineering design is an ideal domain for reaching under served groups
              because it utilizes hands-on activities that students find motivating, and it
              also shows the connection to jobs.

The proposed project will help to develop
              infrastructure for deeper and sustained partnerships,
centered on engineering
              design, among middle and secondary level mathematics and science
              educators,
higher education, industry, and the department of elementary and
              secondary education of the state. The
prototype resources developed in the
              planning grant stage and subsequent larger effort, will be made
available to
              middle and secondary mathematics and science teachers throughout the region,
              the state, and
the nation, with the expectation that they will utilize them
              whenever appropriate.  These changes will, in the long term, lead to improved
              academic performance in mathematics and science, with  meaningful engineering
              design experience, and to an increase in the number of pre-college students who
              enroll in engineering degree programs.

