Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Conceptualizing Skill: Female Supervisors in the
               Mexican Maquiladora Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1994      
File        : a9406130

Award Number: 9406130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7109               (Estimated)
Investigator: Erica Schoenberger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,5922,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9406130  SCHOENBERGER       This research examines how technological change and
              the  reorganization of production paradigms in multinational companies  affect
              the vertical mobility of women workers in these  facilities.  Recent
              scholarship on changes in firm production  strategies, worker-management
              relations, and on the training of  "skilled labor" suggest that the positions
              held by Third World  women in such facilities may not be as static as
              previously  expected.  The proposed research investigates how women in 
              "unskilled" jobs in the "global assembly line" have acquired the  "skills"
              qualifying them for promotion into supervisory  positions.  Central to the
              study is the way that skilled labor  comes to be defined and recognized at the
              workplace across  industries and within several factories.  This research will 
              examine how new requirements for production and renovated  technologies alter
              the roles played by Third World workers in  multinational production facilities
              in situ. To do this, the  investigators will study the emergence of Mexican
              female  supervisors within multinational operations in Ciudad Juarez,  which is
              one of Mexico's largest export processing zones.  Portions of this proposal are
              derived from preliminary research  conducted in Mexico in 1992.  The proposed
              research focuses on  the use of both questionnaires and semi-structured
              interviews  with workers, supervisors, and managers at selected plants of 
              multinational firms located in Ciudad Juarez.       This project will provide
              important new insights into the  understanding of the ways in which
              multinational firms interact  with the local population in industrializing
              areas with an  emphasis on how gender relations both constitute part of the 
              structure of the organization of manufacturing and, in turn, are  redefined
              because of the presence of the multinational firms.  As  a doctoral
              dissertation research improvement award, this project  will also provide
              support to enable a promising student to  establish a strong indep endent
              research career.  ***
