Title       : Genetics of Maize Mitochondria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1998   
File        : a9406055

Award Number: 9406055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen J. Newton NewtonK@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9406055  A long-term objective of this project is to understand the
              effects of  individual plant mitochondrial genes on organelle biogenesis and 
              overall cellular function. The genetic analysis of plant mitochondrial  genomes
              has been limited due to the fact that only a few mutations with  known
              progenitors have been described. We have focused on a set of  lethal maize
              mutations (Nonchromosomal stripe; NCS) that survive in  heteroplasmic plants.
              Different NCS mutants are associated with  distinct phenotypes and the
              mutations have been shown to be deletions  affecting the expression of at least
              three different mitochondrial  genes (cox2, nad4 and the co-transcribed S3 an
              L16 ribosomal protein  genes. The major goal of the current proposal is to
              transform  mitochondria that are homoplasmic for a deletion of the 5' end and 
              promoter sequences of cytochrome oxidase subunit 2 with a  distinguishable,
              functional copy of cox2. This would open up higher  plant mitochondria to
              genetic manipulations that cannot otherwise be  performed. Normal and mutant
              promoter constructs will be tested in  vivo. We propose to continue our
              analyses of new mitochondrial  mutations, particularly the partially
              characterized NCS4 mutation. The  NCS4 mutant rearrangement involves S2-plasmid
              sequences that have  incorporated into the mitochondrial genome. Finally, we
              propose to  continue our genetic approach to analyzing the roles of
              mitochondria  during plant development. The mutants in different steps of
              oxidative  phosphorylation have distinguishable effects on chlorophyll levels
              and  the production of nuclear-coded products for chloroplast function. We 
              will also use the mutants to determine when mitochondrial function is 
              essential for the survival of cells, tissues and organs.  %%%  The long-term
              objective of this project is to understand the effects of  individual plant
              mitochondrial genes on organelle biogenesis and  overall cellular function. 
              During the tenure of this award, the focus  will be on: (1) devel oping
              procedures for transforming higher plant  mitochondria (2) continuing the
              analysis of existing mitochondrial  mutations and (3) continuing to genetically
              analyze the role(s) of  mitochondria during plant development.  ***
