Title       : Chemical Controls on Bioavailability of Riverine Particulate Phosphorus and
               Changes in Riverine Particulate Phosphorus Chemistry Across the Continent-Ocean
               Interface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1998 
File        : a9406585

Award Number: 9406585
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen C. Ruttenberg kruttenberg@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean K. Whelan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1043,1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9406585  Ruttenberg    The overall objectives of this proposal are (1) to use
              selective  leaching procedure (the SEDEX Method) to identify and quantify   
              the chemical from of particulate-P in the lower Mississippi and  Atchafalaya
              Rivers, at the interface between the Mississippi River   and the deltaic marine
              shelf, and in proximal surficial deltaic  marine sediments; (2) to identify
              spatial and temporal controls on  processes modifying  particulate-P during
              riverine transport; and  (3) to identify spatial and temporal controls on
              chemical  modification at the continent-ocean interface.  Phosphorus (P) is  an
              essential nutrient which can limit biological productivity in  fresh, brackish,
              and saline natural waters.  P associated with  particulate matter in natural
              waters will enhance biological  productivity to the extent that the P can be
              assimilated.   Determining the bioavailable P associated with particulate
              matter  is essential for placing constraints on sources of P for biological 
              cycling in aquatic systems.    Bulk P concentration is not a useful parameter
              as P-speciation is  required for assessment of the fraction of particulate P
              which is  bioavailable.  The SEDEX method separately quantifies  Fe-P, 
              authigenic sedimentary apatite (ASAP), (phases likely to control  soluble, and
              therefore bioavailable-P  in natural waters), organic-  P, loosely sorbed-P,
              and detrital apatite.  P-distribution in  Riverine Suspended Particulate Matter
              (RSPM) will be determined at  a series of river stations chosen to permit
              comparisons of input  from agricultural versus industrial land and between the
              levied  lower Mississippi and the Atchafalaya  hard-wood swamps.  Temporal 
              variability will be assessed by re-visiting the river study sites  seasonal. 
              This work will be carried out in conjunction with  ongoing USGS monitoring
              programs, which provided an array of  valuable supporting data and a long-term
              record.  The effect of  estuarine processes on RSPM P-distribution will be
              examined by  coupling field  measurements with P-desorption experiments.  The 
              latter will cover the range of salinity observed in the estuary.  
              P-distribution of RSPM determined before and after mixing should  permit direct
              identification of solid-phase P-reservoirs which  liberate soluble  (and
              therefore bioavailable ) P to solution.   These results will be compared to
              P-distribution of in situ RSPM  from the estuary.  The riverine source of
              bioavailable-P to the  coastal ocean will be assessed by contrasting the
              P-distribution of  RSPM from these two rivers with that in proximal surficial
              marine  sediments, and by contrasting P-loading calculations of separately 
              quantified RSPM P-reservoirs to P-burial rates in proximal shelf  sediments. 
              The work focusses on a globally significant system,  mechanisms of
              transformation, and physical and chemical controls  that should be broadly
              applicable.
