Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Comparison of the Gendered Consequences of
               Migration in Two Regions of Indonesia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1994      
File        : a9406597

Award Number: 9406597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7837               (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria A. Lawson lawson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,5927,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9406597  LAWSON       Households frequently migrate from one residential
              location  to another in search of better employment opportunities, but 
              relatively little attention has been given to examining the ways  that the
              different roles of women and men in households affect  their expectations
              before they migrate and their experiences  after they migrate.  Of particular
              concern are the ways that  different household roles and responsibilities for
              women and men  impinge upon their participation in the labor market, influence 
              their spatial mobility and their choice of destinations, and  affect their
              lives and household relationships after they have  moved.  This doctoral
              dissertation research project will compare  gender-related facets of migration
              within households and within  labor markets in two different parts of
              Indonesia.  The study  areas include both semi-urban and rural areas.  During
              lengthy  visits to each study area, in-depth interviews will be conducted  with
              both women and men and ethnographic data will be collected  and analyzed in
              order to obtain information about income levels,  relative allocations of time,
              and other variables before and  after moves.  These site-specific data will be
              analyzed with  reference to census and independently gathered village-level
              data  to ensure that the local samples are representative of broader 
              populations.  During the conduct of this work, the doctoral  student will
              collaborate with researchers at Indonesian  universities in Jakarta and Ujang
              Pandung.       This project will make a number of important contributions.  The
              comparative case studies will shed new light on the dynamics  of social and
              economic change in parts of Indonesia that have  experienced significant rates
              of in-migration in recent decades.  Because of the careful way in which the
              studies are structured,  the project will contribute to more general
              understandings of  gender-based differences in the migration experience of
              lower-  income residents in developing nations.  As a doc toral  dissertation
              research improvement award, this award also will  provide support to enable a
              promising student to establish a  strong independent research career.
