Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Dynamics and its Application in Physical
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1996     
File        : a9406022

Award Number: 9406022
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Levi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9406022  LevI    The goal of this research is to find and to explain new
              phenomena in  mathematical models of physical systems. More specifically, I
              propose  to work in two different directions: (1) Dynamics of coupled 
              relaxation oscillators and (2) Persistence of invariant sets in  Hamiltonian
              systems.  The first of these directions aims at  understanding what happens
              when simple oscillators are coupled  together. Systems of this kind arise in
              numerous physical settings,  particularly in biology and electric circuits. 
              While an individual  oscillator behaves in a simple and predictable way,
              several such  simple "cells" put together can behave in a totally unexpected
              and  mysterious way. I propose to study the "anatomy" of this interaction  of
              simple "cells" which produces complex and rich behavior of the  "organism". 
              The second topic, in contrast to the first,  deals with  Hamiltonian systems
              which model many situation where energy  dissipation can be neglected, such as
              motion of particles in particle  accelerators, geometric optics and celestial
              mechanics. There are  still deep fundamental unanswered questions in the theory
              of such  systems due to their richness and complexity, although remarkable 
              progress has been made in the 1960s (the Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser  theory) and
              in 1980's (the Aubry-Mather theory). It is proposed to  address some of these
              questions on a particular class of systems  (first introduced by Hedlund) which
              is more tractable than the general  case on the one hand, but is sufficiently
              rich to give new insights  and hints on the other.    Two research directions
              are proposed: first, the dynamics of coupled  relaxation oscillators, and
              second, persistence of invariant sets in  Hamiltonian systems.  In the first of
              these areas I propose to develop  qualitative theory of coupled relaxation
              oscillators, extending the  classical work of Cartwright--Littlewood as well as
              the more recent  work  on periodically forced relaxation oscillators.  In the
              last  couple of years two int eresting phenomena were discovered in this  area,
              and I hope that there are more to be found.  The second of the  two directions
              deals with understanding the behavior of invariant  sets in symplectic maps of
              R^4 under strong perturbations from the  integrable case. I plan   to consider
              a special class of systems,  namely, geodesic flows on a 3D torus with a
              particular kind of  Riemannian metric introduced by Hedlund. This is
              sufficiently simple  to be tractable on the one hand and yet sufficiently
              nontrivial to  give insight into the general situation.
