Title       : Magnetic Microstructures & Information Storage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1997     
File        : a9406198

Award Number: 9406198
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279130             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald S. Indeck rsi@ee.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marcel W. Muller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9406198  Indeck  The proposed research will have two facets:  it will be a
              contribution to the understanding and design of materials and components of
              information storage systems from a new viewpoint, and it will serve as the
              basis for a potential breakthrough in increasing the capacity of information
              storage systems.  Recent studies suggest that the limiting effects of media
              noise in information storage systems are capable of being reduced or eliminated
              by the use of "smart" components in the storage channel that sense the
              irregularities and compensate for them in the storage and/or retrieval process.
               Such adaptive compensation can be made possible in real time because of the
              speed advantage of semiconductor electronics processing over magnetization
              process time scales.  It is anticipated that a novel and unconventional
              approach to medium noise reduction will become indispensable as storage
              densities (especially track densities) increase.  Several possible approaches
              to adaptive media noise compensation can be envisaged at present, however, a
              detailed choice and a successful implementation will require physical and
              analytical information not currently available.  The purpose of this work is to
              provide some of the scientific underpinnings for such an effort.  Accordingly
              the research activities will include several interdependent studies: 
              oMicroscopy:  determination of the physical and magnetic    microstructure of
              medial and transducers  oMagnetic measurements of feature size, using
              instruments,    experimental methods, and methods of data reduction and  
              analysis developed at Washington University.  oMeasurements and modeling of the
              trackwidth dependence of media  noise.  oModeling and computational physics of
              storage media; correlation of micromagnetic calculation with microscope    
              observation; prediction of the attainable storage    capacity of a physically
              realizable storage system.  oDevelopment of design criteria for adaptive noise
              compensation  and design of multi-element transducers  for functional 
              implementation.   The results of the proposed research will have two-fold
              significance, as an augmentation of the science base of magnetic information
              storage, and as a new departure in the design of storage systems.  ***
