Title       : Scalable Wide Area Multicast Routing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1994    
File        : a9406007

Award Number: 9406007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tatsuya Suda                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133813             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah L. Estrin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9406007  Estrin       The  proposal begins with a brief review of the evolution
              of  multicast routing and identification of the scaling issues raised  by the
              introduction of multicast services in a global-scale  internet.  We then
              present criteria for evaluating different  solutions to the scaling issues.
              Given these evaluation criteria we  outline our proposed solution, called PIM. 
              PIM could significantly  improve the scaling properties of multicast routing
              and is capable  of providing better service quality than alternative scalable  
              multicast schemes such as Core Based Trees.       We present preliminary
              simulation results comparing the  performance of different distribution trees. 
              However, fully  characterizing the performance of multicast routing schemes in
              very  large, heterogeneous, internetworks is not trivial; and ``learning 
              through experience'' in operational networks that are of the size  of our
              target environment (i.e., the global internet), is not  feasible . 
              Characterizing multicast protocols is not only  challenging because of the
              scale of the target internet, but also  because of the complexity and
              flexibility built into the protocols  themselves.  Moreover, a single multicast
              protocol such as PIM, may  be used (or configured) in a variety of ways that
              directly impact  performance. Therefore, to characterize our proposed multicast
               approach, and to evaluate it relative to alternatives, we propose  extensive
              simulation studies.        The proposed research is composed of three parts: 1)
              an  extensive simulation study to characterize the scaling properties  and
              tradeoffs presented by the proposed mechanisms, 2) an  investigation of
              alternative aggregation mechanisms to further  extend scalability (using our
              constructed simulation tools for  their evaluation), and, 3) a  prototype
              implementation of the  proposed scheme for testing in laboratory and testbed
              networks.   ***
