Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Intrinsic Stochastic Analysis on Path and Loop Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1996       
File        : a9406888

Award Number: 9406888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elton Pei Hsu elton@math.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The PI will investigate analytical and geometrical properties of the path
              and loop spaces over a Riemannian manifold. The analysis is based on the Wiener
              measure on these spaces, which plays a similar role as the Lebesgue measure in
              the analysis of finite dimensional manifolds. Since the Wiener measure gives
              rise to Brownian motion and Brownian bridge, the probabilistic methods
              (stochastic differential equations, diffusion theory, etc.) will be used
              extensively in our analysis. The geometric and analytical properties of path
              and loop spaces will be studied through the probabilistic properties of the
              so-called Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process.  The PI will discover generalizations of
              integration by parts formula for the gradient operator in various geometric
              settings (mainly for manifolds with boundary) and compute the familiar
              geometric objects such as torsion and curvature tensors of the path and loop
              spaces (as Hilbert manifolds) in terms of stochastic integrals involving the
              usual torsion and curvature tensors of the underlying Riemannian manifold. The
              long-term goal is to develop an intrinsic, geometric Malliavin calculus and to
              investigate hypercontractivity, logarithmic Sobolev inequality, and Meyer's
              equivalence in our new geometric setting and their interaction with the
              Riemannian structure of the base manifold.   Interdisciplinary research is the
              current trend of scientific research. Probability theory is a branch of
              mathematics which studies random behavior of collective phenomena.  In the last
              two decades probability theory has been applied with great success to problems
              from classical mathematical subjects such as partial differential equations and
              geometry.  This new probabilistic point of view not only stimulated research in
              these classical subjects but also opened new avenues of research such as
              stochastic differential geometry and diffusion theory. The PI will use
              probabilistic methods to study properties of an important class of geometric
              objects called loop spaces (for example,  the collection of closed paths on a
              sphere), which just began to gain importance in modern physics. He will show
              how the curvature of the base space (the sphere in the above case) affects the
              behavior of certain random processes associated with loop spaces and give both
              qualitative and quantitative descriptions of the interaction between the
              geometry of the space and the underlying random processes.
