Title       : RIA: Types, Abstraction and Programming Language Expressiveness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1996     
File        : a9406202

Award Number: 9406202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82279              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramesh Subrahmanyam rsubrahmanya.@eagle.wesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,9264,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               The notion of types is an important concept in both the  design of  programming
              languages and in the theoretical investigations of  programming languages. 
              While a significant understanding of type  theoretic  issues in a programming
              language context exists, fairly  basic questions remain  open.  Similarly,
              while it has been  suggested that sophisticated type systems  enhance the
              expressive  power of languages, very little has been done to set-up  a formal 
              work to investigate this idea.  Two related issues form the core  of  this
              work: language expressiveness, and types and operational  semantics. A notion 
              of expressiveness for typed programming  languages is described.  The
              expressive power of  a language relative to another is measured  by comparing
              the sets  of abstract data types implementable in the two  languages. 
              Preliminary results suggest that the resulting expressiveness  hierarchy of
              programming languages in non-trivial.  This research  conducts  a detailed
              investigation into the relationship  between this notion of  expressiveness,
              and various type  disciplines and language mechanisms.    Answers  to these
              questions have a definite impact on the  design of  programming languages. The
              research investigates some  questions  about types in an operational semantics
              context; these  are related to questions  studied in the context of lambda 
              calculus and type theory.  Two specific  classes of questions that are
              addressed follow: (1) orthogonal extension  questions:  does  type system A,
              when added to a languages based on type system  B,  invalidate any existing
              observational equivalences; and (2) type  isomorphism  questions:  given a pair
              of types in a programming  language is there a pair of  definable functions
              (from one to the  other) which are observationally inverse.  These lead to
              further  questions about axiomatization of observational  equivalence in 
              fragments of typed programming languages.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
