Title       : Optimum Receivers Under Complexity Constraints for Radio CDMA Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1996    
File        : a9406069

Award Number: 9406069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297483             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mahesh K. Varanasi varanasi@schof.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9406069  Varanasi       Several civilian nondirectional communication
              applications   such as mobile radio telephony and personal communication
              services  require bandwidth-efficient multiple-access radio communication as 
              well as a tremendous flexibility in system design. The dynamic  channel sharing
              strategy of Code-Division Multiple-Access (CDMA) is  particularly well-suited
              and its feasibility for such applications  and is currently being actively
              investigated. This project will  advance the theory of optimum receivers under
              complexity  constraints for CDMA communication in fading multipath radio 
              channels through research on several aspects of this broad subject.  The
              asymptotic performance measures of near-far resistance and  fading resistance
              will be defined in order to succinctly  characterize the effects of estimable
              and inestimable interference  in multiuser fading channels. The design and
              analysis of optimum  linear detection rules for slowly fading and time-varying
              but  memoryless multipath fading CDMA channels is proposed. Linear  adaptive
              receivers that are near-far and fading resistant will be  developed for
              dynamically time-varying multipath fading channels  with memory. The concept of
              group detection will be studied in the  context of Gaussian as well as
              time-varying multipath fading CDMA  channels in order to address the need for
              strategies with  complexities ranging between those of linear and optimal
              detectors  that bridge the wide gap in performance between them in 
              applications requiring bandwidth efficient communication. Receiver  optimality
              is also addressed through the design of signature  waveforms that optimize the
              performance of fading channel detectors  under bandwidth constraints. The
              results of this research effort  will yield optimum centralized CDMA receivers
              under various  complexity constraints that are well-suited for implementation
              at  base stations and that will serve as ideals in both function and 
              performance to be emulated by decentralized signal reception   schemes
              constrained by even lower complexities.  ***
