Title       : Role of LEAFY in Determining Floral Identity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9406948

Award Number: 9406948
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Detlef Weigel weigel@salk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salk Inst for Bio Studies
	      10010 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371099    858/453-4100

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A central step in flower development is the decision of a  group of
              undifferentiated cells to adopt a floral fate.  A  key role in this process is
              played by the LEAFY gene, whose  activity is required to promote floral over
              shoot  development.  This investigator has cloned the LEAFY gene  from
              Arabidopsis and shown that it encodes a novel type of  nuclear protein, which
              is the earliest known gene product to  be activated in nascent flower
              primordia.  He proposes to  study in detail how LEAFY controls floral fate by 
              elucidating how LEAFY protein exerts its function at the  molecular level, and
              by dissecting the cis-regulatory  elements of the LEAFY promoter.  Since LEAFY
              encodes a  nuclear protein, it will be determined whether it encodes a  novel
              type of transcriptional regulator.  The protein  contains two domains with
              similarity to transcriptional  activation domains of known transcriptional
              regulators.  The  in vivo activity of these domains will be determined by 
              introducing in vitro engineered deletion variants of LEAFY  into transgenic
              plants and testing these constructs for  complementation of leafy mutations. 
              The possibility that  LEAFY acts as a novel type of DNA-binding protein will be
               explored by testing in vitro synthesized LEAFY protein for  its ability to
              bind DNA.  In addition, the molecular  interaction of LEAFY with other proteins
              known to have a  role in floral development will be studied.  In the future, 
              new proteins will be isolated based on their ability to bind  LEAFY protein in
              vitro.  Cis-acting elements mediating the  temporal and spatial control of
              LEAFY expression will be  identified by three strategies:  First, constructs 
              containing combinations of 5' and 3' sequences as well as  intron sequences
              fused to a LEAFY cDNA will be tested for  complementation of the lfy mutant
              phenotype in transgenic  plants.  Second, the promoter sequence of the LEAFY
              cognate  homolog from snapdragon, FLORICAULA, will be compared to  that of the
              LEAFY promoter, in order to identify co nserved  sequence elements.  Third,
              various parts of the 5.4 kb  fragment, including 5' and 3' as well as intron
              sequences,  will be tested in transgenic plants for their effects on the 
              expression of a reporter gene.  The analysis of LEAFY  regulatory sequences
              with reporter gene constructs will be  complemented by studying whether
              expression of LEAFY under  the control of two floral specific promoters, those
              of the  two floral control genes APETALA1 and AGAMOUS, can  completely or
              partially complement the leafy mutant  phenotype.  These experiments will allow
              for assessing  whether the early expression of LEAFY, which is activated 
              before APETALA1 and AGAMOUS, is indeed required for its in  vivo function.  The
              proposed research will further our  understanding of how flowers are initiated,
              and will be an  important step toward the ultimate goal of achieving a 
              mechanistic understanding of this process.  In the future,  this will permit
              for directed manipulation of flowering not  only in model systems such as
              Arabidopsis, but also in  other, economically important flowering plants.  This
              should  lead to improved partitioning of photoassimilates between  reproductive
              and vegetative organs, and thus to better crop  yields.
