Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Maintaining Diversity in a Serpentine Ecosystem:
               The Role of Multiple Stable States and Stochastic Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9406272

Award Number: 9406272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7098               (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan H. Taylor   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1306,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9406272  TAYLOR       Concerns about global change and related issues draws more
               attention to the need to understand the complex ways through  which both human
              and natural factors interact with each other.  Of particular concern have been
              analyses of the respective roles  of natural and human factors on changes in
              vegetation,  particularly the succession of species in forests.  This doctoral 
              dissertation research project will conduct a case study of forest  succession
              in the serpentine "barrens" of southeastern  Pennsylvania and northeastern
              Maryland.  The bedrock underlying  these areas makes its soils low in nutrients
              and higher in  toxins, thereby inhibiting development of vegetative
              combinations  like those found in surrounding areas.  As a result, a complex 
              mix of grasses and trees exists along with a number of endemic  and rare plant
              species.  Two different hypotheses have been  formulated to explain the
              persistence of the distinctive plant  communities associated with the
              serpentine barrens.  The first  posits multiple stable states, with each of the
              plant communities  perpetuating itself in association with local soil 
              characteristics and other factors.  The second hypothesis holds  that the
              vegetative landscape is primarily the result of  stochastic factors, including
              fires (whether started natural or  by human activity) and fire suppression.  Of
              special interest in  assessing the latter hypothesis is the way that plants
              regenerate  immediately after a fire.  In order to assess the validity of 
              these hypotheses, this project will include analyses of the  historical and
              human-induced disturbances in promoting the  diversity of plant communities on
              serpentine bedrock,  descriptions of the current composition and structure of 
              serpentine vegetation and how it has responded to disturbances,  and analyses
              of short- and longer-term responses of serpentine  forests to fires.  In
              addition to analyzing historical documents  and aerial photos, intensive
              analyses will be made of vegetation  bef ore and after controlled burns at two
              sites.       This project will contribute to understandings of the  processes
              and effects of human-induced and natural change,  including better knowledge of
              the different spatial and temporal  scales at which different factors are
              important.  The project  also will generate useful data, and it will contribute
              to  knowledge about strategies that can be used to maintain  populations of
              rare species in these areas.  As a doctoral  dissertation improvement award,
              this award also will provide  support to enable a promising student to
              establish a strong  independent research career.
