Title       : Topology of Anion Carrier and Acetylcholine Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1996      
File        : a9406321

Award Number: 9406321
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack E. Kyte   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Fahey  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Kyte  9406321  The topology and functionally important conformational changes of
               acetylcholine receptor and anion carrier, two proteins in the  plasma
              membranes of animal cells, will be examined with protein  chemical and
              immunochemical techniques.  Sealed right-side-out  vesicles or intact cells
              will be used to determine on which side of  the plasma membrane particular
              amino acids with reagents impermeant  to the vesicles or the cells will be
              established by isolating  peptides containing the modified amino acids by
              immunoadsorbents.   Changes in the rate of modification of particular amino
              acids in  anion carrier by neutral or charged electrophiles will be followed 
              by isolating modified peptides by immunoadsorption.  These results  will
              implicate particular locations in this protein in functionally  important
              structural changes.   The topology of acetylcholine  receptor will be
              correlated with recent high resolution structures  of the protein.  Both the
              topology of the protein and the  conformational changes involved in the coupled
              anion transport  catalyzed by anion carrier from erythrocytes will be related
              to the  mechanism of its catalysis.  In addition to being structurally
              interesting, these two proteins  are of central importance to several
              physiological processes.   Acetylcholine receptor transforms the neural action
              potential into  muscular action potential at the synapse.  Anion carrier is 
              responsible for the bicarbonate transport across the plasma  membrane of the of
              the erythrocyte which permits efficient transfer  of bicarbonate from
              peripheral tissue to the lungs.  %%%  The plasma membrane is a thin bag that
              encloses the living  cytoplasm of a cell.  This bag protects the cytoplasm from
              the  unexpected changes that occur on the outside of the cell, much as  our
              skin contains and protects us.  The passage of chemicals across  the plasma
              membrane is carefully controlled.  This control is  enforced by proteins that
              are embedded in the plasma membrane.   Each of these proteins acts  as a
              gatekeeper opening and closing to  permit particular molecules to pass through
              the membrane at  specific times.  We are studying a protein that is the
              gatekeeper  for sodium and potassium ions and a protein that the gatekeeper for
               chloride and bicarbonate ions.  The first protein is located on  muscle cells
              and remains closed until a nerve cell and potassium to  flow out, an event that
              causes the muscle cell to contract.  The  second protein is located on red
              blood cells and allows the cells  to pick up bicarbonate in the muscles and
              transfer it to the lungs  where it becomes carbon dioxide.  We are studying the
              design of  these proteins that permits them to perform these roles that are 
              essential to the function of muscles and of the blood.  ***
