Title       : Regulation of Fatty Acid Synthesis in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1997      
File        : a9406466

Award Number: 9406466
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Ohlrogge ohlrogge@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9163,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9406466  Ohlrogge  Plant fatty acids are essential for the structure and
              function of  all cell membranes and in addition are the major form of carbon 
              storage in seeds of many species.  The long range objective of this  research
              project is to answer the question:  What determines how  much fatty acid is
              produced by a plant cell?  Precise control over  primary metabolic pathways is
              frequently obtained by a complex  network of interlocking mechanisms which
              include both short term  biochemical regulation over enzyme specific activity
              and longer  term modifications in enzyme expression.  This project will examine
               both types of control of plant fatty acid synthesis and will focus  on the
              following areas: I. results from prior NSF support of this  project have
              provided clear in vivo evidence that acetyl-CoA  carboxylase activity is a
              major determinant of flux through the  fatty acid synthesis pathway.  However,
              it is not known how plant  cells regulate the activity of this enzyme. 
              Preliminary  information indicates that acetyl-CoA carboxylase is regulated by 
              feedback inhibition.  Therefore, one goal of this project will be  to determine
              which metabolites, regulatory molecules, or other  mechanisms are involved in
              controlling the activity of acetyl-CoA  carboxylase.  II. Longer term control
              over the activity of the  fatty acid synthesis pathway may be determined at the
              level of gene  expression.  We have developed a tobacco cell suspension system
              in  which the cellular demand for fatty acid production can be either  up or
              down regulated.  We will determine if there is a direct  relationship between
              expression of genes for several enzymes of  fatty acid synthesis and the cell's
              supply of demand for fatty acid  production.  III. Several cDNA and genomic
              clones for acetyl-CoA  carboxylase have recently been isolated which may encode
              both  cytoplasmic and plastidial isozymes.  The relationship between the 
              structure of these different genes.  Their regulation in different  tissues,
              and their involvement  in fatty acid synthesis in the  plastid and cytoplasm
              will be determined.  %%%  Plant oils have gradually replaced animal fats and
              thus, are a  major and growing source of calories in American diets.  In 
              addition, plant oils are used in a number of industrial application  such as
              the manufacture of soaps and detergents, lubricants and  plastics.  World
              production of plant oils is approximately 60  million tons with a value of over
              25 billion dollars.  Genetic  engineering of plant oils has the potential to
              produce new oils  with improved nutritional or industrial value.  To optimize
              the  production of plant oils for either food or non-food uses it is  important
              to understand how plants control the synthesis of storage  oils in their seeds.
               Therefore, the long range objective of this  research project is to answer the
              question:  What determines how  much fatty acid (oil) is produced by a plant
              cell?  We have  identified acetyl-CoA carboxylase as a regulatory enzyme which 
              controls, at least in part, the flux of carbon into the lipid  biosynthetic
              pathway.  This project will determine which  metabolites, regulatory molecules
              or other mechanisms are involved  in controlling the activity of acetyl-CoA
              carboxylase.  In addition  we will determine if there is a direct relationship
              between  expression of genes for enzymes of fatty acid synthesis (including 
              acetyl-CoA carboxylase) and the cellular demand for fatty acid  production. 
              Information obtained from this analysis from this  analysis of how plants
              control fatty acid synthesis will be used to  genetically engineer improved
              oilseed crops.  ***
