Title       : Stereochemical Micromapping of Enzyme Active Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1998      
File        : a9406644

Award Number: 9406644
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Speckhard dspeckha@loras.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loras College
	      1450 Alta Vista
	      Dubuque, IA  520014327    319/588-7100

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              MCB 9406644  Speckhard  This project will provide detailed information about
              kinase active  sites, specifically about the contacts between the enzyme
              surface  and the coordinated waters in inert bidentate chromium adenosine 
              triphosphate (ATP) and phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) complexes which  are analogs
              of the cellular magnesium complexes. In the absence of  detailed
              crystallographic information, the best way to determine if  the metal ion
              coordination sphere is involved in the recognition of  the substrate by the
              enzyme is to construct a series of chromium  complexes with a single ammonia in
              all possible locations. These  complexes are then used as competitive
              inhibitors of the magnesium  complexes. Comparison of the inhibitions allows a
              map of the active  site in the region around the metal to be constructed. This 
              micromapping technique, recently demonstrated for hexokinase, will  be applied
              to glycerokinase, adenylate kinase, pyruvate kinase and  others. The potential
              for even more detailed information about the  active site will result from the
              combination of micromapping and  the study of x-ray crystal structures like
              that of adenylate  kinase. Analysis of enzymes modified by site directed
              mutagenesis  will complement the micromaps. A new micromapping tool, inert 
              monoamminechromium complexes of phosphoenol pyruvate, will  be developed and
              used to map the PEP site in pyruvate kinase. Inert  chromium PEP itself will be
              useful to scientists seeking to use EPR  and NMR relaxation techniques to study
              enzymes that use PEP. An  important feature of this proposal is that it will
              primarily  involve work by undergraduate students at an undergraduate 
              institution.  %%%  Many enzymes are remarkably specific catalysts.
              Understanding the  ability of enzymes to selectively interact with substrates
              is one  of  the top priorities in biochemistry. This understanding can lead to 
              advances in agriculture and medicine, by allowing construction of  potent
              inhibitors with high selectivity. This is the basis of  r ational  pesticide
              and herbicide design and rational drug design. This  project  will help to
              identify and carefully 'map' specific areas in a  family of  enzymes called
              kinases, which transfer energy within the cell.  There  are certain sites on
              the kinases where special chemical compounds  can  be attached. If these
              chemicals, in the form of stable molecules,  can  be attached firmly, they will
              interfere with the way the cell  normally  functions. These molecules
              effectively scramble the cell's internal  communications and compromise their
              ability to function. This can  create a new substance or it can change the way
              a cell behaves. As  an  example, some cells that may have been destructive can
              now be  rendered  harmless. Undergraduate students will learn about the
              chemicals  used to  identify these sites and conduct 'mapping' experiments. 
              ***
