Title       : Mossbauer Spectroscopy on Nitrogenase Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1998     
File        : a9406224

Award Number: 9406224
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $610000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eckard Munck em40@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9406224  Munck  Mossbauer and EPR spectroscopy will be used to study a variety
              of  iron-sulfur proteins and synthetic complexes that mimic the active  sites
              of these proteins.  The major focus of the proposed studies  will be
              nitrogenase, with particular emphasis on characterizing  intermediates of the
              catalytic reaction.  For these studies protein  is available that contains one
              cluster type (either the cofactor  centers or the P-clusters) enriched with the
              Mossbauer isotope 57Fe  whereas the other cluster type contains the
              Mossbauer-silent 56Fe.   The availability of such protein will facilitate the
              data analyses  substantially; moreover, it will allow us to probe the
              electronic  structure of both clusters in considerably more detail.  It is also
               proposed to study carbonmonoxide dehydrogenase and two types of  hydrogenases.
               One of the hydrogenases contains the so-called H-  cluster, the stoichiometry
              of which has not yet been determined in  any system studied thus far.  Finally,
              theoretical and experimental  studies of 3Fe clusters that occur in proteins
              and synthetic  compounds will be continued.  %%%  The biological system
              converts annually in excess of 10 million  tons of atmospheric nitrogen into
              ammonia, which is subsequently  incorporated into other cell constituents. 
              Since this process is  fundamental to agriculture, many biochemists,
              biophysicists and  geneticists have directed much effort to understand this
              process on  the molecular level.  The research of our laboratory has provided 
              a major contribution to the clarification of the structure of the  metal
              centers of nitrogenase.  While our past research has  addressed the structural
              aspects of two novel metal clusters in  this enzyme, future activities will be
              directed mostly towards  understanding the mechanism of the process, i.e. after
              having  defined the structure involved we wish to elucidate the sequential 
              events occurring during nitrogen fixation.  Moreover, we wish to  provide
              structural information to inorganic chemists  for the design  of catalysts that
              mimic the biological process.  Our struggles with  nitrogenase have involved
              complementary studies that lead to the  discovery of new clusters and to
              fundamentally new insights into  magnetochemistry.  The proposal studies will
              address the  biochemistry of nitrogenase as well as research of a variety of 
              other related proteins.  Our studies of the biological compounds  will be
              complemented by studies of suitable chemical models and  theoretical modelling.
               ***
