Title       : The Evolution of Lymphocyte Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1996     
File        : a9406249

Award Number: 9406249
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory W. Warr warrgw@musc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry E. Ledford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294250001    843/792-0211

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9406249  Warr    Although the structure and pathways of expression of the gene 
              encoding the heavy chain of the IgM antibody of the channel catfish  (Ictalurus
              punctatus) have been defined in previous studies, many  aspects of the function
              of this gene remain unresolved.  The  evolution of the unusual pre-mRNA
              processing pathways which produce  the antigen receptor, membrane-bound form of
              the IgM is not  understood, and neither is the nature of the transcriptional 
              control elements (particularly the enhancer) that drive the  expression of this
              gene.  As the major objective of this  application, it is proposed to define
              the core enhancer element in  the catfish heavy chain gene in terms of its
              precise location,  structure and specificity of cell-type expression.  An 
              understanding of both the structure and expression of the catfish  heavy chain
              gene could permit the successful design of genetic  approaches to manipulating
              the antibody response in a commercially  important fish.  The catfish IgH
              enhancer will be investigated  initially by functional criteria:  the core
              enhancer will be  defined as that minimal segment of DNA from the catfish Ig
              heavy  chain locus that will drive expression of a reporter gene (e.g. 
              chloramphenicol acetyltransferase) in a B cell-specific manner.   Reporter
              constructs will be transfected into cloned, in vitro grown  channel catfish
              cell lines of B cell, T cell and macrophage lineage  and their transcriptional
              activity measured in transient expression  assays.  Once the core enhancer
              region of the catfish IgH locus has  been located, then the specific sequence
              motifs that bind the  transcription factors will be defined by a combination of
              mobility-  shift, footprinting and functional analyses.  The functional 
              analysis will consist of utilizing fragments of the enhancer, in  various
              combinations, in reporter constructs in which it is  attempted to reconstruct
              the tissue specific activity of the native  IgH enhancer.  %%%  These molecular
              level studies of the regulati on of catfish antibody  gene expression will
              provide insight into the evolution of immune  function and generate fundamental
              information that will lay the  groundwork for our future ability to  enhance
              fish immune responses  by genetic means.  ***
