Title       : Physically Based Information Science of Magnetic Recording
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1996    
File        : a9406197

Award Number: 9406197
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $421807             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. O'Sullivan jao@ee.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marcel W. Muller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald S. Indeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9406197  O'Sullivan       The existence, at Washington University, of strong
              programs  both in information theory and communications systems, and in 
              magnetic information storage, has resulted in fruitful  collaboration on the
              information capacity of magnetic storage  systems.  The initial results of this
              collaboration show that the  ultimate capacity bounds of magnetic storage media
              exceed existing  practice and short term projections by nearly three orders of 
              magnitude.  The capacity bounds of the complete storage system  reflect these
              ultimate bounds, but are further limited by the other  system components,
              including transducers, codes, and electronics.   This project analyzes these
              limits, and seeks design rules for  components and channels to maximize the use
              of the potential  capacity.  This objective is supported by three connected
              research  activities.  The first of these activities addresses the modeling  of
              storage media.  The models used to date have been idealized to  reduce their
              computational complexity; they have yielded valuable  qualitative results. The
              project is developing a quantitative  analysis requiring more realistic
              modeling while still being  computationally tractable.  Specifically, thermal,
              spatial and  dynamic effects will be included in more refined medium and
              channel  models.  Annealing algorithms will be incorporated to examine this 
              area. This will allow understanding of the fundamental limits of  this channel.
               The analysis of possible implementations of a  complete storage channel from
              the viewpoint of its information  capacity comprises a major part of our
              research.  Such an analysis  accounts not only for the properties of the
              medium, but also for  such issues as asymmetries of storage and retrieval,
              electronics,  and archivability.  Initial studies focus on computing the
              capacity  of simplified versions of the recording channel that include the 
              read head.  A striking result of this work has been the development  of
              relations and equivalences between the ph ysical parameters of  storage media
              and their capacity bounds.  This has led to a  proposal of new medium design
              guides for ultra-high density  storage.  These results were developed for media
              imbedded in ideal  systems, and are expected to be reflected in similar
              relations in  existing and projected technological realizations.  The 
              equivalences will be tested experimentally, using a variety of  media, in their
              unique laboratory facilities.  These researchers  were the first to demonstrate
              experimentally that medium noise has  a repeatable component due to local
              medium properties.  These  experiments motivated the development of medium
              models for use in  magnetic recording system analysis and design, which led to
              the  proposal to exploit that deterministic noise component to increase  the
              capacity of magnetic recording systems.  Experiments form an  integral part of
              the research.  The research team has theorists  working closely with
              experimentalists.  As a result, the models and  results derived can immediately
              be compared to measurements of  physical systems.  The supporting studies will
              combine to address  the design of optimal signal processing schemes, for
              realizable  systems, that take full advantage of the available components.  The
               design strategies will explore new methods for storing information 
              magnetically, and unconventional information processing techniques.   It is
              hoped that the results will have wide applicability to other  information
              systems; the approach, joining device physics with  information science, is 
              unparalleled in the field.  This  physically-based approach to information
              science will develop new  analysis techniques for complex systems, motivate the
              design  of  new components and systems, and design new signal processing 
              strategies to approach the computed capacity limits.  Through this  novel and
              unconstrained approach new ways to process and store  information will emerge
              yielding dramatic increases in storage  density.  ***
