Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Structure of Stationary Stable and Other Infinitely
               Divisible Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1994      
File        : a9406294

Award Number: 9406294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Rosinski rosinski@math.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project is intended to establish and explore new  connections between
              the theory of certain infinite variance  stationary processes and the ergodic
              theory of nonsingular flows.  This connection leads to a natural classification
              of such random  processes and gives a base for their systematic investigation. 
              A  new approach has been necessary because the ideas and techniques  based on
              harmonic analysis of square integrable processes have a  very limited use in
              the infinite variance case.  On the other  hand, many results of the ergodic
              theory of nonsingular flows  have their natural counterparts in the theory of
              infinite  variance stationary processes.  For example, the famous Hopf 
              decomposition of flows into dissipative and conservative parts  permits us to
              identify and isolate the moving average parts of  the corresponding stationary
              processes.  Building upon these  connections, structural and path properties of
              certain important  classes of infinite variance stationary processes will be 
              investigated.       Stochastic stationarity can be observed in the long-time 
              behavior of many random phenomena when the same patterns of  behavior occur
              with time independent frequencies.  For example,  in a noisy communication
              channel the initial signal is  superimposed with a random noise giving a
              stationary random  process on the channel's output.  In recent years there has
              been  a growing interest in the investigating of highly random  (infinite
              variance) models.  The existing methodology and tools  of harmonic analysis,
              that have been very successful in the study  of moderately random stationary
              processes, have shown a very  limited applicability in the infinite variance
              case.  This  project is intended to establish and explore new connections 
              between certain classes of infinite variance stationary processes  and the
              ergodic theory of nonsingular flows.  This new approach  reveals the structure
              of highly random stationary processes and  it is anticipated that it may lead
              to a new methodology i n the  study of such processes.
