Title       : Regulation of Photosynthetic Electron Transport Genes in Chlamydomonas
               Chloroplasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1997 
File        : a9406550

Award Number: 9406550
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364440             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Stern ds28@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen L. Kindle  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Boyce Thompson Institute
	      1 Tower Road
	      Ithaca, NY  148531801    607/254-1225

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1305,9109,9198,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9406550  Much of chloroplast gene regulation occurs at the post- 
              transcriptional level.  The aim of this project is to undertake a  systematic
              study of chloroplast translation initiation using  genetic and biochemical
              approaches.  We will focus on the pet  genes, whose products form the
              cytochrome b6/f complex, which  transports electrons between photosystem II and
              photosystem I.   Mutations predicted to interfere with translation initiation
              will  be introduced into pet genes and second-site suppressors of these 
              mutations will be analyzed.  In a parallel approach, efforts will  be made  to
              generate null mutations in nuclear translational  activator genes by
              insertional inactivation.  Non-photosyntheic  transformants will be generated
              and screened for defects in  chloroplast protein accumulation and translation. 
              The inserted DNA  tags the gene, which facilitates cloning the mutated gene and
               subsequently the wild-type version.  In addition to these genetic  approaches,
              in vitro biochemical methods will be used to identify  and characterize
              proteins that interact with the 5' UTR.  Protein  extracts from suppressor and
              insertion mutants will be assayed for  any differences in protein binding
              factors.  The results of the  project will lead to a greater understanding of
              the cis-acting  sequences controlling translation, and the proteins that
              interact  with these sequences.  %%%  Although chloroplasts contain their own
              genetic apparatus, most of  the regulatory signals are transmitted to the
              chloroplast by the  action of nuclear gene products.  The isolation and
              analysis of  mutants in both higher plants and algae that are defective in this
               signaling process have revealed that in most cases, chloroplast  gene
              regulation occurs at the post-transcriptional level.  Examples  of such
              mutations include those that affect messenger RNA lifetimes  or RNA maturation,
              protein synthesis or stability, and the assembly  of macromolecular complexes. 
              The first of two general approaches  in this projec t is to introduce mutations
              that interfere with  protein synthesis into chloroplast genes and then to
              identify  compensating suppressor mutations in nuclear genes.  At the same 
              time, biochemical methods will be used to detect the protein  factors directly.
               In a second general approach, efforts will be  made to generate mutations that
              disrupt the functions of nuclear  translational activator genes, by introducing
              transforming DNA into  the nucleus.  Once such mutants have been identified,
              the "tagged"  gene can be isolated.  The results of the proposed research will 
              lead to a greater understanding of the sequences that control  translation of
              chloroplast RNAs, and of the proteins that interact  with these sequences.  ***
