Title       : Technician Support (Phase ll) for the Neurton Activation Analysis Facility in
               the EAPS Department at MIT
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1994    
File        : a9406120

Award Number: 9406120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel F. Weill                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick A. Frey fafrey@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9406120  Frey       This award provides partial funding for the support of  a
              technician assigned to the operation and maintenance of  the Neutron Activation
              Analysis Laboratory  in the  Department of Earth, Atmospheric, and Planetary
              Sciences at  the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The laboratory is  a
              facility dedicated to the analysis of natural materials,  principally
              terrestrial rocks and minerals. Gamma ray  spectroscopy is used to determined
              the abundance of many  trace elements, used as tracers to better understand the
               processes which have formed the Earth's crust and mantle.  The instrumentation
              of the facility consists of semi-  conductor detectors, multichannel analyzers,
              and computer  control. The facility is used for sponsored geochemical  research
              of the Principal Investigator and colleagues at MIT  and by a diverse group of
              other U.S. scientists, including  faculty and students from other universities
              and colleges,  principally in the northeast.  ***  9406684  Johnson       This
              award provides partial funding for the support of  a technician assigned to the
              Radiogenic Isotope Laboratory  in the Department of Geology and Geophysics at
              the  University of Wisconsin, Madison. The technician will assist  in the
              operation and maintenance of the laboratory's  equipment that includes a
              multicollector thermal ionization  mass spectrometer and associated
              instrumentation for sample  preparation and data analysis. The laboratory is a
              resource  for mass spectrometric analysis needed in research and  teaching
              projects in the earth sciences by a large number of  researchers on-campus and
              off-campus. Research applications  include work on Arctic Ocean sediments,
              mantle geochemistry,  volcanism, geochronology of carbonates in the Michigan
              Basin  and Wisconsin Arch provinces, and Archean and Proterozoic  granites. The
              technician will also participate in the  technical developmental work of the
              laboratory, including  the development of new methods for the quantitative 
              measurement of the iso topes of hafnium.  ***
