Title       : Information Theory Approaches to Information Retrieval
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9406220

Award Number: 9406220
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329244             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Coffey scoffey@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart Sechrest  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9406220  Coffey  The problem of efficient real-time retrieval of information
              from  large-scale databases is emerging as an important current  application. 
              This research will use a wide range of techniques  derived from information
              theory to explore  the fundamental limits  of such retrieval systems.  Many
              existing information theory  research topics are directly related to the
              database problem, and  the application in turn generates many novel fundamental
              problems  in information theory.  The basic underlying problem of 
              context-dependent requests for information -- from a database whose  physical
              structure does not match the user-perceived structure of  the data -- is
              modeled as a novel type of random walk problem, in  which one random walk (by
              the user over the data) drives a designed  random walk by the system through
              the database.  Results are  derived which demonstrate that access time can be
              greatly improved  in straightforward ways by adding redundancy.  Potential
              extensions  to systems in which highly compressible data is stored in databases
               with arbitrary structure, with more general forms of redundancy,  are
              discussed.  The theoretical results developed in this research  will provide
              insight into the design of information retrieval  systems appropriate for a
              variety of scientific applications.    These theoretical results , however, can
              only provide first-order  guidance in system design.  Further guidance can be
              found by  comparisons between the results derived from somewhat abstract 
              models and those arrived at through more detailed simulation of  systems.  This
              research will investigate the applicability and  robustness of the results of
              this researah and those of others to  system design through system simulation. 
              Actual datasets and  realistic workloads can be used to validate the models and
              assess  the applicability of the results to actual systems.  ***
