Title       : Workshop on "Identifying Features in Biological Sequences," May 30 to June 19,
               1994 at the Aspen Center for Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1994       
File        : a9406201

Award Number: 9406201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah A. Joseph                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Appelquist   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary D. Stormo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene W. Myers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christian Burks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Aspen Center For Physics
	      600 West Gillespie Street
	      Aspen, CO  81611    /   -

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    We are planning a Workshop, entitled "Identifying Features in Biological
              Sequences", to  be held May 30 to June 19 at the Aspen Center for Physics
              (ACP).  The participants will  be from fields of math and statistics, computer
              science and molecular biology.  All will  be interested in problems of
              extracting bimlogical information from sequences, but with  diverse enough
              approaches that many of them would not otherwise interact with each  other. 
              The total number of participants will be about 25, with a mixture of senior and
               junior researchers.  The format of the Workshop is specifically designed to
              foster  collaborations and other intensive interactions.  Tutorials will be
              given by experts in  particular fields to enlighten the others in the current
              ideas and methods in that field.   There will also be talks by participants
              about their current research and the questions  they are currently pursuing. 
              Most importantly for this Workshop, there will be ample  unscheduled time to
              foster individual and small group interactions.  This will be  facilitated by a
              small local area network of workstations, with access to the Internet 
              available.  This allows participants to obtain data and programs from their
              home (or  other) institutions and to compare methods on similar data, and on
              various different data  sets.  It allows the hands-on development of modified
              approaches and even entirely new  programs.  Several examples exist from
              previous meetings where new methods have been  explored directly due to the
              Workshop.
