Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Labor-Market Formation in an Immigrant Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1996   
File        : a9406596

Award Number: 9406596
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas R. Leinbach                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9200               (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria A. Lawson lawson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9406596  LAWSON       Research on the dramatic restructuring that has 
              characterized economic activities throughout the world in recent  decades has
              tended to focus on either the economic dimensions of  change or on the social
              implications of changing economic  activities for workers.  Relatively little
              attention has been  given to the links between labor markets and social
              processes  within the labor force, however.  This doctoral dissertation 
              research project will examine these links through a case study of  the changing
              composition of labor in the outerware garment  industry of the Seattle
              metropolitan area.  This industry has  been a primary place of employment for
              many of the nearly 40,000  Asian immigrants who have moved to the Seattle area
              since 1985.  As a result, most workers in the outerware industry now are women 
              from southeast Asia.  Secondary sources will be used to document  the
              transformation of the industry in recent decades in order to  establish a
              framework for consideration of industry's current  structure.  A second phase
              of the research will include analysis  of quantitative data, including the
              Public Use Microdata Sample  (PUMS) of the U.S. Census of Population, in order
              to provide  information about the household structure and labor-force 
              participation of southeast Asian immigrants.  In-depth interviews  also will be
              conducted with garment industry owners and managers  and with female garment
              workers from Vietnam and Cambodia to  determine the circumstances of their
              immigration and the  character of their experiences from both economic and
              social  perspectives.       This research will make important contributions to 
              geographic knowledge in a number of different ways.  It will add  to
              empirically based insights into the general role of labor  markets in
              industrial change and to the specific roles of gender,  ethnicity, and
              socioeconomic class is the transformation of labor  markets.  In addition, this
              project will generate new knowledge  about the ways that social and  economic
              processes interact.  As a  doctoral dissertation research improvement award,
              this award also  will provide support to enable a promising student to
              establish a  strong independent research career.
