Title       : Specific Humoral Immunosuppression by Antigen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  1994  
File        : a9406671

Award Number: 9406671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard M. Dintzis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Renee Z. Dintzis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9406671  Dintzis    The goal of this research is to study the mechanism(s) by
              which soluble arrays of antigen  (antigen-arrays) interact with cell surface
              immunoglobulin receptors (sIg) to induce either cell   activation or cell
              death.  The experimental model for these studies is the humoral immune 
              response, wherein B cells with antigen specific sIg either proliferate and
              differentiate into  antibody-secreting plasma cells, or are functionally
              eliminated, depending on molecular size and  hapten valence of the antigen
              arrays.  Previous work from this laboratory has demonstrated  profound
              suppression of specific antibody production in vivo.  Ongoing, high level
              T-cell  dependent anti-fluorescein (anti-Fl) IgM, IgG and IgE serum antibodies
              were reduced 90-99%  in adult mice by intraperitoneal administration of
              fluoresceinated dextran (Fl-Dex) of molecular  mass less than 100 kDa.  Recent
              studies with Fl-Dex of molecular mass 30 kDa demonstrated  that high affinity
              anti-Fl antibodies are preferentially eliminated.  In contrast, high molecular 
              weight (500 kDa) antigen-arrays are stimulatory at comparable hapten
              concentrations.  Using  adoptive transfer experiments, it was shown that
              suppression is dependent on antigen-array dose  and exposure time in the donor
              animals and can not be attributed to antigen carryover.  The  suppression
              affects the B-cell compartment selectively, as carrier-specific T-cell help
              remains  intact and splenic T cells from suppressed mice could not transfer
              suppression.  The molecular  basis of the observed suppression is currently
              being investigated using the anti-nitrophenyl (NP)  response as a model system.
               The anti-NP response in C57BL/6 mice is characterized by a  highly restricted
              VH gene usage as well as a common somatic hypermutation pattern of higher 
              affinity anti-NP memory B cells.  Preliminary PCR analysis indicates that
              memory B cells with  the most common somatic hypermutation are eliminated from
              immunized animals by  administration of antigen-arrays.  The ma in goal of this
              project is to test the hypothesis that the  elimination of anti-NP memory B
              cells is the underlying mechanism of suppression.  For this  purpose PCR
              analysis will be optimized, quantitative Southern blot analysis employed and
              the  cloned VH amplification products from DNA isolated from NP hyperimmune and
              suppressed  animals will be sequenced.  The effect of antigen-arrays on a
              homogeneous B cell population  has been examined in mice transgenic for a
              phosphocholine (PC)-specific mu heavy chain.   Preliminary results indicate
              induction of apoptosis in these cells by PC-Dex of molecular mass  30 kDa. 
              This experimental system will be used as a model for exploratory studies of the
               regulation of suppression.  Together, these findings indicate that, depending
              on the physical-  chemical characteristics of a multivalent ligand, interaction
              with B cell surface Ig may result  either in positive signaling (cell
              proliferation and differentiation) or negative signaling (cell  death).  The
              ability to induce deliberately, either stimulatory or suppressive signals in B
              cells by  manipulation of the molecular properties of the antigenic material
              can be used as a tool for the  study of the control of cellular function by
              extracellular multivalent ligand interacting with cell  surface receptors.  %%%
               The mammalian immune response is highly regulated.  An immune response is
              started when a  foreign substance (antigen) binds to a specific receptor on the
              surface of a cell of the immune  system.  It is well known, however, that some
              antigens may either stimulate an immune response  or suppress an immune
              response, depending on the form in which they are administered and on  other
              factors not well understood.  A better understanding of the molecular
              mechanisms that  determine whether a particular signal will result in
              stimulation or suppression of would be a  major contribution not only to our
              understanding of the regulation of immune function, but would  enhance our
              knowledge more generally of the mec hanisms by which cells respond to external 
              signals.  These investigators have preliminary data suggesting that antigens
              closely related  chemically may stimulate or suppress an immune response
              depending on certain defined  physical-chemical properties.  The goal of this
              research is to define more closely the mechanisms  by which differences in the
              molecular properties of an antigenic material lead to dramatic  differences in
              its effect.  The ability to induce deliberately, either stimulatory or
              suppressive  signals in cells by manipulation of the molecular properties of
              signal molecules can be used as  a tool for the more general study of the
              control of cellular function by extracellular signals  interacting with cell
              surface receptors.  ***
