Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Food Shortage Coping Strategies Among
               Resettlement Area Households in Zimbabwe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9406270

Award Number: 9406270
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9950               (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Campbell djc@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 5928,9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9406270  CAMPBELL       Zimbabwe, like many parts of Africa, is facing important
               questions regarding the ability of rural residents to cope with  food
              deficits, an issue that is inextricably connected to land  distribution. Since
              1980, over 50,000 households in Zimbabwe have  been resettled in formerly
              white-owned farms and ranches, mainly  in semi-arid to arid environments. As
              witnessed during the last  prolonged drought period, resettlement households
              are  particularly vulnerable to recurrent food shortages.  Food  shortage
              coping strategies, as part of food security, are  dependent upon the interplay
              of complex linkages between society  and environment. This analysis is based on
              a regional political  ecology framework that facilitates the linkage of human
              and  environmental variables and views the environment as a dynamic  and
              interactive component of rural societies.  This project will  involve research
              in two field sites and in Harare with  collaboration of faculty and students at
              the University of  Zimbabwe. Comparative field work will be conducted in two 
              resettlement areas in differing environments, and in adjacent non- 
              resettlement areas, which will serve as control groups.  A survey 
              questionnaire will assess the role of human-environment  relationships in food
              storage coping strategies.  Survey results  will be combined with qualitative
              information gathered during one  year of field residence.       This study will
              contribute important new insights into the  understanding of food shortage
              coping strategies in the context  of resettlement lands and it will assess the
              efficacy of regional  political ecology as a research framework.  As a doctoral
               dissertation research improvement award, this project will also  provide
              support to enable a promising student to establish a  strong independent
              research career.  ***
