Title       : Amphibolite Exchange and Social Complexity in Copper Age Portugal: Phase I -
               Source Characterizations and Analyses of Archaeological Assemblage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1994       
File        : a9406658

Award Number: 9406658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17260              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katina T. Lillios Lillios@mac.ripon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ripon College
	      300 Seward St P O Box 248
	      Ripon, WI  54971    414/748-8118

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9406658  Lillios    With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Katina Lillios
              will  initiate the first stage of a proposed long term study which  examines
              the rise of social complexity during the Copper Age  (3000-2000 BC) in
              Portugal. Archaeological evidence indicates  that it was during this period
              that stratified complex societies  first emerged in Western Europe. Dr. Lillios
              believes that  differential access and control over scarce and valued resources
               played a central role in this process and that amphibolite, a  rock which was
              used to make ground stone tools, constitutes such  a good. Dr. Lillios has
              identified outcrops of amphibolite in  Portugal and conducted preliminary
              petrographic and chemical  analyses which indicate that sources can be
              identified on the  basis of structure and composition. In this current project
              she  will expand on this work. Additional sourcing and analysis will  be
              conducted with the goal of developing methods which allow more  precise
              geographic characterization. Dr. Lillios will also study  ground stone objects
              from a series of Copper Age sites to  determine whether or not assignment of
              finished materials to  individual source areas is in fact possible. On this
              basis, in  future research projects, she should be able to reconstruct trade 
              routes and relate these to social and economic variation among  different
              settlements.    Archaeologists wish to understand how complex societies 
              originally arose and how they were maintained. Evidence from many  parts of the
              world suggests that trade and control over scarce  and valued resources played
              a central role. Researchers are now  attempting to build a data base which
              would allow the comparison  of individual cases. Dr. Lillios' work is important
              in this  context. It will also provide data of interest to many  archaeologists
              and will assist in the career development of a  promising young scientist.
