Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Investigation of Farming Women's Work in
               Washington's Apple Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1994     
File        : a9406595

Award Number: 9406595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7075               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucy Jarosz jarosz@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9406595  JAROSZ       Determination of the total costs of agricultural
              production  traditionally has been difficult because considerable labor 
              contributed by women working on farms has not been compensated or  has been
              reimbursed at very low wages.  As women have increased  their participation in
              non-farm labor markets and as agricultural  industries have changed in recent
              decades, the role of women in  farm production has been transformed, but little
              scholarly  attention has been given to the form and implications of those 
              changes.  This doctoral dissertation research project will  investigate changes
              in the agricultural work of women in the  fresh apple industries of Washington
              state.  Apple production and  processing has become more labor intensive and
              more capital  intensive over the last half century.  Special attention in this 
              project will be given to identifying differences in the responses  of women in
              different ethnic groups, socioeconomic classes, and  age cohorts to changes in
              the industry.  These differences will  be identified through analyses of census
              data and a mail survey  of women working in north central Washington.  More
              detailed  information will be obtained through intensive interviews and 
              focus-group discussions of both Chicana and Anglo working women.  In order to
              ascertain whether preliminary conclusions are valid,  project findings will be
              discussed at community-based workshops.       This project will provide new
              insights into the impacts of  technological and organizational change on
              workers employed by  agricultural businesses.  This case study of female
              workers in  the Washington apple industry will employ a complementary set of 
              research methods to contribute new empirical knowledge about  social change,
              with special emphases placed on the roles of  gender, ethnicity, and
              socioeconomic class.  As a doctoral  dissertation research improvement award,
              this award also will  provide support to enable a promising student to
              establish a  strong independent research ca reer.
