Title       : Stochastic Fluid-Flow Models for Control of Communication Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1995     
File        : a9406823

Award Number: 9406823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275045             (Estimated)
Investigator: V. G. Kulkarni vkulkarn@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shaler Stidham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9406823  Kulkarni       Emerging high-speed networks are expected to provide a
              wide  variety of services, for example, file transfers, telephone calls,  video
              conferencing, interactive TV, cable TV, and multimedia  services.  These
              networks will be expected to carry a mix of  traffic with differing service
              requirements. This research project  addresses important operational problems
              arising in such an  environment.  Specifically, the research project will
              investigate  efficient operating policies for multi-media conferencing across 
              existing networks; access control and bandwidth allocation in  B-ISDN with ATM
              switching; and routing in high-speed data networks.   The project will
              establish properties of optimal control policies,  develop efficient numerical
              methods to compute optimal control  policies, and use these results to
              synthesize simple, implementable  and efficient operating policies that exhibit
              near-optimal  performance.       Stochastic fluid-flow models of high-speed
              communication  systems are useful tools in achieving the above goals.  An 
              understanding of how to control a fluid-flow system operating in a  random
              environment in order to optimize a given system performance  measure (such as
              delay, loss, throughput, etc.) is critically  important for proper design and
              operation of these systems.        The proposed research will develop and
              analyze appropriate  fluid-flow control models motivated by the above problems.
               A new  methodology, based upon reduction to deterministic control  problems,
              will be developed to compute the optimal operating  policies.   ***
