Title       : Integrated Studies on the Cellular, Physiological and Developmental Roles Played
               by Higher Plant Plasmodesmata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9406974

Award Number: 9406974
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $727490             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Lucas wjlucas@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9406974  Lucas  This award supports studies on the molecular and cellular 
              characterization of higher plant plasmodesmata (PD).  The capacity  of
              plasmodesmata to engage in macromolecular trafficking of  proteins and nucleic
              acids will be studies using a combination of  techniques.  Functional and
              mutant viral movement proteins (MPs)  will be used in microinjection studies to
              examine the molecular  basis of the interaction between these MPs, their
              cognate viral RNA  (vRNA), and plasmodesmata.   This powerful combination of
              molecular  virology and cell biology opens the way for the identification of 
              the molecular determinants of virus-plant host specificity, as well  as the
              elucidation of the functional domains on the viral MPs.  The  MPs of four plant
              viruses will be used in these studies; red clover  necrotic mosaic virus
              (RCNMV), tobacco mosaic virus (TMV), sunn  hemp mosaic virus (SHMV) and
              cucumber mosaic virus (CMV).  In order  to more fully understand the role
              played by plasmodesmata in the  orchestration of plant development and
              physiological function, it  is important that the sub-structural component
              (proteins) be  isolated, cloned and sequenced.  To this end, secondary PD will
              be  isolated from TMV MP transgenic tobacco plants.  The physiological  and
              molecular basis for the TMV MP-induced alteration in carbon  partitioning will
              be investigated using a range of experimental  approaches.  The reduction in
              root-to-shoot ratios observed in TMV  MP transgenic tobacco will form the
              diagnostic basis for these  studies.  Tissue grafting experiments will permit
              the  identification of the plant tissue involved in this reallocation 
              phenomenon.  The hypothesis that macromolecular (protein)  trafficking through
              PD plays a role in plant development will be  tested using the maize Knotted-1
              mutant system.      Results from these studies on the molecular determinants of
              viral  MP-PD interaction will provide us with greater insights into the 
              requirements for PD macromolecular trafficking.  Purifica tion and 
              identification of PD proteins will provide the foundation for a  detailed
              structure/function analysis of this unique intercellular  organelle.  Details
              on the molecular events underlying the TMV MP-  induced alteration in carbon
              partitioning will provide the  foundation for the identification and study of
              endogenous  signal/regulatory pathways that mediate in the integration of 
              physiological processes from the tissue to the whole plant level.   All such
              data on macromolecular transport through PD will  contribute to testing the
              hypothesis that plants function as  supracelluar rather than multicellular
              organisms.  ***
