Title       : Genetic Studies on Mechanisms of Disulfide Bond Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1996    
File        : a9406275

Award Number: 9406275
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Beckwith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9406275  Beckwith  Many proteins exported from cells and many membrane proteins
              contain disulfide linkages between cysteines within their sequences. These
              disulfide bonds are often important both for the folding   and the functioning
              of the protein. In 1991, it was found that bacteria express a protein, DsbA, 
              that is required for efficient formation of disulfide bonds in proteins. Since
              then, it has been found   that the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae expresses a
              similar activity. A major purpose of this   project is to study the mechanism
              by which the DsbA protein catalyzes oxidation of pairs of   cysteines in
              proteins. To this end, mutants are being isolated that are defective in DsbA
              activity,   the mutant genes sequenced and in vivo studies carried out to
              define the defective step in the   process. In addition, interaction and
              collaborations with biochemists and an X-ray crystallographer   will help
              elucidate the basis of the defect. These studies should lead to a detailed
              picture of the   structurefunction relationships for DsbA. To further
              understand the mechanism of DsbA action, experiments done in vivo are designed
              to indicate at what stage of protein synthesis and folding the   DsbA protein
              acts on exported proteins to catalyze disulfide bond formation. In vivo and in
              vitro experiments will test whether DsbA can act on an already folded protein.
              In vivo experiments will   analyze exported proteins during the process of
              membrane translocation to determine whether   disulfide bonds can form before
              the proteins are fully translocated. A genetic selection has been   devised
              which may allow the isolation of mutants of exported proteins that are unable
              to be acted   on by systems that promote disulfide bond formation even though
              they retain the appropriate cysteines. beta-lactamase will be used as a model
              system since it has a single disulfide bond, is exported to the periplasm, is
              functional in the absence of its disulfide bond and has had its 3-dimensional
              structure determined to 1.8 Angst roms. These mutants may alter the folding,   
              pathway for the protein or its secondary or tertiary structure. Analysis of the
              sequence and structure   of the mutant proteins should reveal the important
              features that allow disulfide bond formation to   take place. Experiments are
              also designed to detect other systems in the bacterial periplasm that  
              catalyze disulfide bond formation. In the absence of the DsbA system, a
              background disulfide bond-forming activity is found. Mutants that both increase
              and decrease the activity of this background activity will be sought. In
              addition, genetic studies will be initiated to identify the system responsible
              for disulfide bond formation under conditions of anaerobic growth. These
              studies should lead to the identification of genes and gene products
              responsible for these other activities.  %%%  These studies have wide
              implications for basic and applied science. The results are relevant to  
              questions of protein folding, one of the major new developing areas in biology.
              In addition, the formation of disulfide bonds in expressed foreign proteins in
              bacterial systems has presented many problems. The ability to manipulate the
              disulfide bond-forming systems should allow more ready solution to these
              expression problems. The range of important proteins that contain disulfide
              bonds includes peptide hormones, membrane receptors, bacterial toxins and
              immunoglobulins.  ***
