Title       : LTREB: Monitoring Primary Succession on Mount St. Helens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1999  
File        : a9406987

Award Number: 9406987
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205224             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger del Moral moral@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9406987  del Moral    This project will continue an in-depth study of mechanisms
              and processes of primary succession on Mount St. Helens, Washington, which
              erupted in 1980.  Since the eruption, recovery has been studied continuously in
              permanent plots and grids representing different substrate and landscape
              situations.  Control of community dynamics has shifted from invasion to that
              controlled by resident populations.  However, no community is completely
              self-sustaining or is it stable.  Most sites continue to receive new species
              and individuals of existing species from outside the site, as indicated by
              increasing community diversity and scattered establishment patterns.  The
              emphasis of this proposal is to explore the assembly of early plant
              communities.   The relationship between community structure and environmental
              factors will be explored by several methods, including comparisons of
              "replicate" samples and correlation among environmental factors and species
              composition.  It is predicted that chance is important during assembly and that
              community composition will have low predictability for many years.  The
              association among individual species and their relationships to microsites will
              also be explored.  It is predicted that interspecific associations will be
              weakest on the least developed substrates and will become more positive with
              time, increasing scale, and substrate development.  Suitable microsites will be
              most restricted on least developed sites, but will expand with time.  Overlap
              among species with respect to microsite types will be relatively broad,
              although different species will rarely occur adjacent to each other.  Limited
              association and broad overlap combine to imply that chance is important in
              early development and that any of several species can be pioneers in particular
              microsites.    Several studies designed to measure rates of upward colonization
              of both tree and ground layer species will be conducted.  It is anticipated
              that both will be slow.  the analyses will be gene ralized by comparing
              observed rates to morphological types.  These observations will be useful in
              predicting the ability of high elevation communities to respond to climate
              change through upward migration.  In aggregate, these studies will assist with
              understanding how plant communities are formed and document how stochastic
              factors may have long-lasting consequences.  Hypotheses concerning niche
              characteristics of invading species and whether or not community composition
              converges through time will be tested and general successional theory will be
              augmented.  The project will result in a detailed, well-documented, long-term
              data base that can be used and extended by future ecologists to further develop
              ecological theory.
