Title       : Development of an Evolutionary Flow Path Model of Water and Solutes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9406436

Award Number: 9406436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310317             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey J. McDonnell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol Kendall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Hooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Env Sci&Forestry
	      
	      Syracuse, NY  13210    315/470-6500

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1043,1317,1325,1579,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9406436  McDonnell    The knowledge of the hydrologic flowpaths is critical to 
              understanding runoff of generation and the transport of pollutants   on to
              modeling the linkages between hydrologic flux and geochemical  flux.  However,
              models and field studies are not well linked in  hydrological investigations. 
              Furthermore, attempts to introduce  such field observations into models have
              faced the inevitable  compromise between the value of additional data and the 
              identifiability of parameters required to take account of the data.   New
              research on runoff flowpaths has shown that spatially-  distributed models are
              required to capture the key hydrological and  geochemical processes.  This work
              will develop   a new  synergistically linked hydrologic/geochemical model of
              how: (1)  waters evolve chemically and isotopically along the different 
              flowpaths and (2) specific flowpaths produce distinctive  "signatures" related
              to the topographic position and hydrologic  history of the water. Uncertainty
              analysis will be used to assess  uncertainty in the model parameters.    Our
              objectives are: (i) to develop a hydrogeochemical model within  which the
              dynamics of stream chemistry and flowpaths can be related  to fieldwork, (ii)
              to assess model structure/parameter  uncertainties and identify fieldwork
              strategies to reduce such  uncertainties, (iii) to make spatially-distributed
              measurements in  the field to validate spatially-distributed estimates of soil 
              moisture, water table elevations, isotope and solute  concentrations, (iv) to
              examine the controls on  geochemical/isotopic evolution along flowpaths by
              using physical  characteristics and responses of the catchment, and (v) to use
              the  new model as a tool for testing specific hypotheses on flowpaths  and
              mixing overall this study represents an innovative attempt  (i)  to link a
              evolutionary reaction-path model constrained by both  solute isotope and
              geochemical data within a topographically-driven  hydrologic model at the
              hillslope scale  and (ii) to de velop a new  type of hydrogeochemical model in
              a form constrained by the  interaction of the field campaign and the assessment
              of model  uncertainty.  The work would make it easier to apply fully 
              distributed models in other study areas.
