Title       : Molecular Genetics of Ribosomal RNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9406186

Award Number: 9406186
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry F. Noller harry@nuvolari.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9406186  Noller  We propose to study specific aspects of the structure,
              function and assembly of ribosomal RNA (rRNA),  using genetic approaches. Our
              main tools are expression of cloned copies rRNA operons from natural  rRNA
              promoters or from inducible promoters, at high or moderate levels, and assay of
              structure and  function using allele-specific chemical probing as well as by
              more conventional methods. Among the  functional problems we plan to address
              are the role of rRNA in tRNA selection, subunit association,  translocation and
              peptidyl transferase activity. Bases that have been identified as potential
              components of  these respective ribosomal functional sites will be targeted for
              site-directed mutagenesis. The resulting  phenotypes will be studied, and we
              will attempt to analyze the mechanistic basis of the genetic defects,  to
              obtain direct genetic evidence for the functional roles of specific sites in
              rRNA in translation. We will  use suppressor and synthetic lethal mutations to
              discover new sites and interactions that have not yet been  identified by
              biochemical approaches. We also plan to continue to analyze the higherorder
              structure of  rRNA, using site-directe mutagenesis. We will test the biological
              importance of proposed pseudoknot  interactions in rRNA, and will test the
              requirement for proposed non-canonical base pairs for ribosome  function.
              Finally, we wish to understand the role of a newly discovered protein that we
              believe may be  involved in assembly events involving the 5' terminal region of
              16S rRNA.  %%%  It is becoming clear that ribosomal RNA (rRNA) plays an
              important role, not only in the assembly  and structure of ribosomes, but in
              their function in protein synthesis as well. Using genetic  approaches, we
              propose to study the molecular basis for the folding and function of rRNA. From
               biochemical and phylogenetic approaches, key nucleotides in rRNA have been
              identified. For  example, many well-known antibiotics inhibit bacterial growth
              by interacting with specific s ites in the  rRNA of bacterial ribosomes. These
              sites turn out to be functional sites where other important  macromolecular
              components of the translational system, such as transfer RNA and elongation
              factors,  interact with the ribosome. Using site-directed mutagenesis, we can
              change the identity of these  nucleotides and study the consequences of these
              changes to try to deduce how they play a role in these  fundamental processes.
              Using genetic approaches that we have developed over the past few years, we 
              can also search for mutations that affect other sites and functions of rRNA, by
              screening or selecting  for their effects on specific ribosomal processes. By
              combining the results of these genetic approaches  with the results of
              biochemical, phylogenetic and structural studies, we hope to be able to gain a 
              clearer understanding of how the ribosome is put together, and how it works. 
              ***
