Title       : Molecular Genetic Analysis of rRNA Function in Tetrahymena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1994      
File        : a9406322

Award Number: 9406322
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Meng-Chao Yao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : F Hutchinson Canc Res Ctr
	      1100 Fairview Ave. N.
	      Seattle, WA  98109    206/667-4868

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9406322  Tetrahymena thermophila is the only organism in which the
              rDNA is  not redundant in the germline genome and in which complete 
              replacement of the functional rDNA has been achieved by this  laboratory. It
              thus represents a unique model system in which to  study rRNA function by
              genetic means. We will continue and expand  our study of rRNA function in
              several ways. We will continue our  analysis of the D8 variable region, a
              conserved region which  preliminary experiments indicate is essential for cell
              growth and  will then analyze three other regions to determine if the sequence 
              and structural features that are important for cell growth in the  D8 region
              are found in those regions. We will do phylogenetic  analysis of comparative
              sequences of the D8 region in Tetrahymena  chosen to represent groups with
              varying evolutionary distances from  T. thermophila. We will test whether the
              conserved features of the  D8 region reside in their secondary or tertiary
              structures by  selectively altering limited sequences and determining their 
              ability to support cell growth after transformation. We will  continue several
              approaches in order to further define the possible  function of the D8 region
              and the peptidyl transferase center. We  will also study the effects of rDNA
              mutations on nucleolar  organization. The results of this study should give a
              greatly  expanded view of the function of rRNA in eukaryotic cells.  %%%  The
              ribosomal RNAs are among the most characterized molecules in  the cell. The
              complete nucleotide sequences of these molecules are  known from nearly 200
              species of organisms including both  eukaryotes and prokaryotes as well as a
              number of chloroplasts and  nitochondria. Despite this knowledge, very little
              is known about  the function of these ubiquitous and important molecules. 
              Essentially nothing is known about how rRNAs are involved in  protein synthesis
              or other cellular activities. They may actually  be involved in the catalytic
              process of the ribososme, thus  repre senting the largest and most ancient
              ribozymes. Past studies  of rRNA function have been limited in part by
              diffculties in  genetic manipulations. The rRNA genes are present in multiple 
              copies in almost all experimental organisms. Tetrahymena  thermophila is the
              only organism in which the rDNA is not redundant  in the germline genome and in
              which complete replacement of the  functional rDNA has been achieved. It thus
              represents a unique  model system in which to study rRNA function by genetic
              means.  ***
