Title       : RUI/MRI: Acquisition of a Particle Image Velocimetry System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0215346

Award Number: 0215346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132129             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elia V. Eschenazi eeschena@xula.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen V. McCloud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Xavier Univ of Louisiana
	      Palmetto & Pine Streets
	      New Orleans, LA  70125    504/486-7411

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1189,1415,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) system is needed to further ongoing funded
              projects on dynamics and transport in unsteady flows, sedimentation processes,
              and complex interfaces. The aim of these studies is to understand the
              fundamental mechanisms of mixing, fate, transport, and sedimentation. This is
              of importance not only from the viewpoint of basic research but also to develop
              predictive tools (for example, for environmental processes) for practical
              applications.

The PIV system is capable of tracking both phases (particles
              or passive tracers and fluid) in real time by the use of non-intrusive optical
              methods to generate 2D or 3D mappings. Data analysis and quantification of the
              processes can be easily performed using MATLAB software linked to the
              instrumentation software. This feature makes the interface use friendly for
              undergraduate students. Furthermore, the PIV system will also be able to track
              the motion of particles in externally driven fluids as function of the driving
              frequencies. With this unique feature it will be possible to investigate
              chaotic advection of particles in real time.

The instrumentation will
              provide a unique opportunity to advance the ongoing research of multiphase flow
              at both the experimental and theoretical levels. In addition, as Xavier
              University, an historically black university, prides itself of being the number
              one producer in the nation of excellent African-American graduates in physics
              and physical sciences, more students will be directly involved in research in a
              very important area and will have the opportunity of using state-of-the art
              equipment, that will better prepare them for graduate school and research
              careers.

This equipment will also have a direct educational impact as it
              will be used in connection
with laboratory classes and research results will
              be used in curricula materials in upper level courses. Furthermore, in the
              future this system can also expand the horizon of the research embraced by
              faculty in areas of technological relevance for multiphase flows. Other
              researchers and collaborators in the New Orleans area will benefit from this
              system as well.

