Title       : Corporate Citizenship and Local-Global Alliances: A Case From Ciudad Juarez
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a0215522

Award Number: 0215522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa W. Wright mww@geog.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION
GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE PROGRAM

RESEARCH
              AWARD
ABSTRACT

BCS-0215522
Melissa Wright
Pennsylvania State University
              

Economic globalization proceeds through a dynamic co-ordination between
              global economic activities and the localized, non-market relationships found in
              civil society. Nevertheless, even as more scholars emphasize the significance
              of local civic institutions for global economic processes, the dominant views
              articulated in globalization studies recreate the bias that global entities are
              immune to the influence of local institutions. This bias is particularly found
              in the literature on multinational firms, which frequently are portrayed as
              globalization's principal agents, operating beyond the influence of local
              practices. As a result, such studies fail to consider how local organizations
              affect multinational corporations and their impact around the world.  This
              research project will investigate how multinational firms and local non-profit
              organizations establish common ground for action through the creation of joint
              civic projects. These projects fall under the rubric of "corporate
              citizenship",  which is a concept increasingly employed by corporations to
              describe their funding for and reliance upon local civic institutions to meet
              their human resource and technology needs. Despite the proliferation of
              references to "corporate citizenship" in the business press, this concept
              remains understudied and its meaning for the local civic domain is virtually
              unexplored. The research will be carried out in a two-year case study in Ciudad
              Juarez (Mexico).  Three sets of questions guide the research: 1) How do
              corporate requirements for human resources and technological development
              contribute to the exercise of corporate citizenship in Ciudad Juarez? 2) How do
              local interpretations of gender and nationality mediate the formation of the
              corporate-civic alliances that constitute the practice of corporate
              citizenship? 3) How do these alliances affect the institutional practices and
              objectives of their participating organizations?   Ciudad Juarez has been
              chosen as the study are for several reasons.  It is the birthplace of the
              maquiladora industry (the export-processing factories in Mexico) and is
              representative of many Third World industrial enclaves where multinational
              firms seek to upgrade the labor force and social infrastructure through civic
              activity.  The city's export-processing maquiladora industry has increased its
              civic participation with educational and community-based organizations over the
              last five years. This increased corporate activity in the Ciudad Juarez civic
              sector mirrors a global trend in the expansion of multinational corporate
              citizenship across Third World regions. 

The project will investigate not
              only what decision-makers in the corporate and civic sectors are doing, but
              also how their motives change through interaction with other organizations and
              how such changes affect the behavior of their institutions. The research
              methods, therefore, are qualitative and involve both open-ended interviews and
              participant observation. The qualitative techniques will be combined with
              archival research to put the fieldwork data into a larger theoretical and
              empirical context.  These methods will investigate how leaders in corporate and
              non-profit organizations make they decisions they do, how they implement and
              modify them and how their stated intentions sometimes diverge from their
              actions.  While qualitative methods do not lend themselves to formal hypothesis
              testing, they will amplify and enrich the results derived from quantitative
              investigations that link corporate behavior with civic action. Further, they
              will provide valuable insight into processes touched upon but not investigated
              by quantitative studies of the maquiladora industry and its impact on the
              regional development of Mexico and the U.S.-Mexico border.  

