Title       : MRI: Development of Integrative Instrumentation for A Nation-Wide Power System
               Frequency Dynamics Monitoring Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  2002    
File        : a0215731

Award Number: 0215731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yilu Liu Yilu.Liu@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arun G. Phadke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lamine Mili  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Virgilio A. Centeno  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The characteristics of power system electromechanical dynamics and
              oscillations are complex and they are an integral part of most major system
              disturbances. Understanding these characteristics is essential for preventing
              catastrophic failures and blackouts. Until now, the complete picture of how the
              entire US power system behaves during disturbances is not well understood. Any
              information we have is from computer simulations that are subject to model
              errors and simplifications. Complete models for nonlinear loads are not
              available despite the critical roles they play in system dynamics. Most of all,
              no model could capture the time varying nature of power system operational
              conditions over long time spans. System frequency (and its rate of change) is
              one of the most important measures of the electric power system behavior.
              Individual frequency measurements made so far are meant for limited local use
              and do not have the accuracy and synchronization necessary for system level
              analysis.

This project proposes to develop instrumentation for a wide-area
              frequency monitoring network (FNET) with research focus on power system
              dynamics measurement, analysis, and control. The proposed integrative
              instrumentation has the following unique features: (1) Phasor Measurement
              techniques will be used for precise dynamic frequency calculations, (2) Global
              Positioning System (UPS) synchronized time pulses will drive data sampling and
              time stamps. (3) Nation-wide system frequency information will be collected
              from potentially hundreds of sites chosen to satisfy observability criteria.
              (4) Internet will facilitate continuous data collection and results
              dissemination.
(5) Measurements will be taken at 110Volt single-phase power
              outlets with the proposed frequency recording units (FRUs). Here, one crucial
              innovation is to make measurement at the 1 1OV level to avoid many obstacles in
              high voltage substation installations. This will reduce overall cost and enable
              measurements to be made easily and flexibly at many locations.

The proposed
              instrumentation development work includes design and development of a
              GPS/Internet based frequency monitoring network (FNET) that includes (1)
              frequency recording unit (FRU) development. (2) information management system
              (IMS) design, and (3) both real-time and offline data processing algorithm
              development.

For the first time, the proposed FNET will make the global
              observation of the vast power network behavior possible. New observations from
              FNET could take the power system research to an entirely new level. A clear
              understanding of the phenomena will lead to innovative counter-measures against
              system blackouts, and increased reliability of nation's critical electric power
              system infrastructure under the deregulated environment. As more understanding
              of the complex power system dynamics is gained with the help of the first-hand
              FNET measurement data, it may be possible to devise early warning systems and
              activate control actions at selected points to damp system oscillations and
              prevent catastrophic power system failures.

FNET opens a new window to the
              "world" of large power system behavior. Such information for education and
              training was never possible before.


