Title       : BE/CNH: Homeostasis and Degradation in Fragile Tropical Agroecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0215890

Award Number: 0215890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nancy C. Tuchman                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1668132            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice N. Pell ap19@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan J. Riha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence E. Blume  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Johannes Lehmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher B. Barrett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1689,1691,5928,9169,9186,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              When both people and their natural environment are "at the margin," small
              changes in the natural resource base often have important effects on people's
              lives.  Conversely, modifications in human activities may significantly affect
              ecosystem functioning.  This responsiveness makes it necessary to study the
              interactions between human behavior, natural capital stocks, and the flow of
              ecosystem services.  Farmers make many decisions about land use and
              improvement, selection of crop varieties, livestock-management strategies,
              chemical applications, and labor allocation.  These decisions fundamentally
              affect the growth of plants, livestock, and soil biology -- in short, the
              functioning of the entire agroecosystem.  Complex feedback loops send responses
              to the different subsystems engendering dynamic reactions.  Exogenous shocks,
              such as those associated with climate variability and changing economic
              incentives, regularly disrupt processes in this complex system.  Over time,
              those disturbances propagate throughout the system, causing adaptation in
              behaviors and performance of the subsystems.  Understanding the interplay
              between smallholder farmers in Kenya and their natural environment is the
              primary goal of this project.  Within three Kenyan research sites, Embu in the
              central highlands, Siaya-Vihiga in the Lake Victoria basin in subhumid western
              Kenya, and upper Baringo in the Rift valley, some farmers have adapted their
              agricultural practices to sustain their soils through crop-livestock
              integration and use of a variety of conservation strategies.  Within the same
              ecosystem, some farmers are able to maintain soil fertility and farm
              productivity, while their neighbors are caught in "natural resource poverty
              traps" that yield food insecurity and agroecosystem degradation.  Studies of
              the systems that are able to maintain homeostasis as well as those that do not
              recover from human and natural shocks provide the opportunity to understand the
              central biophysical and socioeconomic processes that underpin agroecosystem
              functioning in the tropics.  The investigators will develop a model using a
              system dynamics approach that includes the complex feedback loops among
              economic (conditioned by sociological constraints), livestock, crop, and soils
              submodels.  The model will be calibrated and tested using data on soil status
              (nutrients, organic matter and microbial profiles), crop yields, plant biomass
              production, and livestock growth as well as production and socio-economic
              data.

Depletion of soil fertility is increasingly acknowledged to be the
              fundamental biophysical cause of declining food production in Africa.  Unless
              the causes for soil depletion are remedied, it will be impossible to increase
              food production to meet projected demand due to population growth and to ensure
              that the 37 percent of the sub-Saharan Africans receiving less that 2,200
              calories per day are adequately nourished.  Because this project's research
              sites vary by ecological zone and market access, they represent systems
              throughout Africa and much of the developing world.  This research project will
              permit a comprehensive evaluation of socioeconomic and biophysical factors that
              contribute to degradation of tropical agroecosystems.  The project will add to
              limited understanding of the microbial ecology of tropical soils, and to
              knowledge about when soils reach thresholds beyond which replenishment is
              difficult.  The project also will contribute to knowledge of the processes
              through which people become trapped in poverty. The integration of the
              contributions to individual research areas will be made more useful through
              integration into a dynamic model that will permit exploration of the responses
              of these vulnerable systems to economic and biophysical shocks.  This project
              is supported by an award resulting from the FY 2002 special competition in
              Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural
              and Human Systems.

