Title       : Acquisition of an Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope for Research and
               Research Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0215873

Award Number: 0215873
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marek W. Urban Marek.Urban@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shelby F. Thames  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Y. Lochhead  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Instrumentation program supports the University of
              Southern Mississippi  with the acquisition of an environmental scanning
              electron microscopes with energy dispersive X-ray capability. The instrument
              provides a means of high magnification, high resolution analysis of polymeric
              materials with minimum sample preparation.  Low vacuum technology favors
              polymer analysis because non-conductive polymeric surfaces can be imaged. 
              Imaging does not require that the specimen be coated with a conductive
              material, thus, saving time and resources.  Furthermore, samples with high
              water content can also be imaged with low vacuum technology.  Recent
              developments in low vacuum electron microscope design provide a number of
              advantages.  Sample chambers can now accommodate samples up to eight inches in
              diameter. A simple command on the computer controller allows selection of
              either low or high vacuum chamber pressures.  New electron microscopes are
              equipped with a number of automated features that improve performance and
              lifetime of the microscope components.  Automated features now include focus,
              stigmation, gun saturation, gun alignment, contrast, and brightness. These
              adjustments were previously made manually by the operator and had detrimental
              impact on filament lifetime when multiple operators utilized the same electron
              microscope. 

Traditional scanning electron microscopes (SEM) require that
              samples are free from contaminates, dry, stable in a high vacuum environment,
              and electrically conductive to provide for successful analysis. The
              labor-intensive sample preparation techniques required to obtain useable
              samples often resulted in the creation of artifacts, thus obstructing the
              accurate analysis intended.  The advent of the Polymer age in which we live
              further complicated SEM analysis. Almost all polymers are non-conductive, many
              are not stable under high vacuum, and some are sensitive to the electron beam. 
              These problems led to the invention of a new generation of SEM. These
              environmental/low vacuum scanning electron microscopes (ESEM/LVSEM) have
              overcome a number of the problems encountered in traditional SEM analysis of
              polymers.  ESEM/LVSEM utilize partitions to separate high vacuum areas and low
              vacuum areas of the SEM.  
The acquisition of an ESEM/LVSEM at the University
              of Southern Mississippi will aid in characterization of polymers developed for
              a wide range of applications.  The incorporation of energy dispersive X-ray
              unit purchased in 1999 will enhance the capabilities by allowing for elemental
              analysis of polymers and other materials.  This will accelerate the advancement
              of research by providing a technologically advanced tool capable of utilization
              by multiple operators in our research center. 

