Title       : Florida Center for Ocean Science Education Excellence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0215458

Award Number: 0215458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $999999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula G. Coble pcoble@marine.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julie Lambert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Teresa M. Greely  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernadette C. Kelley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer Cherrier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1690      EDUCATION/HUMAN RESOURCES,OCE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support to establish a Florida Center for Ocean Science
              Education Excellence that will serve as a regional hub with a strong emphasis
              on the integration of ocean research and education.   The partnerships to be
              established include a diverse mix of institutions:  three state universities,
              one private university, four state and federal research entities, multiple
              informal education entities and public schools and systems from three different
              geographic areas in the state.   Stakeholders and audiences for the Florida
              COSEE include ocean scientists, K-12 teachers, preservice undergraduates, state
              and school-district decision-makers and the general public. Specific activities
              will include workshops and outreach using multiple formats and platforms. 
              There will be a strong focus on diversity with the technology group for the
              Center located at Florida A and M Univesity, a historically African American
              institution. On a national scale, the Center will nurture development of new
              model programs for educator-scientist training and collaborations.This COSEE
              Center will establish a dynamic mosaic of partners that have excellent
              potential to promote the use of the ocean sciences as an interdisciplinary
              vehicle for effectively integrating research and education at multiple levels
              in Florida.    The key role to be played by the state's primary historically
              black university will strengthen minority outreach and enhance educational and
              career opportunities for the diverse mix of ethnic, racial and cultural groups
              statewide.
