Title       : Acquisition of a Broad Based Structural Dynamics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0215939

Award Number: 0215939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175012             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arya Ebrahimpour ebraarya@isu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Habib Sadid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan D. Blotter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Idaho State University
	      309 Fine Arts Bldg., Box 8046
	      Pocatello, ID  832098046    208/282-2592

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1057,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this proposal is to acquire the equipment needed to complete an
              interdisciplinary structural dynamics test facility. The requested equipment
              consists of a scanning laser Doppler vibrometer, a shake table control system,
              a spectrum analyzer, and various vibration transducers. This equipment will be
              used in conjunction with existing major laboratory equipment which consists of
              large capacity horizontal and vertical shake tables, a vibration isolation
              table, multiple holographic test systems, and a tension/compression testing
              machine. This facility will provide long-term research and training
              capabilities to ISU and the state of Idaho by providing a sophisticated
              structural dynamics laboratory that will support many areas of research. The
              research will have wide application to engineering disciplines ranging from
              aerospace, civil, mechanical, environmental, and electrical. Existing research
              projects that will use this equipment consist of the development of noise
              control techniques, development of optical based small displacement measurement
              techniques, material integrity testing, vibration control of building
              structures and components, building structure response due to earthquakes
              and/or explosives, and static and dynamic soil testing. Other related and
              unrelated areas of research will be generated, as the research facility becomes
              better known by researchers throughout the state. Researchers from the Idaho
              National Engineering and
Environmental Laboratory (INEEL), local and state
              industry, the Measurement and Control Engineering Research Center (MCERC), as
              well as researchers from multiple colleges at ISU will use and benefit from
              this equipment.  Furthermore, the laboratory will be used for K-12 student
              tours and undergraduate and graduate research. This facility will also
              significantly enhance the experimental testing background and training that our
              students currently receive in our two graduate programs in Measurement and
              Control Engineering and Engineering Structures and Mechanics.
 


