Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Computer-Aided Knowledge-Based Process Planning
               for Surface Mount Rework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0215760

Award Number: 0215760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ismail Fidan ifidan@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Serdar Tumkor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5940,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              0215760
Fidan

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Professor Ismail Fidan, Department of Manufacturing and Industrial
              Engineering at Tennessee Technical University, Cookeville, Tennessee and Dr.
              Serdar Tumkor, Mechanical Engineering Department at Istanbul Technical
              University, Istanbul, Turkey.  They plan to develop an interactive knowledge
              based expert interface system of circuit board defects.  The trend to high
              pin-count high-density packaging in surface mount assembly has highlighted
              inherent difficulties in the assembly line of these very fine pitch devices. A
              variety of defects is still common in printed circuit board assembly (PCBA)
              technology requiring rework. Increasing product complexity, decreasing
              component size, and using double sided boards have made rework more difficult
              and the economic reworking of PCBAs is one of the main problems facing PCB
              manufacturers.  PCBA manufacturing has been relatively improved with fully
              automated, accurate assembly machines and the use of robots but it has been
              shown that the outcomes of the automated rework line have not produced a high
              enough level of the reliable yield percentage.  The objective of this award is
              to make a contribution towards this surface mount rework.  With the development
              of this knowledge-based system, the rework will be removed from the PCBA line,
              and PCBA process parameters, which cause joint level reliability problems, will
              be managed online with the help of the developed system.

Scope:  The expert
              interface system for electronic boards that the investigators plan to develop
              may be a cost-effective solution for detecting and correcting flaws in
              electronics manufacturers.  The potential contributions into "computer-aided
              process planning for surface mount rework" may be a significant addition to the
              electronics manufacturing field by minimizing the number of the defects and
              waste of the electronics printed wiring boards.  The developed system and its
              implementations may also be used in the senior and graduate level courses in
              industrial automation and in computer integrated manufacturing graduate
              courses.  Funds for this project are provided by the Office of International
              Science and Engineering and the Division of Design, Manufacturing, and
              Industrial Innovation.

