Title       : Advances in Macroeconomics and Econometrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0215754

Award Number: 0215754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212403             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Hamilton jhamilton@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This research generates new insights into firms' price-setting behavior and
              develops guidelines that will be helpful in a wide range of applied econometric
              work. Two areas of research are proposed.   The first project studies the
              question, why don't firms instantly adjust their prices to new economic
              fundamentals? This question gets to the heart of many of the central issues in
              economics. The novel suggestion here is to study a long time series with a
              sufficient number of observed price changes that we can make a useful
              statistical statement about the conditions under which an individual firm is
              predicted to change its price. A base-case menu cost model is shown to have the
              implication that the past history of prices and fundamentals should influence
              the probability of observing a price change only through the gap between the
              current price and fundamental value. A framework is proposed for testing this
              implication and quantifying and interpreting alternative dynamics that are
              observed in firms' actual prices.

The second set of projects studies the
              role of normalization in econometrics. This issue, long thought to be
              irrelevant for substantive questions, has recently been shown to make a
              significant difference for the estimated impulse-response functions and
              confidence intervals as typically calculated in a number of models. This
              research proposal suggests a unifying principle that could be used to resolve
              both the problems that have already been documented as well as help in a number
              of econometric applications where this issue has yet to be recognized. 

