Title       : SBIR Phase I: Rapid Reagent-Less Multi-Channel Biological Agent Detector
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0215119

Award Number: 0215119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Mlcak mlcak@bostonms.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston MicroSystems, Inc.
	      30-H Sixth Road
	      Woburn, MA  018011758    781/933-5100

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
              demonstrate the feasibility of a miniaturized MEMS-based, reagent-less
              biological agent detector, capable of performing rapid
assays for tens (or
              even hundreds) of analytes simultaneously, for detection of whole  bacteria (or
              spores) with single bacteria/spore resolution. National defense against
              biological warfare agents and naturally occurring pathogens, such as drug
              resistant tuberculosis or food and water contaminates, requires low cost,
              robust, and easy to use technologies for rapid detection and identification of
              biological agents. Rapid detection is needed to provide early warning to
              minimize the numbers of exposed personnel, and to provide timely and effective
              medical treatment of those exposed. Current identification technologies depend
              on time-consuming amplification, which also adds appreciably to the cost,
              complexity, power requirements and size of the detector as it must perform
              multiple sample treatment steps and provide the necessary reagents. In this
              Phase I Project, Boston MicroSystems, with the assistance of the US Naval
              Research Laboratory, will quantify the performance of the proposed biological
              agent detector by fabricating prototype single channel detectors, immobilizing
              antibodies for bacillus globigii onto the detectors, expose them to samples of
              bacillus globigii, and quantify the response and detection limits.

The 
              prinicipal commercial application of this project is in homeland defense.
              However, the proposed biological agent detector may have significant additional
              applications in the areas of medical diagnostics, agribusiness, and
              environmental monitoring.

