Title       : Development of a Down-hole Magnetic Susceptibility Logger and Soil Magnetic
               Laboratory for Archaeological and Soils Investigations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0215723

Award Number: 0215723
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92173              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rinita A. Dalan dalanri@mnstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Minnesota St Unv Moorhead
	      1104 7th Avenue South
	      Moorhead, MN  56563    218/236-2011

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from a National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation
              award, Dr. Rinita Dalan will collaborate with Bartington Instruments Ltd. to
              develop a down-hole magnetic susceptibility logger appropriate for
              archaeological and other near-surface applications. Surficial processes affect
              soil magnetic properties and in depositional contexts it is possible to use
              magnetic variation over depth both to identify individual buried surfaces and
              to gain insight into the factors responsible for their magnetic alteration.
              Based on preliminary data, Dr. Dalan believes that humanly modified surfaces
              can be distinguishable in this way. Thus, in principle, a magnetic
              susceptibility logger could be used as a prospection device to locate and to
              determine the extent of archaeological sites. Because the logger currently
              under development can measure sections up to 1.6 meters in depth and be
              inserted within a 1" diameter hole, it has the potential for widespread
              use.

Working with Bartington Instruments Ltd. Dr Dalan will help to develop
              a stage two prototype. Both field and laboratory tests will be conducted and
              experiments will compare the performance of the second-generation prototype to
              the original and be used to provide advice on further improvements. Performance
              will be evaluated in terms of a number of variables including repeatability
              (noise), sensitivity, stability and resolution. In addition, speed and ease of
              field operation as well as flexibility of application will be evaluated. Field
              and laboratory tests, together with analysis and presentation will be conducted
              over a period of 1.5 years. The southern lake Agassiz Region, an
              archaeologically important area easily accessible to Dr. Dalan provides a set
              of diverse soil and sedimentary environments and thus offers an excellent test
              situation. Three/four sites, most archaeologically examined and pedologically
              described give a controlled context. In addition to down hole measurements,
              sediment samples will be collected for laboratory analysis.

This project is
              important for several reasons. It will provide archaeologists and soil
              scientists with  the ability to quickly and easily plot variation in magnetic
              susceptibility over depth and offer insight into the sediment characteristics
              responsible for this variation. It will also play a significant role in
              undergraduate student training. Dr. Dalan will actively involve Moorehead State
              University undergraduates in both laboratory and field aspects of the research.
              The project provides an excellent vehicle to teach principles of archaeology,
              geophysics and soil science and hopefully will provide an experience which
              encourages students to pursue careers in science.

