Title       : Localization and Functions of Novel Proteins in Cyanobacterial Photosystem II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0215359

Award Number: 0215359
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $783403             (Estimated)
Investigator: Himadri B. Pakrasi pakrasi@biology2.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Photosystem II, a membrane protein complex in cyanobacteria and chloroplasts,
              mediates a unique reaction in the biosphere, oxidation of water to molecular
              oxygen. Although the exact molecular mechanism of photosynthetic oxygen
              evolution remains elusive, it is known that a cluster of manganese, calcium and
              chloride ions is essential for this activity. The long-term goal of this
              project is to define the roles of various protein components of photosystem II
              in the mechanism of water oxidation. Proteomic analysis of a highly active PSII
              preparation from the cyanobacterium Synechocystis 6803 has identified four
              novel proteins, Sll1390, Sll1252, Sll1414, Sll1130, as well as the PsbP and
              PsbQ proteins, which were previously thought to be present only in higher plant
              and green algal chloroplasts. This project includes detailed biochemical and
              genetic studies to determine the cellular localization, and functions of the
              above proteins in cyanobacterial and plant photosystem II.

By harvesting
              solar radiation, the photosystem II complex contributes to half of the biomass
              production on our planet. During the past year, X-ray crystal structure of a
              cyanobacterial photosystem II complex has been described at a 3.8A resolution.
              However, a more detailed understanding of the organization and functions of the
              protein components of photosystem II are necessary to fully comprehend the
              mechanism of photosynthetic O2-evolution. The proposed experiments are expected
              to complement anticipated higher resolution X-ray crystallographic analysis of
              photosystem II to gain such a level of understanding. These experiments will
              also shed new light on the evolution of the form and function of photosystem II
              from cyanobacteria to higher plants. In addition, this project will provide
              state-of-the-art research opportunities to a number of undergraduate, graduate
              and postdoctoral trainees.
