Title       : MRI: Acquisition of High Speed Mixed Signal Test Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0215753

Award Number: 0215753
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266516             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oliver Collins collins.62@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1189,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 02-15753
Collins, Oliver
University of Notre Dame

MRI: Acquisition of
              High Speed Mixed Signal Test Equipment 

This proposal, studying quadrature
              and Sigma Delta modulation/demodulation, supports communications/signal
              processing research for experimental validation using simulators. Experimental
              verification of new ideas in Sigma Delta digital-to-analog and
              analog-to-digital conversion will be explored. Sigma Delta modulation allows an
              intrinsically linear two level quantizer to reproduce a high resolution signal
              by shifting the quantization noise away from the signal band for removal by
              filtering.  The Sigma Delta modulator tries to find the optimal sequence of
              +1's and -1's such that, after filtering, the squared Euclidean distance
              between this sequence of +1's and -1's and a given, identically filtered,
              discrete-time, unity-amplitude-limited sequence filtering is minimized. The
              research aims to show that Sigma Delta modulation constitutes a crude
              optimization algorithm and that practicable techniques solve this optimization
              problem well enough to improve dynamic range beyond the current
              state-of-the-art. The PI claims that the substantial improvement will almost
              certainly expose the inherent nonidealities of even single bit quantizers.
              Because of the bit-to-bit interactions produced by reflections from imperfect
              impedance matches at its output, even single bit D to A generates noise and
              spurious signals. The equipment requested, three pieces of high speed, mixed
              signal test: a data generator, a network analyzer, and a signal analyzer, will
              allow investigation of these effects and permit the design of better single-
              and multiple-bit quantizers.  The data generator will be used as a stimulus
              source in a wavelength division multiplexing project; the superior range of the
              network analyzer will contribute to a microwave remote sensing project.
              Improvement in analog-to-digital and digital-to-analog bandwidth and dynamic
              range is expected. The devices are important whenever digital computation must
              be interfaced to physical world (e.g., getting the analog signal radiated by an
              antenna). Since the digital revolution depends on these conversions, the
              interface is critical to send and store information. Improved performance and
              reduced complexity in manufacturing systems that depend on these conversions,
              such as personal CD players, cellular telephones, high definition TV, computer
              modems, deep communication systems would benefit us all. Moreover, in addition
              to supporting research, the equipment will support enhanced projects in three
              undergraduate courses and contribute to make the students attractive to
              industry for both hiring and mentoring the required design projects.

