Title       : Acquisition of a high resolution, sector field, ICP-MS and laser ablation system
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0215297

Award Number: 0215297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313040             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory E. Ravizza ravizza@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric H. DeCarlo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Mahoney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth H. Rubin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael O. Garcia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0215297
Ravizza

This award provides support to the University of
              Hawaii's School of Ocean and Earth Science and Technology (SOEST) for
              acquisition of a high resolution, sector field, inductively coupled plasma mass
              spectrometer (HR-SF-ICPMS) and laser ablation system. The mass spectrometer is
              a versatile instrument for trace analysis in a wide variety of natural
              materials including seawater, sediments and rocks. The laser ablation unit
              allows direct trace analysis of many solid materials, eliminating the need for
              time consuming and expensive chemical dissolution procedures.  At SOEST this
              instrumentation will be used to advance research efforts in chemical
              oceanography, paleoceanography, geochemistry and volcanology. Analyses of trace
              metals in seawater will be used to better quantify the rate of supply of dust
              to the surface ocean and it solubility. This information is required to test
              current hypotheses that trace metal availability limits biological productivity
              in large portions of the open ocean. Trace element analyses of biogenic calcium
              carbonate precipitated by marine organisms will be used to improve our ability
              to reconstruct the history of ocean temperature changes and fluctuations in
              atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. Paleoceangraphic data of this sort are used
              to establish the magnitude and rate of climate variability prior to significant
              human impact. Data of this type is an essential component of efforts to discern
              between natural climate variability and human-induced climate perturbations.
              Trace element and isotope analyses of marine sediments will be performed in
              order to elucidate the geologic history of chemical weathering. A better
              understanding of chemical weathering is a necessary part of the geologic
              community's effort to understand those natural processes that have maintained
              an atmosphere capable of sustaining macroscopic life for hundreds of millions
              of years.  Sediment geochemistry studies that document concentrations of
              platinum group elements in the environment will also be conducted. Available
              data indicated these metals are released from automobile catalytic converters
              and are enriched in widely distributed areas of the globe. These, and related
              efforts in environmental geochemistry, are part of the research community's
              contribution to assessing the importance of emerging human impacts on the
              global environment. The mass spectrometer and laser ablation system will also
              contribute to the research program of several volcanologists and petrologists
              at SOEST. These investigators use trace element data in conjunction with other
              data sets to understand melting in the deep earth, and the magmatic
              differentiation processes. These processes are responsible for producing
              volcanic activity at the surface of the Earth. Research efforts include studies
              of seafloor volcanism, explosive volcanoes in island arc settings, as well as
              the unique natural laboratory provided by active volcanism on the big island of
              Hawaii.
***

