Title       : BE/CNH: Urban Trace-gas Emissions Study (UTES): Interactions Among Canopy
               Processes, Anthropogenic Emissions, and Social Institutions in the Salt Lake
               Valley, Utah
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0215768

Award Number: 0215768
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1498973            (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane E. Pataki pataki@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip C. Emmi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig B. Forster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tarla R. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph C. Klewicki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1691,9169,9188,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The majority of greenhouse gases and other atmospheric pollutants originate in
              cities, but the linkages among urban vegetation, human activities, and the
              urban airshed are poorly understood.  Carbon dioxide and water vapor are
              greenhouse gases that affect local, regional, and global climate, while
              volatile organic compounds are pre-cursors to the atmospheric pollutants that
              form urban smog.  All of these gases are emitted by human activities and by
              vegetation in the urban environment.  Interdisciplinary collaborations of
              atmospheric scientists, social sciences, urban planners, and ecologists are
              necessary to measure the concentrations and emissions of these gases, to trace
              their origins, and to evaluate the implications for effective management of the
              urban airshed.  This research project will be undertaken by a
              multi-disciplinary research team in order to study the complex factors
              affecting emissions of carbon dioxide, water vapor, and volatile organic
              compounds in the valley containing Salt Lake City, Utah.  An atmospheric
              measurement and monitoring program will be implemented throughout the Salt Lake
              Valley in different land-use areas, such as industrial areas, residential
              neighborhoods, and the intensively developed city center.  Analyses will
              distinguish the compounds associated with trace gas concentration and emission,
              such as vehicular emissions, industrial emissions, contributions from
              residential heating, and emissions from urban vegetation.  After identifying
              the factors controlling the different components in various land uses, the
              investigators will develop a system-dynamics model that will facilitate
              examinations of the urban system as a whole.  The model also will assist in
              quantitatively evaluating options for public policy and management.

Although
              urban environments are ecosystems, comprehensive studies of linkages between
              organisms and their physical environments.  This project will contribute to
              understanding of the high degree of complexity in urban ecosystems, and it will
              provide a framework for evaluating the multiple interactive factors that
              influence airsheds in a variety of cities.  Planners and decision makers from
              Salt Lake City and the state of Utah will participate in this project,
              providing input into model development and exploring policy implications of the
              research results.  By applying scientific measurement techniques to
              quantitative modeling and collaborating with local decision makers, this
              project will evaluate the feasibility and effectiveness of different approaches
              to reducing greenhouse gas emissions while maintaining high air-quality
              standards.  This project is supported by an award resulting from the FY 2002
              special competition in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the
              Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems.
