Title       : SBIR Phase I: Development of a High Precision, Autonomous Quantum Cascade
               Laser-Based Detector for Methane and Nitrous Oxide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0215147

Award Number: 0215147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David D. Nelson ddn@aerodyne.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Aerodyne Research Inc
	      45 Manning Road
	      Billerica, MA  018213934    508/663-9500

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a
              compact and autonomous, high precision monitor for the potent greenhouse gases,
              methane and nitrous oxide. This proposal is submitted under the Geoscience
              Instrumentation subtopic (subtopic E) of the Electronics topic. The target
              molecules are currently detected with cw lead salt diode lasers. These lasers
              require cryogenic cooling and, due to their lack of long term stability, a
              highly trained operator. Quantum cascade (QC) lasers are spectroscopically
              stable and can be operated near room temperature when they are pulsed. This
              allows the design of compact, rugged, inexpensive and autonomous molecular
              monitors. This system is further simplified by detecting both methane and
              nitrous with a single QC laser using nearly coincident transitions near 1300 mm
              . The Phase I research objectives will be to demonstrate that the required
              sensitivity and specificity can be obtained in this spectral region using a
              pulsed QC laser and non-cryogenic infrared detectors. The Phase I research will
              produce a preliminary design for an instrument to be constructed during Phase
              II. The resulting turn-key monitor will address the widespread need to monitor
              these important species in a sensitive and cost-effective manner.

Potential
              commercial applications for this research include 1) the research market
              attempting to quantify the worldwide sources and sinks of greenhouse gases, 2)
              the market for trading credits for greenhouse gas emission reductions which
              requires quantitative documentation of these reductions, 3) the market for
              goods and services able to identify and locate leaks in natural gas
              distribution systems and 4) various research markets needing to quantify
              methane and/or nitrous oxide concentrations or emissions in both laboratory and
              field settings.
