Title       : Cool-Flame-Assisted Combustion of High Pressure CH4/air Mixtures for Hydrogen
               Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0215756

Award Number: 0215756
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329384             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nick G. Glumac glumac@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Herman Krier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Recent studies on the autoignition behavior of fuel-rich methane/air mixtures
              at elevated pressures suggests that mixtures at equivalence ratios of around 4
              can be made to react rapidly for pressures above 8 atmospheres, and thus it may
              be possible to stabilize the process in a modified burner configuration for
              continuous production of product gases.  Current  mechanisms for fuel-rich
              methane combustion--those used to model 'cool-flame' behavior of
              methane--predict that the product gases resulting from such combustion will
              have hydrogen yields that exceed current combustion approaches and
              hydrogen:water ratios of 3 or better.  In this work, a high-pressure reactor
              for combustion of methane/air mixtures at equivalence ratios of approximately 4
              is designed and constructed.  The reactor is designed to facilitate
              stabilization of these flows, which are characterized by long induction times
              and low heat release.  In addition, the reactor has complete optical access,
              enabling detailed temperature and species concentration measurements in a flow
              that is optimized for comparison with the predictions of a kinetic model. 
              Using this reactor, an extensive characterization of the combustion of very
              rich methane/air mixtures at elevated pressures is conducted.  Temperature and
              formaldehyde spatial profiles, induction times, and detailed product yields are
              measured as a functions of process parameters, and the propensity for soot
              formation is examined.  Using these data, current kinetic models are evaluated
              and analyzed under these conditions.  This study is designed to demonstrate the
              feasibility of elevated pressure, air-based combustion techniques for hydrogen
              synthesis from natural gas, as well as to develop the tools for computational
              process analysis and optimization, while simultaneously generating an extensive
              and detailed dataset on the unique 
combustion behavior of this important
              mixture.

Economical conversion of natural gas to hydrogen fuel is critical
              to realization of large-scale use of hydrogen as a fuel for transportation and
              for industry.  In addition, widespread use of fuel cells likewise requires an
              inexpensive source for hydrogen.  Most current hydrogen synthesis schemes, for
              example steam methane reforming and catalytic partial oxidation, remain too
              costly, in part due to high costs associated with the catalysts that are
              inherent in these processes.  Combustion technologies offer the promise of
              inexpensive hydrogen production through non-catalytic partial oxidation of
              natural gas to carbon monoxide and hydrogen (syngas).  Such technologies can
              generate power and hydrogen simultaneously and can be designed to involve
              simple reactor facilities that require smaller capital costs.  At least two
              such combustion processes are currently used by industry.  Significant cost
              reduction in combustion process for hydrogen synthesis can be obtained if 1)
              the hydrogen:water ratio in the product gases (currently ~1 to 2) can be
              significantly improved, and 2) the required oxidizer is air rather than
              oxygen.

