Title       : Collaborative Proposal: Understanding Large Movements in Stock Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0215908

Award Number: 0215908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68193              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xavier Gabaix xgabaix@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The basic motivation of this investigation is to understand the power-law
              distributions that describe various properties characterizing large movements
              in stock price fluctuations, with characteristic exponents that seem to be
              universal for different sizes of stocks and different stock markets around the
              world.  This project develops a model of the microbehavior of financial markets
              to account for these empirically observed facts. The model will have the
              following key components: (a) market participants behave strategically, i.e.,
              they seek to minimize execution time and price impact, and (b) the size
              distribution of mutual funds has a power law tail with exponent 1.  The model
              is tested for consistency with a series of equal-time codependences among
              return, volume, and number of trades that are displayed by empirical data.  
              This project consolidates and extends the conceptual framework of the model in
              several directions. The model predicts that some mechanisms proposed to reduce
              extreme fluctuations are ineffective. For example, a Tobin tax and circuit
              breakers do not change the value of the exponent of returns, but a modified
              Tobin tax whose tax rate increases sufficiently quickly with volume traded
              decreases the fatness of the return distribution. The model also suggests a way
              to use volume to parse out noise from news in return fluctuations, and this
              project explores how useful this approach is. Volatility is known to be
              autocorrelated, and preliminary evidence suggests that number of trades and
              return volatility are similarly autocorrelated. Their long-term memory
              exponents are very close.  The investigators study the propagation of
              volatility, volume and number of trades in a systematic way, particularly
              focusing on the extreme events and the long-term memory properties.  This study
              achieves a reasonably complete description of the way market activity is
              created and propagates. 
