Title       : SBIR Phase I: Study, Evaluation and Prototype of a Continuous Flow Reactor and
               Size-Selection Chromagraphic Scheme for Use in High Throughput Manufacture of
               Silicon Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0215267

Award Number: 0215267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Wiacek rwiacek@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : InnovaLight
	      6801 N. 360 Hwy
	      Austin, TX  787311786    512/795-5835

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to develop a high
              volume manufacturing technology for the production of InnovaLight's highly
              advanced silicon nanocrystal technology.  InnovaLight has discovered a highly
              controlled way to make high quality, uniform, and stable silicon nanocrystals
              with novel properties based on original research at The University of Texas.
              This is a very important discovery, as the unique properties of these
              nanocrystals will enable a host of large commercial applications.  However, in
              order to capture this value, a high-volume manufacturing scheme will need to be
              developed from the current low-volume, batch process.  The ability to produce
              high volumes of crystals that are favorably characterized for use in electronic
              components will enable their cost-effective use in a host of electronics
              applications. 

Potential commercial markets include use as pixels for use in
              high-resolution, low-power flat panel displays on computers and electronic
              instrumentation panels.  The crystals can also be made to emit a tightly
              confined, coherent stream of light.  This opens them up to use as lasers for
              short reach optical communications, terahertz-speed optical chips, smart cards,
              etc.  The crystals also have extremely unique charging behavior that enables
              their usage in advanced, multi-level memory chips.  Such chips would have an
              order of magnitude increase in capacity over existing chips.  Lastly, the
              non-toxic nature of silicon, coupled with the highly controlled surface
              chemistry of InnovaLight's process, opens these crystals up to many biotech
              uses such as in vivo cancer cell detection and oblation. 


