Title       : Diachronic Morphology in Cross-Linguistic Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0215523

Award Number: 0215523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85137              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice C. Harris alice.c.harris@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Alice C. Harris will
              conduct four years of linguistic research on historical morphology (changes
              over time in the forms of words). The goal of the research is to discover the
              universal forces that change the forms of words. Previous studies of historical
              morphology have emphasized the languages of Europe and the Indo-European
              family, but a broader database is more likely to reveal universals of change.
              This project will continue Dr. Harris's earlier research on languages of the
              Kartvelian and North East Caucasian families. It will also draw on published
              discussions of historical morphology of many other language families. The
              method that will be used involves cross-linguistic comparison of very similar
              changes in very different languages. For example, it has been found that in a
              number of unrelated languages, the third person singular form of the verb has
              been generalized as the base of all persons and numbers, leaving the third
              person singular verb with no special marking. In this research, both the
              similarities and differences in such generalizations will be studied.

An
              understanding of how complex linguistic paradigms arise and are restructured
              will tell us a great deal about the role of cognition in managing the use of
              linguistic categories, such as tense and case. This study of morphological
              change will thus contribute to a better understanding of language change
              broadly. In addition, this study will contribute to morphological theory.


