Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Small-Angle X-Ray Scattering Instrument
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0215838

Award Number: 0215838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Shantz shantz@che2.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hung-Jue Sue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Abraham Clearfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andreas Holzenburg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1189,1415,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal seeks the acquisition of a state-of-the art small-angle X-ray
              scattering instrument. The configuration of this instrument, combining a
              rotating anode source with two independent cameras, has been carefully designed
              around a diverse user community whose interests include protein aggregation,
              polymer science, zeolite nucleation, DNA electrophoresis, and colloidal
              science. A rotating anode source was chosen due to its high beam intensity,
              facilitating analysis of samples that scatter weakly. The dual
              all-angle/wide-angle (SA/WA) camera is a robust unit ideally suited for a
              multi-user instrument. This camera employs a line source exposing a larger
              sample volume to the incident beam subsequently reducing the time needed for
              data acquisition. The dual SA/WA camera can be used to study Bragg diffraction
              for analyzing crystallinity in polymers and the Kratky optics will allow us to
              characterize domains up to approximately 1000 nm in size. The dedicated
              small-angle camera, though more specialized, gives us the capability of
              two-dimensional imaging for samples that scatter anisotropically (e.g.
              semicrystalline polymers) and a wide range of sample-to-detector distances
              (100-1000 mm), making it possible to observe a wide range of scattering angles
              on one camera. The instrument will be located in the Crystal and Molecular
              Structure Laboratory (CMSL) in the Chemistry Department and maintained by the
              Materials Characterization Facility (MCF). The MCF is supported by the Colleges
              of Science and Engineering and the Office of the Vice President for Research,
              and both the CMSL and MCF have a well-developed infrastructure for student
              training and instrument maintenance. The user community for this instrument is
              inherently multidisciplinary, including faculty from Chemical Engineering,
              Mechanical Engineering, Chemistry, Biology, Biochemistry and Biophysics, and
              Medical Biochemistry and Genetics. The common need of these investigators is to
              understand structural issues that cannot be probed with methods such as
              diffraction or spectroscopy. Specific problems that will be addressed with this
              instrument include:

1.  mechanisms of zeolite nucleation and the formation
              of other complex inorganic systems made in the          presence of organic
              molecules
2.  studies of core-shell particles and polymer-coated particles in
              concentrated systems
3.  aggregation behavior of proteins and synthetic
              biomaterials in solution
4.  in-vitro studies of biological membrane
              assemblies and macromolecules
5.  determination of pore structures in gels
              used for DNA electrophoresis
6.  processing-property relationships of
              amorphous and semi-crystalline polymers
7.  non-destructive analysis of metal
              particle formation in dendritic materials

This instrument will positively
              impact Texas A&M at several levels. It will be a focal point of several
              research programs and will give others a new tool for their current research.
              The proposed instrument would likely be one of the best laboratory SAXS
              instruments in the United States, so it will also enhance our ability to
              recruit leading faculty in the areas of polymeric and colloidal science.
              Finally, this instrument will positively impact education in two ways. Given
              the multi-user nature of this instrument it will be heavily utilized in student
              training of both graduates and undergraduates, with approximately 35 students
              initially performing research with the instrument. Second, this instrument will
              be integrated into a course one of us is developing (D. F. Shantz). As there is
              currently not a SAXS instrument on campus, this instrument will fill a large
              void in the infrastructure at Texas A&M, with research and education
              benefiting.

