Title       : IMR: Acquisition of Modern Gel Permeation Chromatography Instrumentation for the
               Butler Polymer Research Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0215994

Award Number: 0215994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140700             (Estimated)
Investigator: K. B. Wagener wagener@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Reynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randolph S. Duran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports the
              University of Florida with the acquisition of  of a gel permeation
              chromatography (GPC) instrument equipped with four detectors and high
              temperature capability to provide molecular weight information on a number of
              new polymers being developed.  The projects span the range of modeling
              conventional polyolefins, to conjugated and electroactive polymers with
              especially low oxidation potentials, to examining the structure of highly
              organized core-shell polymers.  The instrument is based on a Waters high
              temperature GPC, capable of making measurements at temperatures up to 150
              degrees C, and possessing an array of detection systems (UV/Vis, refractive
              index, light scattering, and differential viscometry) assembled from three
              vendors: Waters Corporation, Wyatt Technology Corporation, and Viscotek
              Corporation.  Several NSF initiated or funded research in polymers science will
              benefit from using the instrument. In addition 40-50 undergraduate students,
              graduate students (including two NSF Graduate Research Fellows) and postdocs
              present at any one time in the Butler Laboratory will attain training on this
              instrumentation. Researchers from other Departments in the Center for
              Macromolecular Science and Engineering (especially Materials Science) will use
              the facility. Further, Professor Duran leads an NSF/REU site with strong ties
              to France, and each of the faculty members directs REU students through
              this.
%%%
The research team that operates out of the Butler Polymer Research
              Laboratory at the University of Florida, will acquire instrumentation to
              measure the size (so called molecular weight) of the large polymeric molecules
              with which they work. The instrument is a gel permeation chromatography (GPC)
              instrument and will be fully equipped for modern research capability.  The
              projects span studies of conventional polyolefins (e.g. polyethylene), to
              conjugated and electrically conducting polymers, to examining the structure of
              polymers for colloids.  The instrument will be based on a Waters high
              temperature GPC possessing an array of detection systems assembled from three
              vendors: Waters Corporation, Wyatt Technology Corporation, and Viscotek
              Corporation.  NSF initiated or funded research that will benefit from using the
              proposed instrument includes projects to make new plastics, polymers for drug
              release, polymers to make all-organic displays, and polymers for biological and
              chemical sensors. In addition 40-50 undergraduate students, graduate students
              (including two NSF Graduate Research Fellows) and postdocs present at any one
              time in the Butler Laboratory who will recieve training on this
              instrumentation. Researchers from other Departments in the Center for
              Macromolecular Science and Engineering (especially Materials Science) will use
              the facility. Further, Professor Duran leads an NSF/REU site with strong ties
              to France, and each of the faculty members directs REU students through this.

