Title       : MRI-RUI: Acquisition of the C1 Confocal Microscopy System for Cellular Analysis
               in the Biological Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0215775

Award Number: 0215775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144058             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Kurt kurtr@lafayette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elaine R. Reynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shyamal K. Majumdar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lafayette College
	      High Street
	      Easton, PA  18042    215/250-5000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Robert A. Kurt at Lafayette College
              to purchase a Confocal Microscopy System. The confocal system is capable of
              three-color fluorescent imaging and three-dimensional cellular analysis. 
              Consequently, three different proteins can be analyzed with respect to each
              other and their location within a cell.  This is ideal for studying
              protein-protein or cell-cell interactions and to discern the potential function
              of recently identified proteins.  With the acquisition of this instrument many
              exciting projects can be carried out.  The Confocal Microscopy System will
              enable Lafayette faculty to modify and enhance courses to include training in
              sophisticated research techniques, expand the areas of research for both
              students and faculty, and finally contribute to the advancement of knowledge
              within the field of biological science by exploring molecular and cellular
              interactions as they occur within living cells.    

The research projects to
              be performed with this instrument will focus on a variety of biological
              sciences including cellular, molecular, developmental biology and immunology. 
              Some of the projects supported in this proposal include an examination of the
              molecular organization of G protein coupled receptors and associated molecules
              during T cell migration.  For this project proteins utilized by T cells for
              migration will be labeled so that protein-protein interactions can be
              investigated as the T cells respond to chemokines.  The chemokine receptor
              signaling cascade in T cells is poorly defined, thus this project should
              uncover some of the basic steps utilized for T-cell migration.  Another project
              that will be carried out with the microscope will be an examination of the
              cross-regulation between T cell and chemokine receptor signaling pathways. 
              This project will examine the interactions between proteins utilized by both
              the TCR and chemokine receptor signaling pathways in order to understand how
              these different pathways influence each other.  Neural development and
              communication in Drosophila melanogaster is another area of research and
              training that will be enhanced with the confocal microscopy system.  In
              particular the instrument will aid in the studies of bang-sensitive mutants. 
              One project will investigate the effects of these mutants on mitochondria and
              their function.  Another set of experiments is to examine the ability of third
              instar larvae of bang-sensitive mitochondria to maintain their electrochemical
              gradient.  

The broader impact of the proposal is that these projects will
              be carried out by undergraduate students and as a result facilitate the
              research, research training and education of students for careers in science. 
              Some of the research training activities in the Department of Biology at
              Lafayette College include Independent Study, Honors Thesis, the Excel Scholar
              Program, and research-oriented courses such as Electron Microscopy and Tissue
              Culture courses.  Thus, the Confocal Microscopy System will be utilized to
              further strengthen the curriculum and research in Biological Sciences at
              Lafayette College.  The Biology Department has a long history of encouraging
              student participation in research.  By graduation many majors have had at least
              two semesters of extensive research experience.  Often, this in depth exposure
              to research fuels a desire to pursue post-graduate study.  Additionally,
              several courses will be modified to include training in specimen preparation
              and analysis with confocal fluorescence microscopy.  Consequently, it is
              anticipated that there will be three faculty members and approximately fifty
              students each year that will use the instrument.

