Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for a Genomics Facility in Support of the URI
               Environmental Biotechnology Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0215393

Award Number: 0215393
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Nelson dnelson@uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terence Bradley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to the University of Rhode Island to acquire an
              automated DNA sequencer and supporting equipment.  The Environmental
              Biotechnology Initiative (EBI) at the University of Rhode Island was developed
              to promote biotechnology at the institution through research, teaching, and
              outreach.  Four central facilities are envisioned for the EBI - Imaging,
              Genomics and Proteomics, Transgenics, and Bioinformatics.  This grant award
              will establish the URI Genomics Facility by providing funds for the acquisition
              of a DNA sequencer and ancillary equipment dedicated for sample preparation. 
              Additionally, funds to support the hire of a Research Associate to manage and
              operate the facility are provided by this award and matching funds from the
              University of Rhode Island.  

The instrumentation and Research Associate
              will support the currently funded research activities of the three Principal
              Investigators (PIs) and eight other major users in five separate departments in
              three different colleges at the university. The funded research projects of the
              PIs include: studies of gene regulation in the causative agent of Lyme disease
              (Borrelia burgdorferi), studies of gene regulation in Vibrio anguillarum (a
              major bacterial pathogen of farmed salmon and other fish), determination of the
              bacterial species succession of Narragansett Bay, identification of the
              microbes that inhabit the deep ocean biosphere, determination of the regulation
              of the molecular mechanisms of osmoregulation in fish, identification of the
              microbes that inhabit the gastrointestinal tract of salmon, and population
              genetics of selected marine finfish (e.g., haddock and tautog).     The
              establishment of the Genomics Facility will allow user directed DNA sequencing
              with more rapid turnaround and lower costs then is presently available to
              URI-based investigators, who are forced to contract with other academic or
              commercial sequencing facilities.  It also is anticipated that numerous other
              investigators at URI will make use of the facility.

The ability to study
              life at the DNA level has fundamentally changed almost every aspect of research
              in the life sciences.  The high sample throughput afforded by automated DNA
              sequencers allows researchers to address questions concerning genetic diversity
              and gene regulation that were unapproachable only a few years ago.  The
              Genomics Facility also will play an integral role in training our students in
              state-of-the-art research methodologies and the art of scientific
              investigation.  The Research Associate will work with interested faculty to
              develop and refine laboratory exercises in molecular biology that include the
              theory and practice of the DNA sequencer purchased with these funds.  
              Additionally, it is anticipated that the acquisition of Genomics Facility will
              enhance the ability to attract new graduate students.  URI has actively engaged
              in the recruitment of students from under-represented groups for some years to
              enhance the number and quality of such students in our graduate programs in the
              biological sciences.  The availability of this core facility to support the
              research training of all students is expected to enhance recruitment and
              retention of students from under-represented groups.  The combination of
              improved research infrastructure and training opportunities will enable URI
              faculty to better compete for research funds, new faculty, and students. 

