Title       : MRI Instrumentation Development: Nanolithography Using Scanning Tunneling
               Microscope (STM) and Local Electrostatic Discharge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0215867

Award Number: 0215867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255540             (Estimated)
Investigator: Romel D. Gomez rdgomez@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award provides funds to develop
              an instrument to create structures on semiconductor, metallic and oxide
              surfaces at the nanometer length scales.  A research grade electrostatic
              discharge machine will be purchased and will be modified to enable
              substantially improved resolution.  A new vacuum nanolithography tool will be
              constructed, which utilizes the principle of proximal probe technique wherein
              the highly controlled electrostatic discharge between surface and tip can
              dissociate atoms on the target surface with a high degree of specificity. The
              equipment will be used to create semiconductor and magnetic devices with
              nanometer dimensions in order to exploit quantum mechanical behavior such as
              quantization of resistance and nano-contact ballistic magnetoresistance.
    
              This project will improve upon current manufacturing capability down to1 nm
              feature size and will allow relatively inexpensive fabrication of quantum
              devices.  It will be designed as a bolt-on addition to existing charged
              particle lithography tools such as focused ion beam milling machines as well as
              standard electron microscopes; and can be used by university researchers in
              various departments including chemical engineering, materials science, as well
              as chemistry and biochemistry. It will further strengthen the University of
              Maryland, College Park, in the field of nanostructures and can promote advances
              in nanomachining. The technique is straightforward and can be transferred
              readily to various universities and research laboratories.  The instrumentation
              can be converted for use to either add or remove material by a straightforward
              replacement of the fluid layer, and being vacuum-based, it is compatible with
              semiconductor manufacturing processes. Nanostructures could thus be made
              relatively inexpensively and could stimulate vigorous research and development
              of artificial nanostructures.
