Title       : Development of a Spatial-Experimental Laboratory for Research and Policy
               Analysis Related to Complex Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0215738

Award Number: 0215738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $847874             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elinor Ostrom ostrom@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tom P. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome R. Busemeyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Huckfeldt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal aims to develop a unique combination of state-of-the-art spatial,
              visualization, and experimental capabilities within a behavioral science
              research laboratory facility at Indiana University. The laboratory will be
              multi-purpose, with a focus on understanding complex systems at multiple
              temporal and geographic scales. It will contribute to both research and
              instruction. The laboratory will enable the development of new capabilities for
              spatially organized agent-based modeling, three-dimensional (3-D) visualization
              of social systems, multi-user 3-D virtual desktop worlds, as well as the
              implementation of behavioral experiments and GIS technologies in social science
              research. The research group proposing this set of development activities is
              multi-disciplinary with strong records of field and laboratory research in
              anthropology, economics, geography, information science, political science, and
              psychology. An important aspect of the proposed laboratory facility is to
              provide the infrastructure for fostering stronger linkages among the
              researchers involved in this proposal. It will create opportunities for
              enlarging the community of scholars and students at Indiana University
              interested in frontier social science that incorporates spatial attributes of
              decision environments important for understanding human and biological
              dimensions of social, political, and economic decision making. The laboratory
              will enable faculty and students to participate in the testing of current
              social science theories with computer-simulated, agent-based systems as well as
              the tools of laboratory decision-making experiments in controlled environments.
              Based on the research conducted in this laboratory, we hope to develop new
              theories of how complex individual interactions over space and time lead to
              emergent properties in complex social-ecological systems. 

The proposed
              laboratory will facilitate the productivity and breadth of several ongoing and
              future activities: (1) a recently funded biocomplexity project integrating
              agent-based modeling, laboratory experiments, and GIS technologies into the
              study of complex land-use decisions and emergent land-use patterns; (2)
              research on networks of political communication related to the accessibility of
              political attitudes, orientations, and judgments; (3) investigation of resource
              allocation decision making under risk and uncertainty; (4) multi-agent
              experiments in the laboratory, in the field, and at multiple sites; (5) the
              incorporation of GIS technologies into social science research integrating key
              incentive and outcome effects; (6) creation of artificial 3-D environments for
              experimental research and policy applications; (7) paleoanthropological
              research on human evolution; (8) international relations; and (9) education and
              outreach. 

