Title       : MRI/RUI: Acquisition of a Variable Temperature Ultra High Vacuum Scanning Probe
               Microscope for Undergraduate Materials Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0215899

Award Number: 0215899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277660             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Craig jcraig@bradley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul W. Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kelly R. Roos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin R. Kimberlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bradley University
	      1501 West Bradley Avenue
	      Peoria, IL  616250001    309/676-7611

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Major Research Instrumentation RUI grant supports the acquisition of an
              OMICRON Ultra High Vacuum (UHV) Variable Temperature Scanning Tunneling/Atomic
              Force Microscope (VT- STM/AFM) and surface analysis chamber. The VT-STM/AFM,
              which includes an integral single cell evaporator, and the analysis chamber
              will complement the current array of surface spectroscopic and diffraction
              probes available by adding the capability to directly image structures at the
              atomic/nano-scale in situ during formation. The MBE source will provide
              epitaxial growth capabilities for ultrathin film and nanostructure fabrication.
              Currently available UHV sample preparation instrumentation will be integrated
              into the acquired analysis chamber. Through an in situ transfer mechanism
              samples will be transferred between the STM/AFM and analysis chambers for
              optimum surface preparation, imaging, and characterization. The research
              program will uniquely impact undergraduate education in a very significant way
              through a highly effective undergraduate involvement in research. The
              acquisition of the VT- STM/AFM will make it possible for this program to become
              a nationally recognized model for undergraduate materials science
              education.

With this experimental capability several fundamental and applied
              research activities will be pursued: investigations involving fabrication and
              chemical characterization of thin nitride films for use as a gate insulator in
              ULSI transistors, correlation of conductance measurements of ultrathin films
              with atomic-scale morphology, atomistic studies of mechanisms of interlayer
              diffusion in homo- and heteroepitaxial systems, studies of thin semiconductor
              alloy film formation as a result of electron and photon driven processes, and
              investigations of the role of Nb on oxidation processes of TiAlNb alloys. Also,
              collaborations with industrial partners will be established to efficiently
              convert fundamental research results into practical technological applications
              and provide undergraduate students with excellent work related training in
              applied science. 


