Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Proposal: Prenominal Adjectives in Japanese
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0215746

Award Number: 0215746
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11907              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard K. Larson richard.larson@stonybrook.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Richard K. Larson, Ms. Hiroko Yamakido will collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation. Her research concerns dialect variation in
              Japanese, with focus on adjectival inflection. She will study the variants
              spoken in seven prefectures that extend from northern to southern Japan,
              including Hokkaido, Fukushima (or Niigata), Osaka, Kyoto, Hiroshima, Fukuoka,
              and Kagoshima. The project's core data will be gathered though oral interviews
              with native speakers, who will be consulted regarding the acceptability and
              range of meanings of example sentences and phrases involving adjectives. The
              adjectives include those showing the amibuity in English examples like "OLD
              friend" (which can mean 'aged friend' or 'long-time friend'), as well as
              adjectives found in contexts like resultatives ("Mary hammered the metal
              FLAT"), causatives ("Mary made John HAPPY"), adverbials ("Mary spoke
              QUICK-ly"), and so-called secondary predicate constructions ("Mary ate the fish
              RAW"). Ms. Yamakido will also consult published sources available only in the
              relevant locales and several Japanese dialectologists. The results of her
              fieldwork will bear on the nature of prenominal adjectives in Japanese: whether
              they are projected into attributive structures (like "blue house") or into
              relative clause structures (like "house that is blue").

This research is
              significant both for theories of generative syntax and semantics generally, and
              for Japanese dialectology in particular. It will not only advance understanding
              of Japanese grammar, and the relation between its morphological and syntactic
              forms; it will also demonstrate the rich diversity within a small sector of the
              grammar and the importance of cross-dialectal comparison.

