Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research:From babbling to linguistically-relevant
               articulatory gestures: Continuity and variability of speech motor organization
               in infants and young children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0215570

Award Number: 0215570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ludo Max ludo.max@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Ludo Max, Ms. Margaret Earnest will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. Her research includes three studies investigating
              the control and coordination of lip and jaw movements in infants and children
              from 6 to 37 months of age. This work builds on increasing evidence that the
              transition from babbling to meaningful speech is a crucial stage during which
              motor constraints may determine important aspects of speech sound acquisition.
              One major question related to this transition is whether it reflects a
              maturation that is gradual and continuous or whether early speech requires an
              extensive reorganization of the previously acquired motor skills. Therefore,
              two of Ms. Earnest's studies will investigate developmental trends in (a) the
              respective contribution of individual articulators (lips and jaw) to bilabial
              closing and opening gestures, and (b) the typically asymmetric nature of these
              articulatory movements during speech production. Her third study will examine
              the potential neuromotor basis for infants' selection of the jaw as the primary
              articulator in babbling and early speech production. Each of these three
              questions will be addressed by recording movements of the lips and jaw with a
              camera-based movement tracking system and comparing a variety of kinematic
              parameters across different age groups.

This research on the early
              development of orofacial control for babbling and speech is significant for
              several reasons. First, it will lead to new insights into the neuromotor
              processes underlying speech development in children. Second, an enhanced
              understanding of the different stages of speech motor development may be
              critical for explaining commonly observed trends in the sequence of speech
              sound acquisition during babbling and early speech. Third, given this potential
              influence on the order of speech sound acquisition, the constraints imposed by
              developing speech motor abilities may affect other aspects of language
              development.

