Title       : Floods and Human Response: Implications for Geomorphic Adjustment and Fish
               Habitat in the Interior Pacific Northwest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0215291

Award Number: 0215291
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196801             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia F. McDowell pmcd@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. Andrew Marcus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Large floods on alluvial rivers produce geomorphic changes that create and renew
              fish habitat and help regenerate riparian vegetation.  Floods renew spawning
              gravels, scour and deepen pools, and create side channels and other off-channel
              features.  In addition, cottonwoods and other streamside trees important to
              stream ecology depend on floods for regeneration.  All of these features are
              created during moderate to large flood events.  Over a period of years after
              the flood event they infill, stabilize, or otherwise evolve to a less favorable
              condition.  The goal of this research project is to use evidence from historic
              large floods to understand the spatial pattern and controls of these geomorphic
              changes and to determine whether human response to historic floods has limited
              the ability of rivers to regenerate fish habitat.  Many Columbia River
              tributaries experienced a large flood (a flood the recurs on average once every
              50 years or longer) in 1948 or 1965 when flood protection structures (levees,
              bank stabilization and channelization) were less extensive.  They also
              experienced another large flood in the 1996 when more flood protection
              structures were in place.  Using aerial photos, documentary evidence, and
              government agency records, spatial patterns of geomorphic change will be
              analyzed on long continuous river reaches that represent a range of variation
              in geomorphic controls and flood protection.  Geographic information
              system-based analyses of pre-flood and post-flood conditions will be used to
              create change maps.  Geomorphic change is expected to vary spatially in
              relation to controls such as valley width, flood power, sediment inputs, inputs
              of large woody debris.  Geomorphic change during the 1996 flood will be
              examined to determine whether and where habitat creation was reduced by flood
              protection structures.  In addition, historic development of flood protection
              structures will be reconstructed to see whether or not flood protection
              structures were built where the greatest flood impacts occurred.  If flood
              protection structures correspond to sites with the highest potential for
              geomorphic change, the ability of a river to regenerate fish habitat may be
              severely limited.

This project will advance understanding of the spatial
              controls of flood impacts and understanding of human response to flood damage. 
              The project will also contribute to development of ecologically sensitive flood
              protection policies.  The conflict between flood protection and restoration of
              aquatic habitat for endangered fish has become acute in the study region.  In
              1996 a large and damaging flood occurred, and in 1997 more than 20 stocks of
              salmon in the Columbia River were listed as threatened or endangered under the
              Endangered Species Act (ESA).  Existing flood protection policies are not
              compatible with the ESA and are currently being revised.  Scientific findings
              like those that will result from this project will inform the debate and
              decision making by many local authorities throughout the region as they seek to
              adopt and implement new "fish-friendly" policies.  This project will develop
              ways to identify geomorphic "hotspots" for fish habitat and evaluate whether or
              not past human response to floods have limited fish habitat.  Results of the
              project will be disseminated through presentations at regional river management
              workshops and conferences, web pages, and publication in refereed scientific
              journals.

