Title       : MRI/RUI Proposal for Instrumentation of Environmental Research Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0215809

Award Number: 0215809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366364             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Ruggles rugglesr@lafayette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary J. Roth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur D. Kney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Brandes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Javad Tavakoli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lafayette College
	      High Street
	      Easton, PA  18042    215/250-5000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Through the Major Research Instrumentation Program, 18 instruments will be
              purchased to provide an instrumentation framework for an integrated
              environmental research program at Lafayette College.  The acquisition of these
              instruments, when coupled with the existing equipment and the recently
              initiated renovation of the laboratory space within the department, will
              produce a laboratory environment in which faculty can conduct high quality
              research related to the environment and provide advanced undergraduate students
              the opportunity to explore the underlying scientific and technical principals
              for a wide range of environmental measurement techniques.  

The project
              provides the advanced instrumentation required to adequately address the
              research needs of the sophisticated environmental problems facing the world
              today and provides training opportunities to undergraduates in research related
              to the environment.  Faculty members will use the proposed equipment to expand
              their current environmental research programs of which most are conducted with
              undergraduates.  In addition, the proposed equipment would benefit up to 21
              courses offered by 7 faculty at Lafayette College.  Approximately 200
              undergraduate students per year are enrolled in these courses and will use the
              equipment to develop valuable laboratory and research skills.  Typically 12 to
              18 of these students will carry these skills into Independent Study courses,
              Thesis projects or sponsored research with faculty during their junior or
              senior years.  A majority of these research students will continue their
              research in graduate programs. 

The intellectual merits of this project are
              threefold: the enhancement of the research opportunities for both faculty and
              advanced undergraduate students; the improvement of student learning; and
              development of new pedagogical methods of laboratory instruction.  

The
              broader impacts of this project include the development of outreach programs
              directed primarily towards underrepresented groups encouraging participants to
              explore environmental studies, the dissemination of pedagogical developments
              through conference presentations and journal articles, the development of
              multi- and interdisciplinary courses within the environmental programs offered
              institution wide and the training of undergraduate researchers who will carry
              their experience on to various industries or graduate programs. 

