Title       : Acquisition of a Small Molecule X-Ray Facility for the Department of Chemistry
               at Johns Hopkins University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0215963

Award Number: 0215963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246285             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. Karlin karlin@jhuvms.hcf.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald J. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Goldberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Santosh K. Mandal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9198,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
              Department of Chemistry at Johns Hopkins University  will acquire a X-ray
              diffractometer with CCD detector and low temperature capabilities for small
              molecule diffractometry. This equipment will enhance research in a number of
              areas including the following: a) bioinorganic modeling of metalloenzyme active
              sites; b) environmental inorganic chemistry and the development of copper
              mediated dehalogenation; c) synthesis, characterization and reactivity of
              aza-substituted corrole macrocycles; d) new metal-carbonyl diimine compounds of
              photochemical interest; e) photoinduced electron, energy, and atom transfer
              processes; and f) X-ray studies of metal-organic complexes for asymmetric
              catalysis.  Faculty members from Morgan State University, Loyola College,
              Towson University, the University of Maryland in Baltimore County, the US Naval
              Academy and Gettysburg College will also have access to this equipment. 
              

The X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the
              full three dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and
              angles, and it provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of
              the molecule relative to the neighboring molecules.  These studies will have an
              impact in a number of areas, including environmental chemistry, preparation of
              more efficient catalysts, and biochemistry.  
