Title       : Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Use in Research, Teaching, and
               Research Training at Earlham College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0215972

Award Number: 0215972
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337593             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark G. Stocksdale stockma@earlham.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Deibel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nathan A. Trueblood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Earlham College
	      National Road West
	      Richmond, IN  47374    317/962-6561

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
              Department of Chemistry at Earlham College  will acquire a 400 MHz NMR
              Spectrometer. This equipment will enable researchers to carry out studies on a)
              the synthetic applications of ring expansions and contractions of a series of
              cyclic beta-hydroxy tertiary amines under Mitsunobu and modified Mitsunobu
              conditions; b) the synthesis of phytosiderophores analogues, natural compounds
              that may facilitate active transfer of molecules into the roots of grasses; c)
              the effects of oxidative damage on proteins; and d) the effects of an NAD+
              precursor on high energy phosphate metabolism and glycolysis in hearts from
              diabetic rats.   

Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is the most
              powerful tool available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of
              molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific
              arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of
              interactions between molecules in solution.  Access to state-of-the-art NMR
              spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
              The results from these NMR studies will have an impact in a number of areas, in
              particular molecular biology .

