Title       : National Consortium on Violence Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0215551

Award Number: 0215551
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2992074            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred Blumstein ab0q@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A central goal of the National Consortium on Violence Research's (NCOVR)
              capacity-building activities is to increase the number of new researchers
              trained in cross-disciplinary violence research. The objective is that by
              training young scholars, NCOVR can impact the field of violence research. 
              NCOVR has three strategies for attaining this goal. The first is to increase
              the number of NCOVR fellowships that are awarded.  The second is to establish
              affiliations with selected minority-serving institutions to increase the pool
              of underrepresented students introduced to violence research.  The third is to
              conduct special outreach to minority undergraduates to encourage their choice
              of violence research as a career.  NCOVR will increase the number and
              discipline diversity of researchers participating in the NCOVR experience. They
              recruit senior researchers from new disciplines and establish affiliations with
              other extant research teams. They sponsor a number of intellectually compelling
              substantive and methodological workshops each year designed to appeal to senior
              researchers by promoting intellectual scientific exchange and research that
              cuts across disciplines. Some workshops bring together diverse perspectives on
              important research questions or address a difficult methodological question.
              Others develop proposals for outside funding, using small grants for pilot
              projects needed to strengthen the proposals. Some synthesize research findings
              in areas where there are already extensive significant findings. The objective
              of these workshops is to foster both new and expanded collaborations. These
              collaborations may lead to the preparation of larger proposals for outside
              funding that can provide opportunities for young researchers to participate in
              multidisciplinary research. 
