Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Probe Microscope for Research and Education in
               Surface Science and Nanomaterials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0215964

Award Number: 0215964
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Fuierer fuierer@nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jill Buckley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Bowman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      801 Leroy Place
	      Socorro, NM  878014796    505/835-5690

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award is for acquisition of a new state-of-the-art scanning probe
              microscope (SPM) for the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology research
              community. The instrument is an atomic force microscope (AFM) that can be
              modified to operate in a variety of scanning modes, including phase-imaging
              microscopy, electric force microscopy, magnetic force microscopy (MFM) and
              scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). The principal investigators have
              successfully used AFM imaging to support their research on ceramic film
              fabrication and fluid interactions with geologic materials. Other researchers
              will use the AFM for characterizing a variety of materials, including metal
              surfaces, nanocomposites, self-assembled monolayers, carbon nanotubes,
              buckyballs, and DNA. The projects described herein involve some 14 faculty,
              several post-doctoral researchers, and many graduate students, from seven
              different academic departments at NMT. The microscope will enhance graduate
              student training and undergraduate teaching through experience with one of the
              best surface characterization tools available. 
%%%
AFM detects surface
              topography by monitoring molecular force interactions between a probe tip and
              the sample. STM detects surface topography by monitoring the tunneling current
              between an electrically conductive probe and the sample. SPM offers resolution
              of surface features on the order of a few nanometers, the highest of any
              imaging technique. An additional important advantage of SPM over other
              techniques is the ability to image samples in air or under liquids without
              extensive preparation. Environmental and biological samples may be examined
              under near-natural conditions. Instruction in SPM techniques will be integrated
              directly into existing graduate and undergraduate courses and into a new short
              course. Budgeting for an instrument manager/trainer will ensure instrumentation
              access for those with little or no prior experience with SPM techniques. 


