Title       : MRI/RUI: Acquisition of DNA Sequencing and Genotyping Instrumentation for
               Research and Undergraduate Training at Middlebury College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0215782

Award Number: 0215782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106359             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew H. Dick dick@middlebury.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middlebury College
	      Old Chapel Building
	      Middlebury, VT  05753    802/388-3711

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Acquisition of DNA Sequencing and Genotyping Instrumentation for 
Research and
              Undergraduate Training at Middlebury College

Matthew H. Dick,
              PI

Abstract

	A grant has been awarded to Middlebury College under the
              direction of Dr. Dick to establish a DNA sequencing and genotyping facility at
              the college through acquisition of relevant instrumentation. DNA sequencing is
              used to determine the sequence of 'letters' in DNA, and is best known through
              its application in the Human Genome Project. DNA genotyping allows unambiguous
              identification of genetically different individuals, and well-known
              applications include the DNA fingerprinting used in forensic work, as well as
              determination of paternity. These tools are now fundamental to all disciplines
              of biology. DNA sequences are used, for example, in studies ranging from
              identifying genes implicated in human diseases, to understanding the spread of
              HIV, to reconstructing the history of life on earth. The DNA
              sequencing/genotyping facility at Middlebury College will enhance research by
              the faculty, foster new research directions, and help attract top faculty and
              students to the college. Furthermore, it will spark undergraduate interest and
              augment training in molecular biology and its application across biological
              disciplines.
	Dr. Dick and three other faculty in biology, who will be
              involved in the project as senior personnel, will make use of the
              sequencing/genotyping instrumentation to address diverse research problems. Dr.
              Dick will sequence DNA from a widespread group of marine organisms called
              bryozoans in order to reconstruct their evolutionary relationships, which are
              poorly understood. Dr. Helen Young will use genotyping to examine the effects
              of bird versus insect pollinators on the exchange of genetic material among
              flowering plant populations. Dr. Vickie Backus will use genotyping to
              understand the diverse life history strategies of ants in New England forests.
              Dr. Joshua Kavaler will sequence DNA in a study of gene regulation in fruit fly
              sense organ development. In addition, several faculty will collaborate to
              design and implement a new undergraduate training course, Molecular Methods in
              Ecology and Evolution. This course will provide students in ecology and
              evolution the knowledge they need to utilize molecular techniques in their
              research. It will also give students in molecular genetics training they do not
              encounter in traditional courses. The course will thus foster communication
              among students of diverse biological disciplines.
	The research projects to
              which the instrumentation will initially be applied address basic problems in
              biology which, however, have broad significance. Bryozoans, for example, are
              important as indicators of environmental quality, are a source of one class of
              potent anti-cancer drugs, and are exceptionally useful for evolutionary studies
              because of their excellent fossil record. Studies of pollination are relevant
              to conservation, because they address the impact of introduced insect
              pollinators such as the honeybee on native plant populations. Studies on forest
              ants address fundamental problems in evolutionary theory. Cell signaling during
              fruit fly development makes use of molecular pathways identical to those in
              humans; indeed, much of what we know of human gene function has derived from
              such studies. Finally, the broadest and most important use of the
              instrumentation will be to spark interest in biology in the next generation of
              physicians and researchers, and train them in current techniques. 

