Title       : EITM Summer Training Institute(Political Science Program: EITM Competition IIIa)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2002   
File        : a0215621

Award Number: 0215621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $690130             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Alt jalt@latte.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry E. Brady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Aldrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Franzese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               
The scientific study of politics requires empirical testing of theoretical
              models, but theories are often produced without adequate testing and empirical
              work too frequently uses sketchy and oversimplified theory. Gaps have appeared
              between theory and empirical method, and these gaps impair scientific progress.
              To ameliorate this scholars need to train a new generation of scholars who can
              better link theory and empirical work. The Principal Investigators will to
              foster this intellectual development by offering younger scholars an
              opportunity to learn by seeing and doing in conjunction with older scholars who
              have been leaders in advancing theory and empirical work, focusing on
              substantive areas where appreciable research integrating theory and methods
              already exists. 
A successful Empirical Implications of Theoretical Models
              (EITM) summer program, given the current relative infancy of this approach to
              social science, must as much develop as disseminate substance. Thus the key
              regarding training is that each institute include significant teaching and
              research components, providing students a high degree of individualized
              interaction with a far wider and deeper array of EITM mentors than are
              available at any individual institution. The Principal Investigators have
              activities transcending passive receipt of lecture material, involving also
              significant opportunities to advance participants' own research by employing
              their newly gained knowledge about the integration of theory and method. 
The
              investigators foster integrated training by providing, in each of the four
              years from 2002-2005, in four locations (respectively Harvard, Michigan, Duke,
              and UC-Berkeley), a four-week 
summer program. Each of these institutes 
              accommodates up to 25 advanced graduate students and junior faculty. The
              program is selective and admission is based significantly on the quality and
              potential of research presented. A team of up to 15 research faculty conducts
              each institute in a framework detailed below. 
The investigators take a broad
              view of the theoretical models and empirical methods used to evaluate and test
              implications. Formal models on which instruction will build include game
              theory, 
differential equation dynamic models, and simple decision theory and
              more complicated behavioral decision-making models. The empirical toolkit
              should cover not only statistical inference but also focused analytically-based
              case studies, and experimental methods. Computational models have both
              theoretical and empirical relevance in the program. Six areas are outlined that
              have sufficiently matured in combining micro-oriented, institutionally rich
              theory with rigorous structural estimation to offer fruitful possibilities for
              integrated instruction. The six areas, with examples of integrated research and
              teaching outlines, cover spatial models, institutional analysis, macropolitical
              economy, bargaining and coalitions, international security, and international
              political economy. The researchers  include three such areas each year, and
              guarantee that there will be at least one repeat for cumulation and development
              and at least one new module each year. 
Using multiple hosts capitalizes on
              diverse, regionally available deep pools of talent unavailable in any single
              location. It offers regional balance in accessibility and fosters outreach to
              other departments in several locales. The four have complementary strengths in
              computational models, experimentation, and macro- and international political
              economy. 


