Title       : SBIR Phase I: A New Scale-Up Technology for Industrial Production of High
               Quality Semiconductor Nanocrystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0215254

Award Number: 0215254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99746              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yongqiang A. Wang awang@nn-labs.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NanoMF
	      3468. W. Yale St.
	      Fayetteville, AR  72704    479/871-0707

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project intends to
              develop a new technology for the industrial production of high quality
              semiconductor nanocrystals.  Semiconductor nanocrystals are nanometer sized
              fragments of the corresponding bulk crystals, which have shown great potential
              for a variety of electronic and optoelectronic applications.  At present, all
              of those commercial applications rely on the availability of high quality
              semiconductor nanocrystals on a large scale with an affordable price.  The new
              design maximizes the power of the existing batch synthetic schemes developed in
              academic institutions, although it possesses a continuous production nature. In
              this way, the quality and the quantity of the resulting nanocrystals are both
              guaranteed and the optimization of the production is minimized. The proposed
              technology should be extendable to the industrial production of other types of
              colloidal nanocrystals as long as the related batch synthesis is
              available.

The commercial value of colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals in
              the field of electronic and optoelectronic applications lies on large area
              display, portable electronic devices, imprinting of integrated circuits, solar
              cells, etc. A multi-billion dollar market for the production of those
              electronic devices is in rapid development. For all of those devices, colloidal
              nanocrystals with an affordable price play a vital role, and will have a
              significant share of the market. It can be predicted that the success of any of
              those active commercial developments will open an economically significant
              market for the production of high quality semiconductor nanocrystals. It is
              also true that the existence of a commercial production technology with an
              affordable price will promote all of those commercial efforts on electronic and
              optoelectronic applications of nanocrystals.
