Title       : Acquisition of ESEM for Soil Liquefaction Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0215868

Award Number: 0215868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farshad Amini famini@jsums.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson State University
	      1400 J R LYNCH ST.
	      Jackson, MS  39217    601/921-21

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1057,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Research equipment will be provided for new experimental research in the area of
              particulate mechanics.  With the invention of the environmental scanning
              electron microscope (ESEM), it will be possible for the first time to view
              uncoated wet samples in their natural states, which will give a clearer insight
              into the phenomenon than has not been available previously. The newly
              manufactured ESEM will be used to perform advanced research on microstructure
              features of liquefaction of layered soils. The particulate materials to be
              considered are composed of sand, silt, gravel, and water. The long-term goal of
              this research is to provide fundamental understanding of the behavior of
              stratified silt-sand-gravel composites under seismic liquefaction conditions at
              both macroscopic and microscopic levels. The cyclic behavior of
              sand-silt-gravel composites is presently poorly understood, yet these materials
              are commonly found in alluvial deposits and hydraulic fill, which have a
              history of liquefaction during earthquakes.

The research to be accomplished
              with this equipment will not only provide a fundamental advancement of modeling
              of these stratified soils, but also will provide insight when dealing with high
              hazard civil systems such as large dams and other structures.  If we could
              sharpen our understanding of these materials, we would greatly benefit during
              earthquake hazard mitigation process.  This equipment will significantly
              improve the research capability of the Department of Civil Engineering at
              Jackson State University (a minority, and non-Ph.D. granting institution based
              on the NSF's definition) in Mississippi.  The ESEM, having wide range
              applications, will also be used in the scanning microscopy of environmental and
              biological systems. In addition, based on agreements with other organizations,
              the equipment will be available for their use.  The wide range of student
              activities in this project and the student exposure to the experiments will
              significantly enhance the representation of underrepresented minorities in
              science and engineering disciplines.

The proposed program, by modern
              integration of research into education, provides research opportunities for
              students and thus enhances the existing research integration programs.  A
              rigorous management, maintenance, and evaluation and assessment plan is
              implemented to monitor project development and outcomes, and to ensure the
              successful implementation of the project activities. The project activities and
              results will be disseminated broadly to enhance scientific and technological
              understanding.  The technology transfer, outreach programs and procedures will
              include the continuation of the existing collaboration with national research
              laboratories such as the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Engineering, Research,
              and Development Center (ERDC) Waterways Experiment Station (WES), publication
              of papers in refereed journals, presentations at the national or international
              conferences, undergraduate research presentations at the annual college
              research seminar, laboratory demonstration, pre-college outreach program, and
              the dissemination of the project activities through the university web site.
              

It is expected that this instrumentation acquisition project, by
              substantially improving the research and training infrastructure, and by making
              it available to wide range of programs, applications, and students, will have a
              very positive long-term impact on large numbers of underrepresented
              students.


