Title       : Acquisition of a FEI Quanta 400 Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope with
               Oxford E400 EDS in Support of Research and Training in the Life and Physical
               Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0215946

Award Number: 0215946
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Beneski jbeneski@wcupa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia G. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : West Chester U of Pennsylv
	      College Ave & High Street
	      West Chester, PA  19383    215/436-1000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

 
A grant has been awarded to Dr. John T. Beneski at West Chester
              University to purchase an Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope with an
              EDS system. The addition of this equipment to West Chester University will
              significantly increase the research opportunities for our faculty and students
              (particularly in the sciences), enhance our ability to attract new students
              from the widest diversity of backgrounds, enhance our ability to train students
              in state-of-the-art marketable skills, and provide new opportunities for our
              faculty and students to collaborate with scientists from the local high-tech
              corridor of biotechnology-related industries.
The new electron microscope will
              be used extensively by faculty and students in the Departments of Biology,
              Geology & Astronomy, and Chemistry to investigate a wide variety of problems
              including: (1) a taxonomic investigation of bryophytes; (2) the formation,
              structure, composition, and physiology of urine spheres in uricotelic
              vertebrates; (3) the examination of various halophilic bacteria isolated from
              ancient (250 mya and older) surface sterilized salt crystals; and (4) the
              dynamics of Mid-Cretaceous ocean circulation. Dr. Beneski will provide
              additional opportunities for students by actively promoting independent student
              research projects and internships. In addition to research and training, the
              new SEM/EDS will be used as a recruitment tool for attracting new science
              majors from both traditional and non-traditional backgrounds. To accomplish
              this, Dr. Beneski will expand the hands-on demonstrations and tours that
              showcase the imaging technologies available in the Center for Advanced
              Scientific Imaging; these demonstrations and tours are presented to the
              potential students that regularly visit the University as part of existing
              programs targeting area high schools, transfer students, and underserved
              groups.
West Chester University's continued growth in providing
              state-of-the-art imaging technologies and resources not only serves the
              immediate and future needs of our faculty and students in the sciences, it also
              mirrors a growing emphasis on the sciences and technology by the State of
              Pennsylvania and PA State System of Higher Education. Both of these
              institutions expect West Chester University to recruit and train more students
              in the sciences and technology. The acquisition of the requested equipment is a
              critical step in the continued development of Center for Advanced Scientific
              Imaging as a key resource for research and research training at West Chester
              University. 

