Title       : SBIR Phase I: Scanning Magnetic Microscropy for Real-time Electromigration
               Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0215038

Award Number: 0215038
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benaiah D. Schrag schrag@micromagnetics.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Micro Magnetics
	      151 Martine Street
	      Fall River, MA  02723    508/910-9842

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is designed to
              demonstrate the feasibility of developing a magnetic microscopy technique for
              real-time imaging of electrical current densities with sub-micron resolution
              for the analysis of electromigration (EM) processes.  EM failure remains one of
              the most challenging problems facing the semiconductor industry. The microscopy
              technique uses specially designed magnetic sensors called magnetic tunneling
              junctions. By non-invasively measuring and analyzing the magnetic fields
              generated by current-carrying elements, one can image EM processes in
              real-time, with high sensitivity and resolution under ambient conditions. The 
              Phase I research will focus on two critical issues for the commercial viability
              of this technique: 1) the design and fabrication of sensors with low noise and
              high-temperature tolerance for real-time operation; 2) optimization of
              electronics and algorithms for application to multi-level and deep sub-micron
              ICs. 

EM-induced failure analysis remains one of the most active fields of
              study in the semiconductor industry. It is important to any chip manufacturer
              that it be able to characterize EM in real-time and on-site. The research
              results will have numerous potential applications in electronics-related fields
              including semi conductor integrated circuits and data storage.
