Title       : Short-Term Ssynaptic Plasticity Contributing to Learning: Roles of Neuronal
               Activity, Protein Kinases and Basal Synaptic Transmission
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0215647

Award Number: 0215647
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315675             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc Klein kleinm@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1191,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Learning involves changes in the chemistry, function and structure of neurons in
              the brain.  In order to study these changes, it is first necessary to identify
              the neurons that mediate the learned behavior and to determine the steps at
              which communication between these neurons is modified.  The next stage in
              studying learning involves pinpointing exactly which molecules undergo
              alteration, and what part these molecules play in the overall functioning of
              the neurons.  In this project a well-defined reflex behavior will be utilized
              in order to investigate how learning modifies neuronal signaling.
Habituation
              and sensitization of defensive reflexes are two simple forms of learning that
              have been studied extensively in the marine mollusc Aplysia, and the insights
              gained have proven to be generally applicable to learning in higher animals as
              well.  Habituation of the reflex results from repeated activation of the
              sensory neurons, and sensitization is largely caused by the action of the
              neurotransmitter serotonin.  The principal investigator will examine which
              steps in the signaling process are altered by sensory neuron activity and by
              two endogenous enzymes that are activated by serotonin.  Prior work in the his
              laboratory suggests that the two enzymes act at different steps in the
              signaling process, and that different sets of neurons may preferentially make
              use of one or the other of the enzymes.  Experiments will be done by
              intracellular recording from individual sensory and motor neurons and
              application of reagents that affect the activity of these enzymes.
This work
              will contribute to the basic understanding of how the brain learns, and as such
              may have implications for education.  For example, the principal investigator
              has found that the two enzymes affect signaling differently depending on how
              much neuronal activity precedes the application of serotonin, suggesting that
              different learning strategies might be appropriate in different
              circumstances.

