Title       : MRI: Development of a Matrix Channel Measurement System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0215990

Award Number: 0215990
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249931             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Ellingson ellingson@ieee.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Inder J. Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

A matrix channel is the set of NT NR impulse responses (subchannels)
              that completely characterize the propagation between NT > I transmit antennas
              and NR > I receive antennas. The Ohio State University ElectroScience
              Laboratory (ESL) will develop a matrix channel measurement system (MCMS),
              consisting of a mobile multichannel transmitter (MCT) and a portable
              multichannel receiver (MCR) capable of any form of modulation with bandwidth up
              to 40 MHz at any frequency between 250 MHz and 6 GHz. The MCT will consist of 4
              independent, coherent channels. Each transmit channel will consist of an
              arbitrary waveform generator and an upconverter. The MCR will consist of 16
              channels, with each channel consisting of a downconverter/digitizer, 75 ms
              capture at 40 MHz bandwidth (proportionally longer for smaller bandwidths),
              on-the-fly data processing, and long-term storage of results. Both the MCT and
              MCR will be battery-powered and built into transit cases suitable for
              two-person carry to allow measurements anywhere, including indoors, outdoors,
              and from vehicles.

The MCMS will be employed in continuing ESL research
              programs including: (1) Measurements of capacity in matrix channels, (2)
              Development and evaluation of open loop forward link array processing
              techniques for frequency division duplex (FDD) systems, (3) Refinement of
              angle-of-arrival (AOA) estimation techniques for beamforming and mobile radio
              geolocation, and (4) Evaluation of interference mitigation techniques for GPS
              receivers. In each case, the superior tuning range, bandwidth, capture time,
              and portability of the MCMS will greatly enhance the quality of data relative
              to that obtained from previous systems developed by ESL and others. For
              example, in topic 1, the MCMS will be used to obtain improved and more thorough
              measurements of matrix channels to support development of the next generation
              of communications technologies, such as BLAST, that exploit antenna arrays to
              dramatically increase spectral efficiency. Of particular interest is learning
              under what conditions matrix channel systems significantly outperform vector
              (NT = 1) channel methods, and how to design antenna arrays (element geometry
              and polarization) to optimize this performance. The MCMS will possess
              unprecedented flexibility by virtue of its modular, software-defined
              architecture, and thus will be of great value for other research efforts as
              well.

Despite the urgent need, no system with comparable features exists
              commercially, nor can such a system be assembled from off-the-shelf equipment
              at a reasonable cost. Instead, the project team will design the MCMS from the
              bottom up, bringing to bear its extensive previous experience in developing
              similar systems. To ensure the success of this project, ESL will partner with
              Aeroflex Lintek - a world-renowned developer of custom RF test equipment - to
              codevelop the MCMS. In this partnership, ESL will be responsible for design
              concept, requirements, proof-of-concept, and prototyping of hardware and
              software. Aeroflex Lintek will participate in the design effort and will be
              responsible for systems engineering and development of the final system.
              Aeroflex Lintek will perform this work for a small fraction of it's anticipated
              costs in return for the opportunity to develop, produce, and market a new
              generation RE test equipment based on technology developed from this project.

