Title       : MRI/RUI: Acquisition of Controlled Environment Growth Chambers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0215880

Award Number: 0215880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry G. Chmielewski   (Principal Investigator current)
              John V. Constable  (Principal Investigator former)
              Dean M. DeNicola  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Slippery Rock U of PA
	      1 Morrow Way
	      Slippery Rock, PA  16057    724/738-4831

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. John V.H. Constable, Jerry G. Chmielewski, and
              Dean M. DeNicola at Slippery Rock University to purchase four controlled
              environment plant growth chambers.  The requested chambers include control over
              temperature and illumination and will be configured as described below to
              maximize utility for all users.  The configuration of the first pair of
              chambers includes a high light output option that provides illumination to
              approximately three-fourths of full sun level, control over humidity through
              linked humidification and dehumidification systems, and the control of CO2
              concentration using CO2 injection and an integrated infrared gas analyzer.  The
              configuration of the second pair of chambers are identical to those above, but
              lack the high light output option and control over CO2.  Acquisition of these
              chambers will expand the future research efforts of John V.H. Constable; Jerry
              G. Chmielewski; and Dean M. DeNicola in the Department of Biology.  The growth
              chambers will also expand Slippery Rock University's primary mission of
              excellence in undergraduate education in the classroom, the laboratory and
              independent faculty-supervised student research.  
	The chambers will provide
              the capability for a diverse array of projects to be studied according to the
              primary research interests of the investigators. The goals of all proposed
              studies are to enhance our understanding of mechanistic relationships in
              biological systems.  Dr. Constable's studies address the mechanistic
              relationship between nitrate and carbon assimilation at elevated CO2 that will
              enhance our predictive ability on the long-term growth response of vegetation
              to elevated CO2.  Dr. Chmielewski's studies develop the understanding of
              evolutionary trends in reproduction between weedy and non-weedy aster species.
              Dr. DeNicola's investigations seek to build a predictive model of benthic algal
              succession based on growth form and potential colonizing taxa; and (ii) the
              determination of the effects of Acid Mine Drainage (AMD) on benthic algal
              community structure and primary production in order to improve remediation
              efforts in AMD impacted streams.

