Title       : Instrument Development for Imaging and Manipulation of Single Biomolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0215869

Award Number: 0215869
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395889             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Selvin selvin@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Taekjip Ha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, under
              the direction of Drs. Paul Selvin and Taekjip Ha to develop novel single
              molecule microscopes that combine the ability to both watch and manipulate
              individual biomolecules under conditions that simulate the native environment
              in a cell.  The molecules are tagged with a fluorescent dye or dyes that emit
              light after excitation. Information about the position and/or shape of the
              molecule can be gathered by monitoring this fluorescence. At the same time, the
              molecules are put under a variety of environmentally realistic stresses -
              including mechanical forces and torques, electrical and chemical forces, and
              temperature changes. How the molecules react to these stresses can then be
              monitored. 
Specifically, Selvin and Ha propose to build two microscope
              stations. One will examine one molecule at a time with very high spatial and
              temporal resolution. This uses what is called confocal optics, where a single
              molecule is interrogated with an intense, tightly focussed laser beam, while
              being manipulated. The other microscope will look at many individual molecules
              simultaneously, by placing the molecules in an array and interrogating them in
              parallel with more diffusely focused light. This method can acquire statistical
              data much more rapidly. Such pParallel detection is particularly important for
              monitoring irreversible reactions. High-resolution imaging will also be
              developed on this microscope station. 
These microscopes will be used to
              examine a variety of specific biological systems. One is a class of proteins
              called molecular motors. These biomolecules uses the chemical energy of small
              energy-rich molecules (such as adenosine triphosphate, ATP) and convert it into
              mechanical (or other forms) of energy. Membrane proteins are another class of
              biomolecules central to life yet in many cases poorly understood. Selvin and Ha
              will study how several classes of ion channels - membrane proteins that enable
              the cell to control its salt (ion) composition - open and close in response to
              small molecules (ligand) and transmembrane voltage. Folding reactions of
              proteins, DNA, and RNA are also essential to life. These will be studied by
              inducing folding via rapid changes in temperature or chemical
              concentrations.
Single molecule studies have revolutionized our understanding
              of how biomolecules work. The ability to watch one molecule at a time reveals
              not only the average properties detected in ensemble measurements, but can
              yield the entire distribution of relevant properties. Single molecule studies
              also reveal the time evolution of biochemical reactions, which, if
              asynchronous, are not observable via ensemble measurements. At the same time,
              there is an ongoing revolution in the use of fluorescence, which, via specific
              labeling to parts of the biomolecules, enables scientists to dissect how each
              part of the biomolecule is moving. The combination of single molecule
              manipulation and fluorescence techniques has the potential for revolutionizing
              our understanding of how these tiny biomolecules work.


