Title       : Acquisition of a Computational Laboratory for Regional, Interdisciplinary
               Investigation of Climatic and Environmental Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0215934

Award Number: 0215934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $482457             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa C. Sloan lcsloan@earthsci.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,1189,5740,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the Major Research Instrumentation program, a computational laboratory
              will be acquired that will facilitate and unite multidisciplinary research
              focused on regional climate change and the effects of that climate change on
              biologic, geochemical, sedimentologic, hydrologic, and societal systems.  These
              topics involve faculty, researchers and students from 5 departments at the
              University of California, Santa Cruz (Earth Sciences, Ocean Sciences,
              Environmental Toxicology, Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, and Environmental
              Studies). 

Two main research avenues will be supported by this facility. 
              First, a regional climate model will be utilized in investigations of future
              climate scenarios for key regions of interest.  Second, the regional climate
              model results will be applied to a range of studies that focus on responses to
              climate change by various regional biologic (marginal marine ecosystems, marine
              algal blooms, terrestrial floral and fauna ecosystems), chemical (water
              quality, contaminant dispersal), hydrologic (surface and groundwater flow),
              sedimentologic (land slide and glacial hazards), and societal (water
              management) systems.  The researchers will use an advanced regional climate
              model to investigate future climate change scenarios that include increasing
              levels of greenhouse gases and aerosols and for scenarios of projected future
              land use changes.  Regional modeling cases will be carried out at model
              resolutions of 40, 30, and 20 km., to investigate effect of spatial resolution
              upon results. 

This project will provide a multidisciplinary and
              multidimensional view of the possible effects of future climate change at
              regional scales.  The project will involve graduate and undergraduate students
              in research and computing projects, seek to engage underrepresented students in
              scientific research, and allow for the inclusion of results from this research
              to be incorporated into 18 different courses across 5 different departments.
