Title       : Acquistion of Advanced Test Equipment for Infrastructure Materials Reliability,
               Risk Assessment and Performance Enhancement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0215831

Award Number: 0215831
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146037             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Kosson david.kosson@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luoyu R. Xu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin K. Tseng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Prodyot K. Basu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Hercules  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is for the acquisition of advanced physical and chemical testing
              equipment to characterize structural performance of current and emerging
              infrastructure materials.  The equipment requested would facilitate both
              acquisition of performance data on new materials and development of a
              mechanistic understanding of the relationships between physical and chemical
              processes that lead to failure.  Physical challenges to the nation's
              infrastructure are being presented by several forces: (i) deterioration due to
              aging, (ii) security threats by malicious or terrorist actions, and (iii)
              demands for increased capacity and safety.  Examples include bridge and roadway
              structures, pipeline conveyance of gas, petroleum, chemicals and water,
              aircraft and aerospace structures, automotive structures and, management of
              nuclear materials and wastes.  Common amongst all of these examples are the
              needs for improved mechanistic understanding, in-situ monitoring, prediction
              and prevention of structural failure under environmental conditions.  Common
              chronic stresses to these systems that must be mitigated include loading,
              thermal cycling and chemical environmental reaction, many of which may occur
              simultaneously and have currently poorly characterized synergistic effects. 
              Acute stresses include sudden impact and high temperatures.  
The set of
              materials that has been the focus of our research, based on national
              infrastructure challenges are Portland cement concrete systems used for highway
              and building construction and also used as the basis for treatment of nuclear
              wastes.  This also includes composites and reinforced polymer laminates used in
              building and transportation structures and structural rehabilitation. The
              equipment requested will facilitate non-destructive evaluation of material
              performance, and local inorganic and organic compositional testing to assess
              corrosion and other failure mechanisms that result from chemical changes in
              materials (e.g., during thermal stresses, chemical attack).  The specific
              equipment requested includes (i) laser ablation unit for an existing
              inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometer to facilitate elemental and
              isotopic profiling in materials, (ii) a thermogravimetric analyzer mass
              spectrometer system to determine organic composition as a function of
              environmental stresses, and (iii) an ultrasonic non-destructive analyzer to
              assess internal fracture formation during testing.
The project team includes
              participation of faculty from the Departments of Civil and Environmental
              Engineering, Chemistry, Chemical Engineering, Electrical Engineering and
              Physics. 
The requested equipment will support and enhance ca. $10 million
              dollars per year of current sponsored research and training, including an NSF
              IGERT program in Risk and Reliability Engineering and Management. 
              Complimentary collaborative linkages are provided with Sandia and Oak Ridge
              National Laboratories, DOE, Halliburton, and Tennessee Department of
              Transportation.  
$130,000 in matching funds are provided by Vanderbilt
              University for the $141,000 requested from NSF with a total project cost of
              $271,000.


