Title       : Acquisition of a magnetic resonance imaging system to assess brain plasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0215700

Award Number: 0215700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1684980            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard N. Aslin aslin@cvs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin J. Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jianhui Zhong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elissa L. Newport  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daphne Bavelier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from a National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation
              award, Dr. Richard Aslin and his colleagues at the University of Rochester will
              establish the Rochester Center for Brain Imaging (RCBI).  The overall goal of
              this new center is to assess the plasticity of the adult and child brain as it
              adapts to altered and varied experiences.  One type of alteration is the loss
              of sensory input in a single modality (e.g., the loss of vision or hearing
              because of blindness or deafness).  Previous research at Rochester has shown
              that congenitally deaf individuals who use sign language do so with the same
              parts of the brain (the left hemisphere) that are usually used for spoken
              language, despite relying on the visual rather than the auditory modality. 
              Deaf individuals also have greater sensitivity to patterns of movement in the
              peripheral visual field because they rely more on signed language inputs
              delivered in the visual modality.  These patterns of brain plasticity are the
              result of altered sensory input during early development and have important
              implications for the brain's ability to compensate for deprivation and injury,
              provided that it has time during early development to adapt to these unusual
              circumstances.  Similar mechanisms of plasticity may be present in adults as
              they learn a new task or compensate for brain injury.  The Rochester group will
              use functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to study both long-term
              (developmental) and short-term aspects of brain plasticity in adults, children,
              and non-human primates.  The research will provide important insights into the
              neural mechanisms of learning and plasticity and the keys to the brain's
              ability to adapt to novel experiences.

Working with a team of cognitive
              scientists and neuroscientists, as well as magnetic resonance physicists and
              image processing engineers, Dr. Aslin will supervise the purchase,
              installation, and operation of a 3 tesla (T) fMRI system designed to measure
              the microscopic changes in blood oxygen level that occur in localized regions
              of the brain as participants perform a variety of tasks.  This system, which is
              state-of-the-art in the field of human brain imaging, will provide a group of
              over 30 researchers from the University of Rochester and Cornell University (90
              miles from Rochester) with the capability to explore a variety of issues in
              human brain plasticity and recovery of function after natural deprivation,
              injury, or disease.  A key feature of the new center is a team of physicists
              and engineers who will develop new ways for fMRI to reveal even more
              fine-grained details about the functioning and visualization of the
              brain.

This project is important for several reasons.  It will provide a
              first-class facility for non-invasive brain imaging to a group of researchers
              at Rochester who have already demonstrated their ability to conduct
              cutting-edge research in cognitive neuroscience.  The RCBI will also play a
              significant role in the training of future scientists by actively involving
              graduate and undergraduates students from the University of Rochester and
              Cornell University, as well as undergaduates from the State University of New
              York at Geneseo (a non-Ph.D.-granting college located 30 miles from Rochester)
              in state-of-the-art brain imaging research.  The new center provides an
              excellent vehicle to teach the principles of fMRI to a new generation of
              students who will become leaders in the field of cognitive neuroscience.

