Title       : Acquisition of an Analytical Ultracentrifuge for Use in Biochemistry, Structural
               Biology and Polymer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0215690

Award Number: 0215690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223115             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Raleigh draleigh@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
    A  grant has been awarded to the State University of New
York  at  Stony
              Brook under the direction of Dr. Raleigh for the acquisition of an analytical
              ultracentrifuge.
The  analytical  ultracentrifuge was first developed more
              than 50 years ago
and  its  invention  lead  to a Nobel Prize. Since that time
              it has evolved
from  a custom made piece of specialized apparatus to an
              essential everyday
tool  for the investigation of basic biochemistry and
              chemistry. Analytical
ultracentrifugation  is the method of choice for
              studying the properties of
large  molecules that associate in solution. It is
              applicable to biological
and  non-biological  systems  and  it  is now an
              important research tool in
biochemistry,  structural  biology  and  polymer 
              science.  The  ranges  of
applications  of  this  technique  are  immense and
              are rapidly increasing.
Acquisition  of an analytical ultracentrifuge will
              complement major ongoing
initiatives  in  polymer science and in structural
              biology and biochemistry
at SUNY Stony Brook.

    Ten  investigators
              representing five academic departments at SUNY Stony
Brook  will  conduct
              basic research projects. Their research interests span
the  range  from  the 
              development  of  new  materials, to biology, polymer
chemistry,  enzyme 
              mechanisms,  protein  dynamics  and  folding, and viral
assembly.  Together 
              they supervise more than 90 researchers. Professor Chu
will  use  the
              instrument in his investigations of novel vesicle structures
and  surfactants 
              formed by modified fullerenes. These new materials have a
range of potential
              applications including delivery agents. Professor Kisker
will  use  the 
              ultracentrifugation  in  her  studies  of  DNA repair while
Professor  de  Los
              Santos will make use of the instrument in his studies of
damaged  DNA.  DNA 
              repair is essential for maintaining the correct genetic
information. 
              Mutations  are  the  primary cause of hereditary diseases, as
well  as 
              cancer, and may also be involved in aging. Professors' London and
Smith will
              investigate fundamental issues in membrane protein structure and
folding  and
              the ultracentrifuge will play an important role in their work.
It  is 
              estimated  that 30 % of all proteins are membrane proteins but very
little  is
               known  about  their structure and folding despite the fact that
they  play a
              central role in many important biological processes. Professor
Raleigh  will 
              use  the instrument in his studies of the process of protein
folding.  The 
              protein-folding  problem refers to the mechanism by which an
initially 
              unfolded protein achieves its final functional structure. It has
long  been 
              known that the linear sequence of aminoacids dictates the final
folded 
              structure  of  proteins but the rules that govern this key assembly
process
              are still not understood. Professor Sampson will use the instrument
in  her 
              studies of the important enzyme cholesterol oxidase, which is used
as  a 
              cholesterol  sensor. Professor Sampson and Professor Tonge will make
use  of
              the instrument in their basic studies of enzyme functions while the
laboratory
               of  Professor  Scarlata will apply the instrument to studies of
viral 
              assembly.  Professor  Schindelin will use the ultracentrifuge in his
studies
              of the proteins involved in the biosynthesis of critical
              molybdenum
cofactors.

    The  consortium  of  investigators  who will make
              use of the analytical
ultracentrifuge  study  fundamental  problems  in
              biology, biochemistry and
polymer  chemistry.  Many  biologically important
              molecules as well as many
man  made  macromolecules  work in tandem with
              closely associated partners.
Understanding   the  detailed  nature  of  these 
              interactions  is  key  to
understanding  these  complex  systems.  An 
              analytical  ultracentrifuge is
required  for  these  studies. Examples taken
              from work at SUNY Stony Brook
include  studies  of  critical  proteins 
              involved in the repair of damaged
genetic  material,  the  assembly  of 
              viruses,  the  behavior of novel new
materials  made  from  C60  ("buckyball" 
              derivatives),  and studies of the
fundamental  processes  by which proteins
              acquire their biologically active
state.  The  instrument  will  also  greatly
              enhance the infrastructure for
training  graduate  students  at  SUNY  Stony 
              Brook  and will also benefit
researchers at nearby Brookhaven National
              Laboratory
