Title       : MRI/RUI-Acquisition of a Real-Time Quantitative PCR Instrument for Undergraduate
               Research and Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0215516

Award Number: 0215516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111635             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas L. Vandergon thomas.vandergon@pepperdine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Helm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jay L. Brewster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donna Nofziger Plank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pepperdine University
	      24255 Pacific Coast Hwy
	      Malibu, CA  902634819    310/506-4000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

A grant has been awarded to Pepperdine University under the
              supervision of Drs. Vandergon, Brewster, Nofziger Plank, and Helm to acquire
              research instrumentation that will enhance the undergraduate research and
              teaching programs in cell and molecular biology.  The instrument funded by this
              grant is designed to perform real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction
              (QPCR) experiments.  QPCR is a technique in which low copy number DNA or RNA
              samples are amplified and detected in real time with fluorescent dyes as the
              reactions are progressing.  The ability to detect the amplified samples in
              real-time is of enormous value in addressing many questions in cell and
              molecular research because it allows for accurate quantitative analyses.  The
              QPCR instrument will be utilized in both summer undergraduate research programs
              and in the Honor's research program during the academic semesters. This
              instrument will facilitate research projects carried out in the context of the
              biology department's current summer program funded in part through a NSF-REU
              site grant.  The PI's will also develop four new undergraduate laboratory
              teaching modules that specifically utilize real-time QPCR in addressing low
              copy gene presence in samples, and gene expression in cells, tissues, or
              organisms. 

A variety of methods have been utilized traditionally for
              measurement of normal gene expression and detection of changes in gene
              expression, however, it is challenging to quantify traditional PCR and RT-PCR
              (reverse transcription PCR) assays which are prone to template conversion
              errors and amplification errors.  Recent advances in QPCR technology overcome
              these problems and allow for accurate quantification of amplified templates in
              real time experiments.  Specific research programs in which the QPCR instrument
              will be used are: (1) analysis of photolyase gene expression in response to UV
              radiation in amphibians (Vandergon), (2) examination of stress-response signals
              and apoptotic signals in eukaryotic cells (Brewster), (3) characterization of
              Notch signal transduction in mammalian cells (Nofziger Plank) and (4)
              examination of glycogen synthase regulation in animal cell culture model
              systems (Helm).  In addition, this instrument will be used to introduce new
              concepts into the laboratories of the core cell biology and biochemistry
              courses, several upper-division biology elective courses, and related courses
              in nutritional science.  Each faculty member associated with this grant will
              develop a new undergraduate laboratory teaching modules that explores gene
              presence within samples, temporal changes in gene activity, or induced changes
              in gene expression.  The four laboratory teaching modules that will be
              implemented using this instrument include:  (1) an analysis of intermediary
              metabolism gene responses of E. coli grown in different nutrient media, (2) an
              analysis of gene expression changes in response to environmental stress in
              yeast, (3) an analysis of the expression patterns of two genes involved in
              vulval development in C. elegans, and (4) an analysis of the presence of
              genetically modified organism (GMO) material in foods.  The developed
              laboratory modules will be made available freely on the Natural Science
              Division Web site at Pepperdine University.

This grant will foster
              undergraduate research in cell and molecular biology at Pepperdine University. 
              This instrument will provide a powerful new tool for use in student-generated
              independent research.  The grant will provide undergraduate students with
              access to the latest equipment for research in molecular and cellular biology. 
              It will aid also in generating student interest in graduate studies in cell and
              molecular biology and will provide training to students interested in
              employment in the biotechnology industry.  Cross-department connections will be
              made in research and teaching between the biochemistry program, biology
              program, and nutritional sciences program.  Ultimately, this grant will assist
              in training scientists in cutting edge techniques to keep research at
              Pepperdine University at the forefront of science.

