Title       : US-Pakistan Workshop: 27th International Nathiagali Summer College on Physics
               and Contemporary Needs, Islamabad, Pakistan, June 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0215511

Award Number: 0215511
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Talat S. Rahman rahman@phys.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5943,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0215511 
Rahman

Description: This project supports the participation of nine
              US scientists in the 27th International Nathiagali Summer College on Physics
              and Contemporary Needs, scheduled for June 24-July 5, 2002 in Nathiagali,
              Pakistan.  Dr. Talat S. Rahman, Department of Physics, Kansas State University,
              is organizing the US delegation.  Dr. Riazuddin, Director of the National
              Center for Physics at Quaid-e-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan is the
              organizer of a one-week session on condensed matter physics (CMP) at the
              College. Attendees include scientists, mostly recent Ph.D.'s, from a number of
              developing countries in the region, including Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, China,
              India, Iran, Nepal, Tajikistan, and Turkey, as well as Pakistan. They also
              include graduate students from Pakistan.  There are two sessions of one week
              each:  the first week is dedicated to topics in CMP and the second week to
              topics in particle and plasma physics.  This award supports the participation
              of the US scientists in the first week's session, whose theme is "Novel
              Characteristics of Nanostructured Materials."  Lectures will focus on magnetic,
              semiconductor and metallic nanostructures, and the processes of nanostructuring
              materials.  Special emphasis will be placed on providing insight into topics
              such as spintronics, quantum dots, quantum wells, nano-wires, nano-tubes,
              photonics, and microelectronics.  Speakers will also lead informal discussions
              and tutorial sessions.  The proceedings will be published.

Scope:
              International Nathiagali Summer Colleges (INSC) have been organized every year
              since 1976.  Scientists from the United States and Western Europe present
              lectures and hold discussions on a variety of subjects of current interest in
              physics and their contemporary applications in developing countries.  The INSC
              is attended by laboratory and industrial researchers, university professors,
              college teachers, and graduate students.  The INSC provides the US lecturers
              the opportunity to establish useful links with scientists from developing
              countries and to disseminate scientific knowledge broadly. At least one junior
              scientist and one graduate student will be selected as participants in the US
              delegation.  The broader impact of this activity will be to create a more
              scientifically aware society worldwide.

