Title       : MRI/RUI: Acquisition of an X-ray Microanalysis System with WDS Spectrometer for
               Elemental Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0215745

Award Number: 0215745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226587             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. L'Amoreaux lamoreaux@postbox.csi.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Staten Island
	      2800 Victory Boulevard
	      Staten Island, NY  10314    718/982-2254

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Major Research Instrumentation RUI grant supports the acquisition of an
              X-ray microanalysis system with extended range parallel beam WDS spectrometer
              to augment the current research activities of a diverse faculty within CUNY and
              centered at the College of Staten Island. The new system includes two
              integrated components. The first of these components is an X-ray microanalysis
              system that utilizes energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) to collect, identify
              and map X-ray spectra from the samples. The electron beam from the SEM gun
              interacts with a sample, exciting elements in the sample. The sample then emits
              secondary electrons and X-rays. The energy of the X- rays emitted is element
              specific. Through the EDS system, it is possible to simultaneously collect
              secondary electrons (to obtain a three-dimensional image of a sample) and K a
              energies of > 0.1 keV (also emitted following excitation by the primary
              electron bombardment) and to obtain an accurate map of the distribution of
              elements within a sample. These elements include those of atomic mass equal to
              or greater than Be. The second component to be acquired is a parallel beam
              wavelength dispersive spectroscopy (WDS) system. The WDS system allows for the
              detection of elements from < 10 keV, that is, for light element detection. The
              equipment will be used in collaborative research efforts related to elemental
              distribution within polymers and biopolymers. Research topics include analysis
              of the alignment of metals in nanotubes, binding of metals to sediments, and
              distribution of metal bioaccumulated by aquatic and terrestrial
              organisms.

This instrumentation acquisition supports a number of educational
              activities both at the College of Staten Island and the City University of New
              York. This includes its use in an Advanced Microscopy course "Instrumental
              Methods in Chemistry" and undergraduate research activities through the
              Independent Studies and Honors Thesis programs. Additionally, the instruments
              will support research activities in the College of Staten Island's NSF-funded
              REU program on Polymers and Biopolymers, as well as the Center for
              Environmental Science. As the Departments of Biology and Chemistry have an
              established interdisciplinary approach to research and teaching, the
              instruments will also be used in graduate education and training in the
              NSF-supported IGERT program on Nanostructural Materials and Devices. 

