Title       : SBIR Phase II: Focused Beam Total Reflection X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis Using
               Doubly-Curved Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0215914

Award Number: 0215914
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499864             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zewu Chen zchen@xos.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : X-Ray Optical Systems, Inc
	      15 Tech Valley Drive
	      East Greenbush, NY  12061    518/880-1500

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to meet
              the demand from the microelectronics industry for improved wafer contamination
              analysis. Wafer contamination control is critical for Ultra Large Scale
              Integrated (ULSI) technology and there is a strong demand for a non-destructive
              analytical tool with improved sensitivity and spatial resolution over the
              conventional total x-ray fluorescence (TXRF) method. A new technique, focused
              beam TXRF, can meet this important market need. Based on point-focusing
              toroidal crystal optics, focused beam TXRF will improve the spatial resolution
              by a factor of more than 100 and provide 30 times better detection sensitivity
              for local contaminants on Si as compared to the conventional TXRF method. This
              technique also has potential for low-level Al, Na and other low Z elements
              analysis on Si that cannot be addressed effectively by the conventional TXRF
              and other techniques. In this project, preliminary focused beam TXRF data will
              be collected using WL1 excitation provided by a toroidal Si (220) crystal to
              demonstrate the improvement of sensitivity and resolution for transition metal
              detection. Theoretical calculation will be also carried out to determine the
              feasibility for Al and Na detection for wafer contamination control at 10^ 9 to
              10^10 atoms/cm^2 level.

Focused beam TXRF analysis has commercial
              applications in the microelectronics industry for wafer contamination control
              including localized and homogeneous contaminants with high resolution. These
              contaminants include many important elements such as transition metals, Al, Na
              and other low Z elements. By being able to identify these contaminants, the
              quality of silicon wafers can be improved.  This will be a tremendous cost
              savings to a multi-billion dollar industry.
