Title       : SBIR Phase I: Vacuum Ultraviolet Spectroscopic Ellipsometer for Semiconductor
               Lithography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0215258

Award Number: 0215258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel S. Hampton hampton@containerless.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Containerless Research Inc
	      910 University Place
	      Evanston, IL  602013149    847/467-2678

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will test a novel
              method for
Vacuum Ultraviolet (VUV) spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE)
              measurements for process control
and monitoring in semiconductor lithography
              applications. It builds on the demonstrated
success of employing planar
              grating diffraction to achieve SE measurements in the visible
wavelengths. For
              SE measurements in the VUV, it is necessary to employ conical
diffraction
              geometries which do not require sheet-type polarizing elements in
              the
detection system. This permits the construction of a Conical Diffraction-
              Grating
Division of Amplitude Photopolarimeter (CD-GDOAP) that is the
              analyzer/detection system in
the VUV-SE. By intercepting four or more
              dispersed orders of the cone of diffraction, a
CD-GDOAP can measure the
              polarization state of light over the full spectrum in the VUV
with no moving
              parts. The VUV-SE will: (i) operate in the 140-280 nm spectral range,
              (ii)
have no moving parts, and (iii) provide high temporal resolution. In
              Phase I, we propose
to characterize the performance of a laboratory breadboard
              CD-GDOAP by investigating (i)
conical diffraction geometries, (ii) robustness
              of polarization detection, and (iii)
performance of optical components in the
              VUV. If successful, it will lead to a compact,
high-speed VUV-SE for use in
              semiconductor processing.
Potential Commercial Applications of the
              Research
The proposed SE based on CD-GDOAP will permit real-time measurements
              for VUV lithography
applications at 157, 193, and 248 nm in a single
              instrument. Presently there are no
commercially available instruments (used in
              production facilities) that can access all of
these wavelengths. Successful
              completion of this project will ensure rapid entry into the
marketplace,
              through the business relationship that CRI is developing with
              major
semiconductor metrology equipment companies.
