Title       : Acquisition of a High-Speed, High-Sensitivity Ellipsometer for Materials
               Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2002  
File        : a0215881

Award Number: 0215881
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78568              (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Michael Kilbey mike.kilbey@ces.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott M. Husson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard V. Gregory  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. Creager  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports purchase of a phase-modulated spectroscopic "Picometer"
              ellipsometer from Beaglehole Instruments. With response times on the order of 1
              millisecond and adsorbed mass sensitivity on the order of 2 ng/cm 2, this
              high-speed, high-sensitivity instrument will be used to study in real-time the
              assembly and organization of soft materials at interfaces over both short and
              long time scales. This instrument will also be used to monitor adsorption
              events at polymer-modified interfaces. A set of projects that will benefit
              immediately from the capabilities of this instrument include the analysis of
              the assembly of polymer amphiphiles, the growth of surface-confined polymers,
              the dynamics of redox molecules at electrodes, and the morphology of thin films
              of optoelectronic polymers. The spectroscopic ellipsometer will be housed in
              the recently created Surface Characterization Laboratory, located in the
              Chemical Engineering Department. Post-doctoral researchers and graduate and
              undergraduate students from several disciplines (the Chemical Engineering,
              Bioengineering, and Environmental Engineering and Science Departments)
              currently utilize this multi-user facility. 

The scientific projects
              underway impact important areas, such as advancing the technology for molecular
              electronics and optoelectronic polymer devices, creating (bio) separation
              agents designed at the nanoscale, and tailoring interfacial layers that can
              screen antigenic displays on cells. These research projects will enable
              expansion of the diversity of students working in the Surface Characterization
              Laboratory to include students from Chemistry and Materials Science &
              Engineering, thus providing a truly interdisciplinary training environment. The
              Picometer and associated facility will be available to faculty and students
              from nearby non-Ph.D. granting colleges that have an association with Clemson's
              Chemical Engineering Department through the Research Exploration programs. The
              Picometer will also help to grow the Surface Characterization Laboratory into a
              state-of-the-art facility in the area of advanced materials research, a core
              research theme at Clemson University. 

