Title       : CSEDI: Collaborative Research: New Experimental Approaches to He/U-Th
               Partitioning of the Mantle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0215547

Award Number: 0215547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165054             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy L. Grove tlgrove@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Grove
EAR-0215547

It is paradoxical that the mantle sources with the highest
              3He/4He and 22Ne/21Ne, and argued to be the least-degassed and therefore the
              most primitive or primordial, have uniformly depleted (not primitive) Sr, Nd,
              and Hf isotope signatures. This is an unexplained and long-standing flaw in the
              "Standard Model" for rare gas evolution in the earth. One of the assumptions
              underlying the Standard Model is that He is more incompatible than Th and U
              during upper mantle melting processes, and that it will be preferentially
              removed during melting and subsequent eruptive degassing. Existing data for
              mineral-melt partitioning of He ranges over several orders of magnitude, and
              does not place any real constraints on this most important assumption of the
              Standard Model. This project will address this issue by methodical experimental
              measurement of He, Th and U partitioning between olivine, clinopyroxene and
              silicate melt. The study will provide new solubility data for true
              structural-bound He in both natural and synthetic olivine and clinopyroxene,
              and in silicate melt, over a wide range of temperature, pressure, and oxygen
              fugacity. Helium in single-phase experimental charges will be analyzed first by
              crushing in vacuo (to release helium from cracks, voids and defects) followed
              by fusion in an utrahigh vacuum furnace. He in multi-phase charges will be
              analyzed by in-situ laser-ablation. U and Th partitioning data will also be
              determined over the same range of conditions for olivine/melt and
              clinopyroxene/melt equilibrium pairs in simple Fe-free haplobasaltic systems.
              The experiments will be designed to provide a direct comparison between Th-U
              partitioning and He partitioning. Ultimately, the resulting data will allow an
              assessment of a key question in terrestrial helium isotope evolution: is high
              3He/4He synonymous with an "undegassed" or "relatively primordial" mantle
              source?  The answer to this question has broad significance to the CSEDI
              community, as helium is one of the only lines of evidence for relatively
              undegassed material in the deep earth.
-- 

