Title       : NSF Workshop on Population Connectivity in Marine Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a0215652

Award Number: 0215652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78406              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Cowen rcowen@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A central goal of marine ecology is to achieve a mechanistic understanding of
              the factors,, regulating the abundance and distribution of marine populations.
              With such an understanding, it should be possible to generate theory capable of
              predicting the effects of changes in physical and biological parameters on the
              dynamics of these populations. A critical component of the above goal is to
              quantify rates of exchange, or connectivity, among subpopulations of marine
              organisms. We have, however, little more than a rudimentary understanding of
              the spatial scales over which marine populations are connected by larval
              dispersal. This lack of knowledge represents a fundamental obstacle to any
              comprehensive understanding of the population dynamics of marine organisms.
              Furthermore, a lack of spatial context that such information would provide has
              limited the ability of fisheries scientists to evaluate the design and
              potential benefits of novel management strategies such as marine protected
              areas (MPAs).

A recent community debate identified marine population
              connectivity as a key question in biological oceanography:  Over what spatial
              scales are marine populations connected via dispersal of early fife stages? The
              report noted that the inability to accurately predict dispersal makes it
              impossible to determine the effect of climate change and/or human exploitation
              on marine ecosystems. Thus, there is a clear need for an interdisciplinary
              effort to address this issue and the consequential need for programmatic
              funding in support of this effort.

Considering the significance and scale of
              this problem and the obvious need for an integrated, interdisciplinary
              approach, a workshop will be held to:

1)	Develop an appropriate Science
              Action Plan, and 
2)	Estimate resource needs to successfully execute this
              plan.

The workshop will draw scientists from across the broad biological and
              physical oceanographic community, with additional representation, as needed,
              from other disciplines, especially those capable of providing unique
              methodologies applicable to the resolution of this problem. The workshop will
              enable scientists from all relevant disciplines to be involved in the planning
              of this scientific agenda to ensure compatibility of spatial and temporal
              scales in sampling strategies and model development.

