Title       : Stimulus-Secretion Coupling Mechanisms for Rapid, Nongenomic Corticosteroid
               Actions in the Teleost Prolactin Cell Model System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0215205

Award Number: 0215205
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375297             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Borski russell_borski@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerry S. Oxford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1155,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Prolactin has well over 300 known functions in vertebrates.  It regulates
              virtually every aspect of physiology including osmoregulation, behavior, growth
              and metabolism, reproduction and immune function.  The diversity and number of
              actions of prolactin is paralleled by the complexity with which the hormone is
              regulated. The investigators will address the novel mechanisms by which the
              steroid, cortisol, rapidly inhibits prolactin release from the pituitary gland
              of an important euryhaline food fish, the tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus). 
              Previously, they showed cortisol acts within minutes to inhibit prolactin
              release in tilapia.  This discovery as well as others have altered the
              prevailing consensus that the effects of steroid hormones are mediated solely
              through their ability to alter the expression of genes, a process that
              typically requires hours or days to occur.  Over the past decade it has become
              increasingly apparent that all classes of steroids rapidly regulate various
              organ systems.  Cortisol and other glucocorticoids modulate hormone secretion,
              neuronal excitability, behavior, cell morphology, and carbohydrate metabolism
              in various vertebrates within seconds or minutes.  Unlike other classes of
              steroids, however, most rapid glucocorticoid actions produce inhibitory
              responses.  Despite abundant evidence for rapid glucocorticoid effects, the
              cell-signaling mechanisms mediating their actions are poorly understood. This
              is due, in part, to the inherent difficulty of studying inhibitory rather than
              stimulatory responses and the lack of suitable, native model systems to address
              the cell biology underlying rapid glucocorticoid actions.  
Over mammals and
              other vertebrates, fishes present an important advantage for the study of
              prolactin cell function--prolactin cells are segregated as a nearly homogenous
              mass that is easily separated for study.  Prolactin baseline secretory activity
              can be easily manipulated to study potentially important stimulators and
              inhibitors of prolactin cell function and the cell-signaling pathways that
              mediate their action.  The investigators show cortisol acts at the membrane,
              independent of gene expression to rapidly inhibit prolactin release by reducing
              two cellular messengers, cAMP and calcium.  These actions may occur through a
              specific high-affinity pituitary membrane receptor, and involve reductions in
              voltage-gated calcium channel activity and influx of extracellular calcium. 
              Studies also demonstrate the steroid may directly act at the membrane to
              suppress phospholipase C, an enzyme critical to regulating cellular calcium in
              vertebrates. In the present proposal, four specific objectives will address in
              further detail the mechanisms mediating rapid, nongenomic effects of cortisol,
              including several components never previously explored in vertebrates.  The
              first objective will address the type of receptor that cortisol may bind to
              rapidly modulate prolactin secretion.  The second will examine whether the
              steroid acts to rapidly alter the membrane electrical properties of prolactin
              cells to reduce voltage-sensitive calcium channels either directly or through
              increasing potassium ion conductances across the cell membrane.  The third aim
              will test whether cortisol inhibits phospholipase C activity, inositol
              triphosphate production, calcium release from intracellular-sensitive pools,
              and activity of protein kinases in events that lead to rapid reductions in
              prolactin release.  The fourth objective will explore whether the steroid might
              rapidly modify growth factor signaling to regulate prolactin release.  These
              studies will employ a combination of methods to study cell-signaling, including
              both cell and tissue culture, pharmacological manipulations, bioimaging,
              hormone receptor-binding, immunoassays and electrophysiology.
Completion of
              the proposed studies will advance the knowledge of rapid, nongenomic actions of
              steroids.  This is a new and growing discipline in the field of endocrinology,
              regulatory biology and medicine.  Specifically, the research should lead to
              development of a comprehensive model describing the signaling pathways
              mediating rapid actions of a "stress hormone" known to influence, and possibly
              impair, several physiological processes including memory, behavior,
              reproduction, and immune function. As cortisol and prolactin exert opposing
              actions on hydromineral balance in fish, the detailed workings underlying
              osmoregulation, an ancient and universal process critical to physiological
              adaptation, will also be advanced.

