Title       : Acquisition of a CCD X-ray Diffractometer for Chemical Crystallography Research
               and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0215950

Award Number: 0215950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R M. Wilson wilsonrm@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William B. Connick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anna D. Gudmundsdottir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeanette A. Krause-Bauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,9184,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, the
              Department of Chemistry at the University of Cincinnati will acquire an X-ray
              diffractometer with CCD detector for small molecule diffractometry. This
              equipment will enhance research in a number of areas including the following:
              a) the study of reactive intermediates in crystals; b) design of novel
              complexes as photodynamic therapeutic agents in the treatment of cancers; c)
              the study of unusual covalent and hydrogen-bonded geometries of promising
              catalysts and composite structures; d) the study of host-guest chemistry and
              molecular recognition; e) investigations on polymorphism and its role in drug
              interaction and design; and f) the design of supramolecular solids that can
              function as molecular machines, magnets and coordination polymers .

The
              X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three
              dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles, and
              it provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of the molecule
              relative to the neighboring molecules.  These studies will have an impact in a
              number of areas, including the preparation of more efficient catalysts, drug
              development, and materials sciences.
