Title       : Role of Accessory Proteins P50/P55 in SnoRNP Biogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0215545

Award Number: 0215545
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405426             (Estimated)
Investigator: E S. Maxwell stu_maxwell@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) play essential roles in eukaryotic ribosome
              biosynthesis.  Critical snoRNA functions include directing cleavage of the
              pre-ribosomal RNA precursor and guiding the modification of specific
              nucleotides in the ribosomal RNAs.  More than 100 snoRNAs have been identified
              in the nucleolus, thus establishing the snoRNAs as the largest class of small
              stable RNAs found in eukaryotic cells.  Investigations have demonstrated that
              the box C/D and H/ACA snoRNAs exhibit evolutionarily conserved sequences and
              folded structures characteristic of each family.  Each of these RNA motifs bind
              family-specific proteins to establish the snoRNA:protein (snoRNP) complex. 
              Both the box C/D and H/ACA snoRNA motifs and their associated core proteins are
              required for snoRNA processing, snoRNP transport, and snoRNA-guided nucleotide
              modification of  ribosomal RNAs.  Most recently, two novel accessory proteins
              have been identified that are also essential for snoRNP synthesis.  Accessory
              proteins p50 and p55 interact with the snoRNP core complex in the nucleoplasm
              and regulate snoRNP production. Despite their critical nature,  nothing is yet
              known about how p50/p55 function in the synthesis of new snoRNP complexes. 
              Therefore, the goals of this research are twofold.  First, p50/p55's role in
              snoRNP biogenesis will be examined in vivo in the Xenopus oocyte nucleus. 
              Microinjection experiments will determine the possible role of these accessory
              proteins for snoRNP assembly in the nucleoplasm as well as their potential
              function in transporting mature snoRNP complexes into the nucleolus.  Second,
              structural studies will define the interactions of p50/p55 with the box C/D
              core snoRNP complex, providing mechanistic details of accessory protein
              function in regulating the snoRNP biosynthetic pathway. 

p50 and p55 are the
              first identified snoRNP accessory proteins essential for snoRNP  biosynthesis. 
              Defining their functional roles will provide fundamental insight into the
              snoRNA/snoRNP biosynthetic pathway.   The involvement of p50/p55 in other
              nucleoplasmic events such as chromatin remodeling and RNA synthesis has
              suggested that p50 and p55 are multifunctional proteins and may serve as
              "molecular bridges" to coordinate various processes in the eukaryotic nucleus. 
              Therefore, this research has the potential to impact our basic understanding of
              RNA metabolism in the eukaryotic nucleus and reveal new regulatory paradigms of
              gene expression. 
