Title       : SBIR Phase II: Nonintrusive Species Specific Velocimeter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0215930

Award Number: 0215930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen Flusberg allen.flusberg.@srl.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Science Research Lab Inc
	      15 Ward Street
	      Somerville, MA  02143    617/547-1122

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop a
              passive, nonintrusive species-specific velocimeter (SSV) that simultaneously
              measures spatially resolved velocities of multiple species in a flame, sorting
              the information by species and spatial scale size. The SSV will be geared to
              spatially resolve the mixing and chemical dynamics occurring within flames, and
              to track these effects in real time. No instruments are available that can make
              such measurements passively and non-invasively in a com-pact geometry. The SSV
              will play a critical role in a novel deposition process, combustion chemical
              vapor deposition (CCVD). CCVD is a continuous open-air deposition process that
              is targeting a wide spectrum of thin-film-coating markets, including
              electronics, glass, anti-corrosives, superconductors, catalytics, polymers, and
              nanopowders. Phase 1 demonstrated feasibility by measuring spatially resolved,
              species-specific CCVD flame velocities on different spatial scales. Phase 2
              will be a proof-of-principal program to (1) construct an engineering prototype,
              (2) demonstrate the correlation between SSV data and bottom-line CCVD film
              properties, and (3) design an SSV-based CCVD controller that can be fabricated
              economically and commercialized in a privately funded
     This technology
              will facilitate smart deposition that streamlines the reliability of CCVD.
              Incorporated into a CCVD system, the SSV will become the central element of a
              feedback control module that maintains the consistency of the flame and
              maximizes deposition efficiency. The commercial market for this technology
              generates about  $50 million annually. This project addresses the interest in
              advanced control techniques for manufacturing. It supports the development of
              improved and more reliable coatings that will enhance technology and lower the
              cost of many common products, e.g. electronic memory devices in computers,
              appliances, and automobiles.

