Title       : Acquisition of an Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectrometer for use in
               Research, Undergraduate and Graduate Curricula at Brooklyn College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0215374

Award Number: 0215374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181180             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Magliozzo rmaglioz@brooklyn.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Brooklyn College
	      Office of Research & Program Dev
	      Brooklyn, NY  112102889    718/951-5622

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract to proposal No. 0215374, entitled "Acquisition of an electron
              paramagnetic resonance spectrometer for use in research, undergraduate and
              graduate curricula at Brooklyn College"

A grant has been awarded to the
              Department of Chemistry at Brooklyn College of the City University of New York.
               The grant will be used toward the purchase of a new EPR spectrometer to
              replace a nearly thirty-year old instrument whose function has seriously
              deteriorated in the recent past.  EPR spectroscopy is a basic analytical and
              research tool used to study the properties of systems containing unpaired
              electrons.  Specifically, the method of EPR spectroscopy will be used to study
              1) the structure and mechanism of a new class of bacterial heme enzyme,
              catalase-peroxidase.  This enzyme is of key importance in the mechanism of
              action of a first-line antibiotic used to treat tuberculosis infection; 2) the
              mechanism of a radical enzyme, pyruvate formate-lyase, which provides a simple
              model system for analysis of unusual enzymatic reactions; 3) the action and
              toxicity in mitochondria of methamphetamine-related compounds; 4) the mechanism
              of action of a DNA-cleaving molecule; 5) the molecular structure of materials
              used in batteries and also the structure of chemical compounds important in
              radioactive waste management; 6) the structure of metalloprotein active sites.
              
Several biochemical projects supervised by Prof. Richard S. Magliozzo,
              research by auxiliary users from other universities, as well as chemistry
              laboratory course curricula in undergraduate and graduate programs at Brooklyn
              College of the City University of New York will derive benefit from a new EPR
              instrument purchased with support from the NSF.  New scientific knowledge that
              will be produced during the period of funding will advance the field of
              biochemical reaction mechanisms, and will provide insights into the structure
              and function of biological and environmental chemicals.  Undergraduate and
              graduate education at Brooklyn College (the latter consisting of local Master's
              Programs in Chemistry and Biochemistry, as well as Ph. D. Programs in the same
              two areas coordinated at The Graduate Center of CUNY, New York, NY) will also
              derive benefits from this grant.  Moreover, the education and training of
              undergraduate students from underrepresented minority groups in the sciences,
              who participate in local, state and federally funded programs, will be directly
              improved by the availability of a new instrument for their research projects at
              Brooklyn College.  

