Title       : Acquisition of a Sputter Deposition System for Thin Films Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0215902

Award Number: 0215902
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joost J. Vlassak vlassak@esag.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research Program will support
              faculty in the Applied Physics and Applied Mechanics groups at Harvard
              University with the acquisition of a thin film deposition system with in-situ
              stress monitor. The system will be used for the growth of metal films that
              range in thickness from tens of nanometers to several micrometers, for a
              comprehensive study of thin film mechanical properties. The main focus of this
              study is the deformation behavior of elemental metal and alloy films. Basic
              deformation mechanisms and interactions with microstructural features such as
              grain size, grain orientation, grain boundaries, interfaces, surfaces, and
              dislocation substructure will be explored. Alloy films will be used to
              investigate precipitation hardening and the shape memory effect in thin films.
              The deposition system will also support research on self-organized
              nanostructure evolution and amorphous metallic films. Students at the
              undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels will use the system.


This
              award from the IMR Program will support faculty in the Applied Physics and
              Applied Mechanics groups in the Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences at
              Harvard University with the acquisition of a thin film deposition system with
              in-situ stress monitor. The system will be used in graduate research projects
              on thin film mechanics, self-organized nanostructure evolution, and amorphous
              metallic films. In addition to the graduate research program, a special program
              will be set up to involve undergraduate students in original thin films
              research in the framework of an independent research course offered by the
              Division. The deposition system will also significantly advance undergraduate
              education through the development of special laboratory sessions for an
              Introductory Materials Science course. These sessions will serve as a first
              introduction to thin film technology, but are also intended to foster interest
              in advanced Materials Engineering studies.

