Title       : SBIR Phase I: Biosensor for Label-Free, Real-Time Monitoring of Environmental
               Pathogens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0215192

Award Number: 0215192
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Salvador M. Fernandez fernandez@ciencia.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ciencia Inc
	      111 Roberts Street, Suite K
	      East Hartford, CT  061083605    860/528-9737

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I Project proposes to
              develop a microarray-based biosensor for on-site, real-time identification and
              enumeration of multiple environmental microorganisms from aqueous and/or
              aerosol samples with high sensitivity and specificity. The operation of the
              biosensor will be based on a recently developed novel technology involving 
              grating-coupled surface plasmon resonance (GCSPR). The proposed biosensor
              system, with the capability for continuous on-line monitoring, would have
              numerous applications where rapid assessment of a contaminated environment
              would be needed. The specific objectives of the Phase I project are (a) to
              engineer the manner in which aerosol and aqueous samples will be delivered to
              the GC-SPR biosensor flow cell, and (b) to assess and optimize the performance
              of the biosensor in the detection of a prototype microbial target. In the
              follow-on Phase II project, specific target pathogens will be selected and
              specific chips will be constructed to detect these pathogens.

The commercial
              applications of this project are expected to be in a large number of locations.
              They include (1) hospitals, where nosocomial infections may arise; (2) office
              buildings, where accidental contamination with mold spores, Legionella and
              other pathogens may create health hazards; (3) natural bodies of water or
              commercial water supplies, where Cryptosporidium, coliform bacteria and several
              other waterborne pathogens are of great concern ; and (4) the food industry,
              where there is a need for sensitive methods for on-line and real-time detection
              of pathogens. Finally, the proposed technology will provide for rapid, on-site
              detection of biological agents, such as spores of Bacillus anthracis, that may
              be intentionally introduced into the environment.

