Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: The Effect of Affective Experience in
               Investment Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0215509

Award Number: 0215509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Feldman Barrett barretli@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
More Americans than ever before - about 125 million - are currently
              participating in acts of investing.  In spite of the growing popularity of
              investing and of the constant ebbs and flows of emotions in the world of
              investing, the actual effect of emotion on investment behaviors has not been a
              major subject of scientific research. The purpose of this project is to explore
              and examine the role of emotion in investment behaviors.

The research
              focuses on the relationship between affect and two dimensions that can be used
              to describe investment decision making: defensiveness-aggressiveness and
              overreaction-underreaction.  Specifically, it is predicted that positive
              feelings may promote aggressive investment decisions, defined as a tendency to
              focus primarily on obtaining possible gains rather than preventing possible
              losses in decision making (for example, concentrating investment on a set of
              high-return assets), whereas negative affective states will foster defensive
              investment decisions, defined as a tendency to focus primarily on avoiding
              possible losses rather than obtaining possible gains in decision making (for
              example, diversifying assets or pursuing low-risk assets). 

Another
              prediction is that positive feelings may promote a response pattern of
              underreaction, defined as a tendency of being relatively insensitive to market
              signals in making decisions (often failing to respond to meaningful signals),
              whereas negative affective states may foster a response pattern of
              over-reaction, defined as a tendency of being overly sensitive to market
              signals (often responding to meaningless signals).   

The investigators plan
              to test these hypotheses in an Internet-based stock investment game combined
              with an experience-sampling procedure.  Thus, the study will investigate the
              role of affect in decision making in an ecologically valid way.  If successful,
              it will have both theoretical and practical implications. By exploring the
              critical role of affective experience in decision making process, this research
              will enrich the decision making literature that has been overly cognitive in
              nature.  It also may help investors enhance their understanding of how, when,
              and why affective experience influences investment decision making.

