Title       : The DLESE Program Center: Providing Infrastructure for a Distributed Community
               Library
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0215640

Award Number: 0215640
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16529215           (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary R. Marlino marlino@ucar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Fulker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tamara R. Sumner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UCAR
	      PO Box 3000
	      Boulder, CO  803073000    303/497-1000

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award is jointly funded by the Directorate for Geosceicnes and the
              Directorate for Education and Human Resources (National STEM Digital Library). 
              The Digital Library for Earth System Education (DLESE) is a distributed,
              community-based library dedicated to improving the quality, quantity, and
              efficiency of teaching and learning about the Earth as a system at all
              educational levels.  As a community-owned library, DLESE is committed to the
              principles of participatory governance and distributed library construction. 
              The DLESE Program Center (DPC) supports the DLESE mission and the DLESE
              community by serving as an integrator for community efforts and by providing
              the basis for program continuity.  These integrating and continuity functions
              are achieved through the provision of technical infrastructure and community
              support services.  The DPC work objectives for this performance period are to: 
              (1) Develop an operational library backbone infrastructure that is tailored to
              specific geoscience education needs; enables distributed collections and
              services to act as an integrated whole; and interoperates with other library
              efforts such as NSDL.  (2) Support community capacity building by providing
              tools, components, and services that enable the development of high-quality
              collections of teaching and learning resources by community members.  (3)
              Enable systemic change as articulated by the national geoscience educational
              reform documents through the development of innovative resource discovery
              interfaces and services.  (4) Promote overall library awareness to increase the
              use of library services by educators and students.  (5) Conduct ongoing library
              operations, including support for community operation of diverse collections
              and services.  (6) Support broad-based community governance.  (7) Promote and
              support DLESE diversity initiatives.  (8) Support distributed library
              evaluations of user experiences, library collections and services, and
              educational effectiveness.   These objectives are informed by the DLESE
              governing bodies and the broader community, the results of work to date, and
              the overall library vision as articulated in the DLESE Strategic Plan.   The
              objectives will be measured against two-year and five-year benchmarks for
              library functionality.  These benchmarks were crafted with broad community
              input, and articulate the stages necessary for library development, growth and
              sustainability.  Meeting these benchmarks requires significant technical
              developments in the first half of the performance period, with a transition
              towards an increased operation focus in the latter half.  Constant throughout
              is continued support for DLESE governance and the distributed library building
              effort.  DLESE governance processes are designed to involve community members
              in all major decisions and to maintain a balance between centralized and
              decentralized responsibilities. The effort will advance geoscience education
              by:   (1) Establishing DLESE as the premier, trusted source for high quality
              geoscience education resources.  (2) Promoting sustainable library growth
              through community capacity-building and community participation in library
              governance, development, and operations.  (3) Enabling the library to serve as
              a catalyst for geoscience educational reform by (a) promoting broad and
              equitable access to quality geoscience education resources, (b) supporting
              geoscience literacy goals and Earth systems perspectives,  (c) integrating
              research and education through increased access to and understanding of Earth
              systems data and data analysis tools, and (d) contributing to the body of
              evidence on the value and efficacy of digital libraries.
