Title       : CSEDI Research - Fine Structure of the Lower Mantle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0215644

Award Number: 0215644
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244074             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Gurnis gurnis@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Eiler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald V. Helmberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a collaborative study of the deep mantle between the disciplines of body
              wave seismology, computational geodynamics, and isotope geochemistry. The
              project will systematically survey seismic data sets and compare waveform data
              with synthetics for a range of models (including tomographic, hybrid, and
              convection models). An assortment of modeling techniques have been assembled to
              take advantage of many different types of seismic phases to constrain dynamic
              models. With the release of two large datasets (South African array and Saudi
              Arabian network) along with the ever expanding IRIS and East African PASSCAL
              experiments, there will be an excellent opportunity to study the underpinning
              of the African continent from bottom-to-top. A concerted effort will be made to
              formulate, study, and apply dynamic models of the lower most mantle, especially
              the upwellings African superplume.  Both 2-D (including a cylindrical geometry)
              and 3-D Cartesian finite element, mantle convection codes will be used to
              understand lower mantle and core mantle boundary dynamics. Spherical models of
              convection that have the history of plate motions imposed as boundary
              conditions will also be used. Model quantities (such as temperature, chemistry,
              phase, melt, and anisotropy) will be mapped into two and three dimensional
              seismic velocity fields. These predictions will be tested directly with body
              wave phases. Previous interdisciplinary work between seismology and geodynamics
              has allowed has supported the hypothesis that there are three types of
              structures within the lower most mantle where plumes arise: thermo-chemical
              super plumes, thermal upwellings which have ULVZ at their base, and thermal
              plumes which erupt through old subducted slabs. A new goal of this continuing
              research project is to use seismological observations and dynamical models as
              new organizing principles for interpreting the geochemistry of plume-related
              basaltic lavas. The seismology and geodynamics will be used to predict maps
              (predicted plume provinces) which will be tested with the geochemistry of MORBs
              and OIBs.

