Title       : Acquisition of a white light confocal microscope for quantitative
               characterization of dental microwear surfaces.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0215830

Award Number: 0215830
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218571             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter S. Ungar pungar@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan C. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher A. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation award will allow
              the purchase a NanoSurf II Pro (NanoFocus Corp) white light confocal microscope
              for use in dental microwear analysis and other research activities at the
              University of Arkansas.  Dental microwear analysis is the study of microscopic
              use-wear patterns in teeth to infer diet.  The ability to reconstruct diet from
              dental microwear is important to both bioarcheologists and paleontologists
              because food preferences provide a key to understanding the biology and ecology
              of past peoples and fossil species.

While dental microwear has been studied
              for many living and fossil groups, current techniques are stretched to their
              limits.  Microwear feature measurement error is high, and repeatability is low.
               This both reduces the power to resolve diet-related differences within studies
              and limits the ability to compare results among studies.  Measurement errors
              stem from two problems. 1)  The scanning electron microscope (SEM) used in most
              such studies is not ideal for microwear analysis.  Because the SEM forms an
              image by a complex interaction between a surface and an electron beam,
              different instrument settings can produce different images for a single
              surface.   2)  Because a surface can have hundreds of microscopic scratches and
              pits with irregular and overlapping boundaries, it can be difficult to identify
              and measure those features.

Drs. Ungar, Brown and Walker will use the
              Nanosurf II Pro instrument to solve both problems.  This instrument creates a
              true rendering of a wear surface in 3-D to provide a repeatable, automated
              procedure to quantify patterns of wear.  The microscope measures z-values at
              fixed x,y intervals and calculates a series of attributes, such as roughness
              and anisotropy for a microwear surface.  This work is important because it will
              give researchers a new, more repeatable way to characterize dental microwear
              that should lead to new insights into the diets of past peoples and fossil
              species. 
  
This NanoSurf II Pro will also be used by researchers and
              students in other disciplines on the campus of the University of Arkansas.  
              The combination of high resolution, long depth of field and large field of view
              of this instrument will allow new research in: 1) plant pathology (study of
              damaged leaves following insect predation); 2) mechanical engineering (study of
              impact of cutting tools and electronic packaging systems); 3) chemistry
              (measurement of patterned materials for lab-on-a-chip devices); 4) biological
              engineering (measurement and analysis of microorganisms for development of
              biosensors); 5) food science (assessment of effects of processing on food
              surface structure); and 6) geosciences (measurement and analysis of bedrock
              surface modifications due to weathering).  Limited research infrastructure at
              Arkansas' universities contributes to a limited science and technology
              environment in the state.  Many students leave Arkansas for their education and
              employment, contributing to the fact that the state is last in the nation in
              percentage of its population with a college degree.  Access to state-of-the-art
              major research instrumentation, such as the NanoSurf II Pro, will contribute
              toward recruiting and training students from geographically underrepresented
              groups in a broad range of science and technology disciplines.

