Title       : MRI: Development and Integration of Time-Resolved Laser Based Instrumentation
               into the Undergraduate Chemistry Research and Curriculum Experience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0215863

Award Number: 0215863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Dvorak madvorak@stcloudstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Gregory  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St. Cloud State University
	      740 Fourth Avenue South
	      St. Cloud, MN  56301    320/255-2122

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program, Profs.
              Michael A. Dvorak and Daniel Gregory of St. Cloud State University will develop
              a time-resolved laser based instrument for integration into the undergraduate
              chemistry research and curriculum experience.  This is a collaborative venture
              between St. Cloud State University and Dakota Technologies Inc. (DTI).  The
              overall goal of these studies is to create affordable and easy-to-operate
              modules that can be readily coupled to commercial spectrofluorimeters, and
              greatly expand their capabilities.  This research will focus on the development
              of two spectroscopic modules: a nanosecond laser light source, which will allow
              recording of fluorescence decay data, and a transient absorption accessory,
              which will allow absorption studies.  

Undergraduate and graduate students
              will be heavily involved in the development phase of this project and will use
              the instrument in their research.  Thus, the educational impact from the
              instrumentation for undergraduate chemistry training will be significant. 
              Central to any chemist's training is the understanding of spectroscopic
              techniques that play a critical role in all areas of chemistry.  
