Title       : Phylogeny of Orobanchaceae Sensu lato Inferred from Phytochromes and Other Data:
               Implications for the Evolution of Parasitism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0215780

Award Number: 0215780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah Mathews mathewss@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea D. Wolfe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0215780
Mathews and Wolfe
	By definition, plants are autotrophic organisms,
              capable of producing their own food via photosynthesis.  Plants that become
              parasites suppress or lose their photosynthetic apparatus and come to rely on
              host species for carbon, nitrogen, and water.  With a single exception,
              parasitism is unique to flowering plants, where parasitic species are found in
              at least eleven lineages.  The plant family Orobanchaceae is a lineage of root
              parasites that includes the completely parasitic (holoparasitic) broomrapes and
              the partially parasitic (hemiparasitic) figworts.  Within Orobanchaceae, a
              single autotrophic lineage apparently gave rise to the hemiparasites, and
              holoparasitic species have originated from different hemiparasitic lineages. 
              Thus, a series of transitions from autotrophism to hemiparasitism and from
              hemi- to holoparasitism can be investigated to learn about the steps underlying
              this switch in lifestyle.  Preliminary evidence suggests that development of
              the photosynthetic machinery in these parasites may be suppressed by upstream
              genetic regulators of photosynthesis.  This would allow photosynthetic capacity
              to be suppressed but not lost.  To test this model, an improved hypothesis of
              phylogenetic relationships within Orobanchaceae is required.  DNA sequence data
              from nuclear and chloroplast genes sampled from the majority of genera in the
              family will be collected and analyzed to resolve their phylogenetic history. 
              The focus of the nuclear DNA sequencing will be on phytochrome genes, which
              encode photoreceptors involved in regulating photosynthetic gene expression and
              development .  Thus, data collected to address phylogenetic questions can also
              be used to test the role of altered phytochrome photoreceptor function in the
              development of parasites.  Specifically, phytochrome gene copy number,
              molecular evolution, and expression in hemi- and holoparasites and in
              autotrophic relatives will be assessed to determine whether phytochrome
              function is altered.
	The capacity to exist without all or part of the
              photosynthetic machinery has given rise to parasitic weeds that significantly
              impact agriculture and forestry throughout the world, but the steps whereby
              plants become parasites remain unknown.  Thus, mechanisms for their control
              remain underdeveloped.  A widely accepted model suggests that gene loss leads
              to holoparasitism.  But this does not fully explain the retention of intact
              photosynthetic genes by some holoparasites, nor does it explain why most
              parasitic flowering plants retain photosynthetic capacity.  A model involving
              suppression but not loss of photosynthesis may better explain the data.  These
              studies based on sequences from phytochrome genes, supplemented with sequences
              from nuclear ribosomal and plastid loci, will improve our understanding of
              phylogeny in Orobanchaceae and will provide a sound phylogenetic framework for
              testing models for the evolution of parasitism in plants.

