Title       : MRI: Development of a Spin-Polarized Field-Effect Transistor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0215872

Award Number: 0215872
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Thibado   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent P. LaBella  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports development of a low-temperature, ultra-high vacuum,
              scanning tunneling microscope, which employs two 100% spin-polarized tips. In
              this new instrument spin-polarized electrons will tunnel into GaAs at one
              location, traverse through a small region of the sample, and then tunnel out
              through another tunnel junction. To achieve this, a novel double-cleaved sample
              preparation procedure will be developed that uses two STM tips separated by an
              adjustable parameter from a few nanometers to millimeters. This system will be
              used to study the coherent transport properties of spin-polarized electrons
              and, in addition, will allow the study of quantum mechanical transport
              properties for coupled spin-dependent tunneling junctions. A coherent electron
              spin current will be injected using a ferromagnetic-metal STM tip (100%
              spin-polarized single-crystal Ni<110> wire), and then coherently removed using
              another ferromagnetic-metal STM tip. By being at low temperatures the
              spin-relaxation lifetime is significantly extended, allowing high
              signal-to-noise ratio data acquisition. This development is complimented with
              an educational program designed to enhance the understanding of science by the
              general public. 

This equipment is critical for studying the complex
              properties of spintronics devices. Students will gain valuable skills in the
              development of this equipment and will be able to transfer the technology to
              other interested parties upon graduation. The revolutionary idea of spintronics
              currently hinges on discovering how to coherently transfer the electron spin
              from one material to another. This research can provide significant guidance
              toward achieving this goal, thereby influencing the research fields of surface
              physics, magnetism, device physics, basic electron-spin physics, electronic
              materials, and microscopy.

