Title       : Acquisition of a Structural Monitoring System for a Laser Molecular Beam
               Epitaxy/Scanning Tunneling Microscope Facility for Materials Research and
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0215929

Award Number: 0215929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiandi Zhang zhangj@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kuang-Hsi Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yesim N. Darici  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl A. Ventrice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              E. Ward Plummer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports
              Florida International University with the acquisition of a structural
              monitoring system for a laser- molecular beam epitaxy (LMBE)-scanning tunneling
              microscope system. The PI's will construct comprehensive tools with
              multi-component growth capability coupled with in-situ nano-scale
              characterization capabilities. This is essential for success in "Complex
              Materials Growth by Design." The in-situ structural monitoring system includes
              a newly designed in-situ reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED)
              instrument for real-time monitoring of materials growth and low-energy electron
              diffraction (LEED I-V) optics for surface structure determination will be the
              essential component for the studies of artificial structured materials. The
              system will be added on a pulsed laser deposition (PLD) system, forming a
              controlled growth LMBE facility. This facility will be integrated with a
              variable temperature (VT) (25 - 1500K) scanning tunneling microscope (STM) and
              other existing surface characterization probes with a growth capability in an
              ultra-high vacuum (UHV) cluster. The objective is to construct a unique
              facility capable of growing and characterizing materials in-situ for
              interdisciplinary research and education of materials scientists in the new
              field of nano-technology.  The goal is to: 1) exploit materials tailoring for
              desired functionalities, 2) explore new physical phenomena in artificially
              structured materials, and 3) educate a new breed of materials scientists with
              an expertise in science-driven nano-fabrication. 

This award from the
              Instrumentation for Materials Research program supports Florida International
              University with the acquisition of a structural monitoring system for a laser-
              molecular beam epitaxy (LMBE)-scanning tunneling microscope system. The PI's
              will construct comprehensive tools with multi-component growth capability
              coupled with in-situ nano-scale characterization capabilities. This is
              essential for success in "Complex Materials Growth by Design." The in-situ
              structural monitoring system includes a newly designed in-situ reflection
              high-energy electron diffraction instrument for real-time monitoring of
              materials growth and low-energy electron diffraction optics for surface
              structure determination will be the essential component for the studies of
              artificial structured materials. The system will be added on a pulsed laser
              deposition system, forming a controlled growth LMBE facility. This facility
              will be integrated with a variable temperature (VT) (25 - 1500K) scanning
              tunneling microscope and other existing surface characterization probes with a
              growth capability in an ultra-high vacuum cluster. The objective is to
              construct a unique facility capable of growing and characterizing materials
              in-situ for interdisciplinary research and education of materials scientists in
              the new field of nano-technology.  The goal is to: 1) exploit materials
              tailoring for desired functionalities, 2) explore new physical phenomena in
              artificially structured materials, and 3) educate a new breed of materials
              scientists with an expertise in science-driven nano-fabrication. 

