Title       : Development of Scanning Nano-Raman Spectroscopy with Apertureless Near-Field
               Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0215966

Award Number: 0215966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308777             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexei Sokolov sokolov@polymer.uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Foster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Continuing the recent progress in nanoscience and nanotechnologies requires the
              development of methods of chemical, conformational, and stress analysis with
              nanoscale lateral resolution. The objective of this award from the MRI Program
              is to develop a scanning Raman spectrometer with spatial resolution of the
              order of 10-50 nm with a strongly enhanced optical signal. A central feature of
              the proposed work is the use of apertureless near- field optics to provide a
              gain of at least 10 exp.10 in intensity of the Raman signal over what may be
              achieved with currently available commercial instruments based on
              aperture-limited optics created with fibers. This approach will provide both
              exquisite spatial resolution and large local enhancement of the Raman signal
              using a scanning metallic tip. The enhancement is absolutely essential for
              measurement of the signal from small volumes. A long-term goal of the work is
              development of a Raman spectrometer capable of single molecule detection. The
              following specific objectives will be met in achieving the overall goal of the
              work: 
(1) Development of the technology for the creation of a metallic tip
              providing strong local enhancement of the Raman signal; (2) Optimization of
              different optical schemes for providing the incident light and collecting the
              Raman signal for particular experimental tasks; and  (3) Construction of the
              scanning Raman spectrometer prototype with nanometer scale spatial resolution.
              

Development of a scanning nano-Raman spectrometer (SNRS) supported under
              the MRI Program will be applicable to several scientific activities. In the
              study of adsorption of human blood proteins to well-defined surfaces, SNRS will
              provide laterally resolved information on conformational changes in the protein
              upon adsorption. The distribution of surface nano-domains in biomaterials from
              block copolymers, assembly of collagen fibrils, and fibrin formation are
              further biomaterials problems for which the SNRS instrument will provide unique
              information. Lateral variations in chemical composition at the surface of
              adhesive blends can also be mapped with SNRS and correlated with variations in
              surface mechanical properties. In blends of long-branched and linear chains
              SNRS will provide a laterally resolved alternative non-destructive method to
              study near surface composition in blends with isotopic labeling. It will also
              offer a means to study near surface composition without labeling. Additional
              research activities include the study of hybrid nanostructures from polymer
              brushes and dendrimers and mapping of surface functionality in ultrathin films
              of various sorts, including self-assembled monolayers with mixed
              functionalities. Development of the scanning nano-Raman spectrometer will have
              a significant impact on the Nation's academic research infrastructure not only
              polymeric materials, but also semiconductor technology, biotechnology and
              biology. The unprecedented measurements it will provide will promote better
              understanding of structure/property relationships in materials on the nanometer
              scale. 


