Title       : Genetic Variation of Island Melanesia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0215827

Award Number: 0215827
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20235              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan S. Friedlaender jfriedla@astro.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An unexpected finding of recent genetics research is that humans are remarkably
              homogeneous, belying old racial stereotypes.  The region with the greatest
              established variation is sub-Saharan Africa, which implies this is the place of
              origin of our species.  Mitochondrial genetic variation has provided the best
              illustration of this pattern.

This pilot project will help determine how
              mitochondrial variation in another region - the Western Pacific - the
              "Melanesians" of Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands, compares with
              genetic variation in Africa.  This group of researchers has identified a number
              of new mitochondrial genetic variants there, which suggest these populations
              are very ancient as well.  

The pilot project will compare these variants
              systematically and more thoroughly with other currently "unclassified" variants
              from Australian aborigines and south Asians, which may be related.  Longer
              sequences of mitochondrial DNA (1,100 base pairs) and a uniform coverage of
              more variable regions (with high resolution RFLP analysis) on a selection of
              the candidate samples will answer these questions of similarity once and for
              all.

This pilot project will provide the basis for deciding if more
              intensive genetic analysis in the Western Pacific is warranted.  If, as the
              researchers believe, they have identified a genetically highly variable set of
              populations, it will be important to expand the analysis to other parts of the
              human genome - to the Y, X and to genes on other chromosomes, on a larger
              sample of populations. 

Unraveling the genetic history of this region is
              essential in providing a comparative base for similar studies in Africa, as
              well as Europe, Asia, and the Americas, where the trails of ancient population
              movements have been obliterated to a greater degree. 

The project will
              involve promotion of graduate training in molecular genetic methods for
              minority women and international collaboration.

