Title       : Miniaturized Portable Flow-Through Amperometric Immunosensor Device for Fast
               Field Analysis of Rodent Viruses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0215384

Award Number: 0215384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389933             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ebtisam S. Wilkins wilkins@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry L. Yates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to University of New Mexico to develop a prototype
              sensor to detect hantavirus infections in field. It will be a rapid, hand held,
              automated device, which gives a quantitative determination of viral infections
              in small mammals. As a result of this development several functioning devices
              will be tested in field conditions. Currently samples from wild populations
              must be collected in the field and returned to the laboratory for testing,
              often taking days or weeks. The work initially will be focused on the
              optimization of a sensor for fast (10-20 min) determination of viral infections
              in the field and will be extended towards the development of an automated
              portable system to be used in field stations or other remote sites. The next
              stage of the research will include miniaturization of a portable system and
              developed for rapid on-site determination of the viral infection in mammal
              samples in field research environments anywhere rapid viral detection is
              needed.

The work will include the evaluation of the disposable sensing
              element, optimization of sensor column assembly and flow-injection system,
              engineering of the prototype of the sensor, optimization of the assay procedure
              and determination of optimal time for incubation, flow rates and temperature,
              development of fast assay for hantavirus infections in blood samples,
              characterization and validation of the assay procedure and comparing it with
              the conventional techniques. Further work would include the miniaturization of
              the existing manually operated device and make it automated. To accomplish this
              task a micro-controller, micro pump, disposable sensing element and a battery
              system will be used.

This project brings together a multidisciplinary team
              from the University of New Mexico's (UNM) Department of Biology, Department of
              Chemical and Nuclear Engineering and Department of Microbiology to develop the
              proposed instrumentation. Conventional techniques for determination of viral
              infections (immunoblot) are qualitative, require relatively long process times
              (24 hours) and must be conducted under laboratory conditions. The awarded
              research will result in a sensor, which can be used in cases when the
              application of conventional immunoassay techniques is limited or impossible.
              The sensor will be developed using disposable flow electrodes and is a means to
              conduct fast assay for hantavirus infection with an electrochemical detection.
              Therefore, while employing different available immunochemicals, a variety of
              disposable elements can be designed for different kind of infections. The
              resulting device from this project can be used for fast analyses of other
              viruses or metabolites under field conditions, in mobile units and may be
              applicable to detection of certain biological weapons. The sensors can also be
              used for rapid analyses in conventional conditions of biological, physiological
              and analytical practices. The University of New Mexico is a Hispanic serving
              institution. A summer NIH/NSF workshop to attract minority and underrepresented
              students will be applied.

