Title       : SBIR Phase I: Innovative Materials for Thermal Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0215327

Award Number: 0215327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98144              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean Baker powdermet@earthlink.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Powdermet, Inc.
	      9960 Glenoaks Boulevard, Unit A
	      Sun Valley, CA  913521047    818/768-6420

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will enable a
              2-fold increase in conductivity for products without sacrificing power or
              capability. Recently, a new high thermal conductivity material has been
              produced using CVD fluid bed coating process and low cost consolidation
              techniques. The realization of improved electronic substrates is dependent on
              the increases in thermal conductivity over standard materials. Though high
              conductivity materials have been identified, consolidating these materials in a
              cost effective and durable manner has remained illusive. The encapsulation of
              materials prior to consolidation has aided the durability and low cost
              processing. The innovation in this program is to improve the encapsulated
              materials being produced, and potentially develop even greater and distinctly
              different physical properties additional development of the encapsulated
              powder/consolidation process is necessary. This Small Business Innovation
              Research Phase I project will enable a 2-fold increase in conductivity for
              products without sacrificing power or capability. Recently, a new high thermal
              conductivity material has been produced using CVD fluid bed coating process and
              low cost consolidation techniques. 
     The realization of improved
              electronic substrates is dependent on the increases in thermal conductivity
              over standard materials. Though high conductivity materials have been
              identified, consolidating these materials in a cost effective and durable
              manner has remained illusive. The encapsulation of materials prior to
              consolidation has aided the durability and low cost processing.  The innovation
              in this program is to improve the encapsulated materials being produced, and
              potentially develop even greater and distinctly different physical properties
              additional development of the encapsulated powder/consolidation process is
              necessary.
