Title       : MRI: Aquisition of Fast Response Gas Analysis Equipment For Advanced Automotive
               Emission Control and Diagnostic System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0215920

Award Number: 0215920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328078             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Peyton Jones jamespj@ece.vill.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amy S. Fleischer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Muske  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1189,1415,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This MRI grant will be used to create a state-of-the-art experimental facility
              for dynamic measurement, modeling, diagnosis and control of transient
              automotive emissions. Catalytic exhaust after-treatment systems play a key role
              in reducing automotive emissions, but to meet increasingly stringent legislated
              environmental targets, (as specified in SULEV or OBD II for example), it is now
              necessary to incorporate their dynamic behavior within the on-board engine
              control and diagnostic system. To measure and model these dynamics
              experimentally requires the state-of-the-art, dual-channel, fast-response gas
              analysis equipment. The MRI grant will also be used to acquire a
              hardware/software system for data acquisition, and for rapid prototyping access
              to the engine management and diagnostic system, in order to be able to
              implement and test the algorithms developed. It is believed that there are
              currently only four facilities worldwide (within academia) that have fast
              response gas analysis capability, one of which was constructed at the
              University of Sussex (UK), by the principal investigator.  

The
              interdisciplinarity inherent in a system which has an engine, electronic
              control, and the catalytic after-treatment elements is reflected in the
              cross-departmental team of investigators who come from the Mechanical,
              Chemical, and Electrical & Computer Engineering departments within the College
              of Engineering at Villanova University. For each of these departments, the
              facility would strongly enhance the Undergraduate and Masters student exposure
              to the automotive industry in a geographic area, which is weak in this regard.
              The facility will be a regional resource, and is supported by Drexel and Temple
              Universities as well as local industry. Industrial support and cost share comes
              from a broad cross-section of the automotive industry including end user Ford
              Motor Company, international automotive consultants Ricardo Inc., locally based
              consultants, Environex, and local catalyst manufacturer Johnson Matthey.

