Title       : Acquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0215852

Award Number: 0215852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287636             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sophia Passy sophia.passy@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Grover  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin D. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Malgosia A. Wilk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremy Marshall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT						

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Sophia Passy (PI), Drs Grover,
              Marshall, Wilk, and Nelson (Co-PIs), and Drs Arnott, Burleson, and Smith
              (Senior Personnel) from the University of Texas at Arlington to purchase a
              confocal scanning laser microscope. The instrument will be used for a broad
              range of applications, including subcellular localization of molecules;
              monitoring ion channel clustering patterns; cytoskeleton visualization;
              emission fingerprinting, 3D reconstruction, and detection of gradients in
              biofilms. The unifying theme underlying these diverse research endeavors is the
              search for a relationship between structure and function in the organic world,
              which remains one of the most fundamental questions in biology.
The equipment
              will be employed for the study of: 1) biofilm spatio-temporal dynamics as a
              product of small-scale proximate ecological processes of species dispersal,
              growth, and competition, and ultimate broad-scale environmental constraints of
              shear stress and nutrient limitation; 2) spectral fingerprinting of live algal
              communities developing in the freshwater plankton and benthos for the purpose
              of developing a new biomonitoring approach; 3) chemical and neural mechanisms
              that control cardiovascular and ventilatory reflex responses to environmental
              stimuli in fish; 4) three-dimensional reconstructions of sperm shape and
              structure through optical sectioning of the sperm cytoskeleton to assess the
              influence of variation in sperm shape on sperm motility and competition; 5)
              spinal cord and peripheral nerve regeneration by fabricating tissue engineered
              scaffolds that deliver drugs, proteins, growth factors, and DNA to support and
              regulate neuronal regeneration; 6) molecular mechanisms used by bacteria to
              establish and maintain Mg2+ homeostasis, and the consequences of disrupting
              these mechanisms, and 7) intracellular pathways involved in the regulation of
              ion channels and how alterations in the functional state of channels affect
              cellular functions under conditions of chronic pain and inflammation. This
              microscope will also provide the basis for the development of a new graduate
              course in Molecular Cytology and enhance existing courses such as Limnology and
              Phycology. 
The Biology Department at the University of Texas at Arlington has
              well established a specialized microscopy facility, the Center for Electron
              Microscopy, where generations of researchers and students have received
              training and explored the wonders of the organic and nonliving micro-cosmos.
              The addition of a confocal microscope to this facility will open new avenues
              for novel and interdisciplinary research, which should come as no surprise
              given that confocal microscope technology only became commercially available in
              the early 1980s, with its use largely limited to medical studies. Hence, there
              are still a number of unexplored fields in biology, ranging from physiology and
              signal transduction to aquatic ecology and evolution, which will vastly benefit
              from the new approaches that confocal microscopy offers.

