Title       : BE/CNH: Conference on Robustness of Coupled Natural and Human Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0215898

Award Number: 0215898
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32514              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Stephen Lansing jlansing@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa M. Curran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary C. Stiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas K. Park  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,1691,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Coupled natural and human systems may be viewed mathematically as dynamical
              systems (systems of differential or difference equations) in which humans are
              involved either as parts of the system or by influencing some processes,
              whether intentionally or not.  Alternatively they may be considered as complex
              systems -- collections of agents engaged in rule-governed behavior. In either
              case, robustness refers to the stability and resistance to perturbation of such
              dynamical or complex systems as they evolve in state space.  A dynamical system
              is said to be structurally stable if reasonably small perturbations to the
              system result in a new dynamical system with the same qualitative dynamics. 
              The concept of robustness raises questions that lie outside the purview of
              stability theory, such as the interplay of system organization and system
              dynamics.  Processes like adaptation and positive feedback can increase the
              robustness of living systems and coupled natural and human systems, but the
              linkage between efficiency and robustness may be an inverse one in which
              optimal efficiency is at the expense of robustness in the face of changing
              environmental conditions.  In some cases, robustness may be an emergent
              property of evolved systems, or it may be possible to engineer systems to
              enhance their robustness.  To address these issues, this award will sponsor a
              conference to be held at the Santa Fe Institute in the Spring of 2003.  The
              conference will bring together scientists from a range of disciplines,
              including physics, mathematics, computer science, earth and climate science,
              ecology, anthropology and archaeology, to discuss theoretical research and case
              studies, with emphasis being placed on comparative discussion of the case
              studies.  Papers will be circulated in advance and presented in a single forum
              attended by all conference participants.  Results of the conference are
              expected to be published

The robustness of coupled natural and human systems
              has become a matter of increasing concern as the modern industrial system's
              impact on the natural systems of the planet becomes more and more apparent and
              issues of sustainability become paramount.  This conference will contribute to
              explorations of robustness in coupled natural and human systems at scales
              ranging from planetary (climate) and macroscales through the mesoscale of
              sociocultural systems to the microscopic scale of disease microevolution. 
              Participants will explore the association of different spatial scale with
              varying temporal scales, and they will help answer a number of critical
              questions, including whether robustness is best assessed by analysis of
              existing data or through simulation modeling, how engineered systems compare to
              complex adaptive systems in terms of robustness and/or a calculus of costs and
              benefits, and under what circumstances robust systems are most likely to
              develop.  Through this conference, participants and other scholars will develop
              new insights into and new approaches for investigating robustness in coupled
              natural and human systems.  Broader impacts of this project include the
              expansion of an interdisciplinary network of scientists to explore this
              important topic in a collaborative framework.  The results of their discussions
              and subsequent collaborative activities could ultimately yield many practical
              benefits for land and resource managers as well as others who have
              responsibilities associated with maintaining environmental quality.  This
              project is supported by an award resulting from the FY 2002 special competition
              in Biocomplexity in the Environment focusing on the Dynamics of Coupled Natural
              and Human Systems.

