Title       : SBIR Phase I: Engineering Platform for the Nanoformulations of Water Insoluble
               Drugs Using Supercritical Antisolvent Process with Enhanced Mass Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a0215181

Award Number: 0215181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99901              (Estimated)
Investigator: Poongunran Muthukumaran poongs@thartech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Thar Technologies, Inc.
	      730 William Pitt Way
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152381333    412/826-3939

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
              develop a flexible platform for nano-formulations of water insoluble drugs. As
              the practice of medicine progresses  towards "complete cure for diseases",
              delivering  new drugs to specific areas to target specific tissues becomes an
              important objective of overall pharmaceutical research. Unfortunately many new
              drugs have poor water solubility that reduces their bioavailability. Carefully
              formulated nanoparticles and nanospheres are reported to have therapeutic
              advantages such as bioavailability, ability to avoid reticuloendothelial system
              (RES) removal, and direct tumor targeting. This project will develop the
              Supercritical Anti-Solvent with Enhanced Mass Transfer (SAS-EM) Process for
              producing nanoparticles of water insoluble drugs and encapsulating
them in
              biodegradable polymers as nanospheres. The three key steps in the Phase I study
              include : (1) Phase behavior studies to identify the suitable solvent and
              experimental conditions, (2) Particle formation studies where nanoparticles of
              said drugs are produced using supercritical antisolvent process with enhanced
              mass transfer,  and (3) Characterization of the nanoparticles/nanospheres for
              particle size, size distribution, and crystallinity. Light scattering
              techniques will be used to measure the size distribution complemented with
              Scanning electron microscopic visualization. X-ray diffraction measurements
              will be used to describe the crystallinity.

The commercial applications of
              this project are in the area of pharmaceutical drug delivery.
