Title       : Coping with Community-Based and Personal Trauma: National Response Following
               September 11th
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0215937

Award Number: 0215937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roxane C. Silver RSILVER@UCI.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen Holman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              At some point in their lives, most people encounter stressful events that can
              have a major impact on the course and direction of their lives. However, after
              decades of research, it is clear that many assumptions held in society about
              how individuals respond to life's traumas have not survived empirical test. For
              example, in contrast to widely held myths about the coping process, the data
              fail to demonstrate universal reactions to stressful life events. Despite the
              popular belief that emotional and cognitive responses to stress follow a clear
              pattern, there is little empirical evidence for an orderly sequence of stages
              of response. Understanding the general process of coping will be enhanced
              through examination of group and individual differences, as well as
              similarities, in response to a variety of negative life experiences.

The
              principal investigator started a longitudinal investigation of early emotional,
              cognitive, and social responses to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
              Using an anonymous Web-based survey methodology, stress and coping data were
              collected from a large nationally representative sample of adults and
              adolescent/parent dyads (with an over-sampling from 4 cities that have
              experienced community-based trauma: New York City, Oklahoma City, Miami, and
              Littleton, CO) at 9-14 days, two months, and six months following September 11.
              This project continues the prospective study, following the sample with four
              specific aims: 1) To investigate the psychological and social processes that
              help explain individual differences in response to a national traumatic event;
              2) To identify early predictors of long-term adjustment to both the 9/11
              attacks and subsequent events that may occur; 3) To compare responses to the
              9/11 events among individuals who have previously experienced a traumatic event
              (either personally or in their communities) with those who have not previously
              encountered trauma; and 4) To investigate prospectively the psychological and
              social processes that help explain variation in response to various stressful
              life events more generally.

The unparalleled nationwide impact of the
              September 11th attacks, coupled with the large and representative nature of the
              existing national sample and the early collection of emotional, cognitive and
              social responses to these events, provides a remarkable opportunity to examine
              longitudinally how individuals and communities respond to stressful life events
              more generally.  Such an examination can be conducted without several specific
              methodological limitations that have plagued prior research (e.g., small or
              demographically homogenous samples). Information collected in this effort can
              illuminate the coping process more generally so as to advance future conceptual
              work in this area. Moreover, it can further the understanding of the unique
              needs of traumatized individuals and provide information to help identify
              individuals at risk for subsequent difficulties. With these data in hand,
              educational and intervention efforts that are designed and implemented among
              health care professionals and the community at large can be better informed,
              more cost-effective and more sensitive to the needs of the populace.

