Title       : New England Regional COSEE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0215456

Award Number: 0215456
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2459518            (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn A. Levi clevi@neaq.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert F. Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah K. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Spitzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New England Aquarium Corp
	      Central Wharf
	      Boston, MA  021103399    617/973-5200

NSF Program : 1690      EDUCATION/HUMAN RESOURCES,OCE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funding to The New England Aquarium (NEAq), Woods Hole
              Oceanographic Institution (WHOI), and the University of Massachusetts (UMass)
              for development of a New England Regional Center for Ocean Science Education
              Excellence (NER-COSEE). This center will focus on capacity building in the New
              England region by: 1) providing educators (teachers and other formal and
              informal educators) with multiple tools to create programs and curricula that
              convey knowledge of the oceans, and 2) providing research scientists and
              scholars the means and training to be more effectively involved in K-12
              education and undergraduate formal and informal education. All three partners
              are highly visible centers of public education, outreach and ocean science
              research and work with a wide network of educators from public, private and
              informal education centers. In addition, U.Mass has an extensive track record
              in educating under-served students and has a strong teacher-training program.
              Activities will include working with informal educators throughout the region
              via workshops and by providing a pool of resources for prototyping and
              evaluation; working with researchers to help them learn to communicate
              effectively with teachers, informal educators, students, and journalists, and
              providing them with a network by which they may collaborate with educators and
              the media; working with K-12 educators to develop innovative curriculum modules
              that teach national and state science standards using ocean science, and to
              assist in the development of networks and programs that recruit and train more
              qualified K-12 science teachers. The NER-COSEE will initially work with the
              Global Learning Center School/New Bedford Public School and Harbor School in
              Boston to pilot test and evaluate programs. They will also create a Resource
              Center, housed in the NEAq's Education Center that will make resources
              available for broad distribution.




