Title       : Acquisition of a high resolution ICP-MS for environmental research and training
               in Maine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0215724

Award Number: 0215724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350304             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl J. Kreutz karl.kreutz@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark L. Wells  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Mayewski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen A. Norton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0215724
Kreutz

This award provides support to significantly enhance the
              elemental and isotopic analysis capabilities at the University of Maine through
              the acquisition of a high resolution inductively coupled plasma mass
              spectrometer (HR-ICP-MS).  The HR-ICP-MS will enable environmental scientists
              and students at UMaine, as well as other educational institutions and state
              agencies, to substantially broaden their interdisciplinary research interests
              far beyond the current possibilities.  Specifically, a state-of-the-art
              HR-ICP-MS will enable the PIs to: 1) Dramatically expand our element
              concentration and element ratio analysis capabilities in aqueous matrices. 
              Existing UMaine research strengths in Quaternary science, environmental
              geochemistry, and marine biogeochemistry rely upon accurate elemental
              determinations at part-per-trillion and part-per-quadrillion levels.  Each of
              these programs requires the sensitivity and low detection limits offered by
              HR-ICP-MS to perform multi-elemental analyses without time-consuming
              pre-concentration protocols;  and 2) Perform rapid and highly precise elemental
              isotope ratio determinations, or constrain isotope ratios sufficiently for
              primary processes to be inferred.  Isotope measurements made with the HR-ICP-MS
              will be immediately used in several ongoing projects investigating pollutant
              source and transport, biogeochemical processes, and climate variability.   We
              will develop a HR-ICP-MS Facility in the Sawyer Environmental Research Center
              at UMaine for use as a regional resource. We plan to acquire a Finnigan
              ELEMENT2, the only commercially available high resolution single collector
              ICP-MS.  In addition to its primary research focus, the HR-ICP-MS will be used
              in a range of undergraduate and graduate programs at UMaine. Integration of
              research and education will occur through graduate theses, undergraduate
              courses, and independent undergraduate research projects under the Honors
              Program and Capstone Experience program. 
***


