Title       : Acquisition of Cryo-Preparative Instrumentation for an Electron Microscopy Core
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0215662

Award Number: 0215662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144371             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Phillips phillipst@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Phillips- 0215662

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Thomas E. Phillips to fund
              the purchase of three cryo-preparative instruments:  (i) a high-pressure
              freezing machine, (ii) an automated freeze-substitution and low temperature
              embedding processor, and (iii) a cryo-ultramicrotome.  Conventional chemical
              fixation using aqueous fixatives cause unnatural changes in the fine structure
              of cells.  Conventional fixation and embedding techniques at room temperature
              are also well known to interfere with immunocytochemical localization of target
              antigens.  Cryo-fixation at ambient pressure results in the formation of
              ice-crystals that destroys the fine structure in all but the most superficial
              10-20 mm of tissue.  Freezing at very high pressure increases the depth of
              tissue without ice crystal damage to over 200 mm.  The combination of
              cryo-fixation and freeze-substitution results in not only a truer preservation
              of tissue fine structure but also a greatly enhanced immunoreactivity.  For
              samples which can not be fixed using high-pressure fixation, such as those
              collected in the field, conventional fixation followed by cryo-ultramicrotomy
              has been demonstrated to show much higher immunoreactivity than specimens
              dehydrated and embedded in plastic resins.  
To maximize the impact of this
              technology, these instruments will be housed in a multi-user electron
              microscopy facility for use by all researchers on our campus.  Furthermore,
              investigators at other regional institutions will be able to use these
              instruments to prepare tissues that they can then examine on their home
              campuses.  Examples of the type of research to be performed with this equipment
              include the Phillips laboratory's plan to freeze plant seed tissues to examine
              the pathway that both endogenous and exogenous transgenic proteins travel
              through plant cells.  The Baskin laboratory studies how a plant organ attains a
              specific and heritable shape.  High pressure freezing will allow this lab to
              define the role that the filaments of the cell's cytoskeleton play in
              determining the shape of the root.  
The sequencing of the complete or partial
              genomes of a growing number of bacteria, plant and animal species has created a
              wealth of information concerning what proteins are made by these different
              organisms.  The next big breakthrough will be to determine the function of each
              of the proteins.  The first steps in this process are determining in which
              cells the proteins are expressed and where exactly within the cell the proteins
              are located at different developmental or physiological stages.  Electron
              microscopic immunocytochemistry offers a way to visualize the precise location
              of specific proteins and non-protein antigens within cells. These
              cryo-preparative instruments will not only increase the chances that our
              antibodies will recognize their target proteins but also ensure that the
              location that we find those proteins in accurately reflects their distribution
              in living cells.   

