Title       : SBIR Phase I: Xenon 3D Detector for Gamma Ray Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0215289

Award Number: 0215289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Lacy jlacy@proportionaltech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Proportional Tech
	      8022 El Rio
	      Houston, TX  770544104    713/747-7324

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project will seek to achieve a
              quantum leap in sensitivity of gamma ray astronomy in the 100 keV to 10 MeV
              region through development of a novel high pressure xenon (HPXe) detector
              element for imaging the region of interest. This development will incorporate
              (1) a cost-effective means of containing HPXe safely up to pressures of 3240
              psig, (2) innovative means of measuring the spatial coordinates of gamma ray
              interactions within the HPXe detecting element for high quality spatial and
              angular measurements, and (3) novel methods of realizing the optimal
              spectroscopic properties of HPXe at a density of 0.55 g/cm3 to achieve an
              energy resolution approaching 0.45% at 1 MeV. A large array of such detecting
              elements could provide the ideal detector for a next generation HPXe Compton
              gamma ray telescope, having an angular resolution of a few tenths of a degree
              and providing a hundred-fold increase in sensitivity over that predicted for
              the upcoming Integral (SPI) satellite gamma observatory. A scaled down version
              of such a telescope could also be used for regional neutron activation analysis
              of the Martian surface, remote detection applications, or an excellent
              alternative to HPGe detectors currently used in laboratory settings.

The
              anticipated outcome of this project is a new basic detector element, which can
              be used for a variety of space physics, field detection, and laboratory
              applications. The physical characteristics of such a detector combined with an
              order of magnitude improvement in energy resolution make it well suited for
              gamma detection in the 100 keV to 5 MeV band aboard satellite or balloon-borne
              instruments. Another very exciting application of this technology is a
              spectrometer for detection of radiation emitted as a result of neutron
              activation of the Martian surface. Such research could provide important data
              regarding planetary soil composition. In addition to astrophysics applications,
              a high energy resolution detector element based on high pressure xenon
              cylindrical detectors has significant commercial potential as a replacement for
              HPGe because the requirement of cryogenic cooling is eliminated, resulting in
              greater convenience and broader applicability. HPGe is currently employed in
              many laboratory settings, and the proposed technology could offer a cheaper and
              much more convenient alternative.

