Title       : MRI/RUI: Development of a Michelson Interferometric Imaging Refractometer for
               Optical Polymer Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0215407

Award Number: 0215407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134215             (Estimated)
Investigator: William T. Grubbs wgrubbs@stetson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stetson Univ
	      421 North Boulevard
	      Deland, FL  32720    904/734-4121

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Major Research Instrumentation RUI development project expands the
              capabilities of a low-cost optical apparatus based on a Helium-Neon (HeNe)
              laser and a Michelson interferometer that can be used to measure refractive
              index and film-thickness variations in planar polymer samples. The development
              incorporates a tunable light source and a visible-NIR digital camera imaging
              system. The use of a coherent HeNe laser light source in the current system
              greatly limits the versatility of the apparatus because it is limited to
              differential refractive index measurements. These measurements can only be
              carried out at 633 nm. The replacement of the coherent HeNe laser with a
              tunable, low-coherence arc-lamp source makes possible the determination of
              absolute and differential refractive index. These measurements can be performed
              at any wavelength, thereby permitting one to characterize the dispersion
              properties of samples. The addition of a visible-NIR digital camera and a
              hardware-software image capture system will advance the capabilities of the
              apparatus by allowing one to resolve graded refractive index profiles in
              optical materials. An imaging system will permit one to confront optical
              wave-front distortion problems, arising from surface roughness and sample
              inhomogeneity, that have plagued previous interferometer systems. The study,
              involving undergraduate students at a non-Ph.D. granting institution, will also
              promote training and learning through the integration of research in the
              educational process. 

The expanding use of the internet and the accompanying
              demand for high-bandwidth transmission media has fueled interests in
              'all-optical' networking. Polymers are emerging as key materials in the
              development of optical networks, owing to their flexibility, light weight, low
              cost of fabrication, and the potential to create materials with a variety of
              physical and optical properties. Research and development of optical polymers
              is currently hindered due to a lack of instrumentation for fully characterizing
              the bandwidth capacity of candidate materials in the visible and near-infrared
              (NIR) spectral regions. In particular, there is interest in developing optical
              imaging systems that allow one to characterize the absolute refractive index,
              refractive index stability, and overall dispersion properties of new polymeric
              materials. A secondary goal of this study is to use the new instrument to
              measure differential and absolute refractive indices in a wide range of freshly
              prepared polymer films. A collaborative study at the University of Central
              Florida will focus on the refractive index characteristics of polymer films
              doped with candidate photochromic compounds. These organic compounds are
              capable of two-photon induced photoisomerization. When incorporated into a
              polymer film, the 'switching' characteristics of these compounds make possible
              three-dimensional holographic data storage. 

