Title       : Lon-Mediated Regulation of Type III Protein Secretion in Pseudomonas Syringae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0215417

Award Number: 0215417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Hutcheson sh53@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The pathogenicity and host range of Pseudomonas syringae, a plant pathogenic
              bacterium, has been linked to the activities of a type III protein secretion
              system (TTSS) that essentially injects bacterial proteins into cells of its
              host.  These injected proteins alter the host cells to assist the growth of the
              bacterium in susceptible plants, but in resistant plants these proteins serve
              as a signal to initiate cellular defense mechanisms associated with disease
              resistance.  The assembly of the TTSS in P. syringae is induced during the
              interaction with host cells and is coordinated by a complex genetic regulatory
              system. Positive- and negative-acting regulatory factors that control assembly
              of the TTSS have been identified.  This project will elucidate how these
              regulatory factors transduce signals produced during the interaction with the
              host to regulate and coordinate assembly of the TTSS.  This research will
              determine how the activity of a specific regulatory protease is controlled
              during the disease process, define the role of another regulatory protein,
              HrpV, in coordinating the assembly of the TTSS, examine a possible gating
              mechanism controlling when proteins are released from the bacteria, and
              elucidate how the activities of key transcriptional factors are modulated.  The
              proposed experiments will provide new insight into molecular mechanisms for
              controlling bacterial disease and disease resistance in plants, but since
              several bacterial pathogens of mammals use a very similar mechanism, this
              research may have application to managing bacterial diseases of mammalian
              hosts.  

