Title       : Acquisition of Plant Growth Chambers for Teaching and Research: Enhancement of
               New Life Sciences Building
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  2002  
File        : a0215923

Award Number: 0215923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Guiltinan mjg9@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hong Ma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nina V. Fedoroff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah M. Assmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Claude W. dePamphilis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract: Mark Guiltinan (#0215923)

A grant has been awarded to Pennsylvania
              State University under the direction of Dr. Mark Guiltinan to develop a Plant
              Growth Facility consisting of six growth chambers and a small greenhouse. The
              facility center will provide a physical home for the graduate programs, and an
              organizing role for the enhancement of Plant Sciences research, teaching and
              outreach programs.
The objectives of the center will be to: provide
              state-of-the-art research facilities for a core group of resident plant
              scientists, including current faculty and new hires; provide collaborative
              space in the new building to members of the Plant Science Center; develop and
              enhance collaborative interactions among plant scientists and with
              researchers
in other fields, at Penn State and elsewhere; improve the Plant
              Physiology and Ecological and Molecular Plant Physiology graduate education
              programs, and; develop outreach programs for the general public and for
              pre-college students.

This center will support research in plant sciences
              for diverse studies, but will be particularly important to the growing number
              of plant scientists using the model plant species, Arabidopsis thaliana. The
              completion of the Arabidopsis genome sequence, along with major new funding
              programs in plant genomics at the NSF and USDA,
have brought us to a new era
              in plant research, requiring high throughput facilities for functional analysis
              of genes. 

Penn State has made a priority effort to enhance the life
              sciences; enhancement of the Plant Sciences Center will help us move forward on
              this path, by providing necessary facilities and maximizing laboratory space in
              the main building. This will in turn help to attract top faculty candidates who
              will be concerned about availability of such facilities. The facility will
              provide for the first time, an interdisciplinary, inter-college facility for
              high quality environmental growth of plants to support the many plant
              scientists at Penn State. It will also serve our teaching and outreach
              programs, providing a facility available to all for the growth of plants.

