Title       : Acquisition of a Quantum Design PPMS for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0215693

Award Number: 0215693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178598             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sang-Wook Cheong sangc@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Valery Kiryukhin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martha Greenblatt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Major Research Instrumentation Program provides supports for
              acquisition of a Quantum Design Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS).
              The PPMS is essential for a broad research collaboration between the Physics
              and Chemistry Departments at Rutgers U., New Jersey Institute of Technology
              (NJIT), various other universities, a national laboratory, and industrial labs.
               The instrument will be used in a wide range of research, including research on
              the microscopic electronic/magnetic/structural inhomogeneity found in
              functional oxides, and its corresponding roles in the macroscopic physical
              response of these materials, such as magnetoresistance, magnetic permeability,
              piezoelectric constants, and linear/non-linear optical characteristics. The
              success of these research activities will depend on a speedy characterization
              of various material properties, and the PPMS will be essential for this
              purpose.  

The PPMS will be directly used for education of undergraduate
              students as well as high school students from underrepresented groups. New
              experiments for an undergraduate class will be developed at the Department of
              Physics & Astronomy (Rutgers U.).  In addition, T. Tyson at NJIT will
              incorporate magneto-transport and other magnetic experiments on superconducting
              cuprates to a seven-week summer workshop for high school students in the Newark
              area.  Sabya Guha (Technician at Rutgers) will manage the maintenance and
              operation of the PPMS so that the safety of inexperienced students/users will
              be ensured.

 ****

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation
              program supports Rutgers Univ New Brunswick with the acquisition of a Quantum
              Design Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS), a multi-functional and
              user-friendly instrument.  The PPMS can be used for measurements of a wide
              range of physical properties in complex materials. It will be essential for a
              broad research collaboration between Physics and Chemistry Departments at
              Rutgers, New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT), various other universities,
              a national laboratory, and industrial labs.  Modern electronic and magnetic
              devices often utilize the physical response of materials when subjected to
              external influences such as magnetic or electric fields, pressure, or optical
              irradiation.  Recent investigation suggests that the large-scale physical
              response can be drastically enhanced in materials with microscopic
              electronic/magnetic/structural inhomogeneity.  Thus, this enhanced response in
              microscopically inhomogeneous materials can provide the scientific underpinning
              for future technologies.  The research will focus on understanding as well as
              controlling the inter-relationship between the microscopic inhomogeneity and
              macroscopic physical response.  The success of this project will critically
              depend on a comprehensive characterization of various materials, and the PPMS
              will be essential for this purpose.

The PPMS will be used directly for the
              education of undergraduate students as well as high school students from
              underrepresented groups.  New experiments for an undergraduate class will be
              developed at the Department of Physics & Astronomy. Furthermore, T. Tyson at
              NJIT, will add magneto-transport and other magnetic experiments on
              superconducting cuprates to a seven-week summer workshop for underrepresented
              high school students in the Newark area 

