Title       : SBIR Phase I: Preventive, Corrective, and Emergency Control for Equipment
               Outages Producing Voltage Collapse and Blackout
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0215299

Award Number: 0215299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Schlueter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Intellicon
	      1936 Heatherton Dr.
	      Holt, MI  488421539    517/355-5244

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an
              autonomous method for curing voltage collapse and blackout in a power system
              that may occur when a loadflow has no solution. This method will identify over
              100 different voltage collapse problems in a system when current methods may
              only detect two or three. It can find 1000 or more double equipment outages
              that have no loadflow solution that are unknown due to the overwhelming
              computation required to find them. For each such equipment outage that has no
              loadflow solution, the method will determine (a) if the lack of solution is due
              to loadflow algorithm convergence problems or not; (b) which of the over 100
              voltage collapse problems is producing the blackout; (c) whether the lack of
              solution is due to insufficient sufficient reactive supply and the corrective
              or preventive control that would enable a loadflow solution to be found; (d)
              whether the lack of solution is due to network reactive losses that require
              reduction in load(emergency control) to enable a loadflow solution to be found;
              (e) the corrective and/or emergency controls that require very few control
              changes because it depends on the structure of the subsystem that initiates the
              blackout. the method would be used in design, scheduling, and in on-line
              control of power systems. Currently, it takes an average of 15 hours of
              engineering manpower/ computation time to obtain a solution and in many cases
              no solution can be found.  The proposed method can be expected to obtain a
              preventive, corrective or emergency control solution for every equipment outage
              that has no solution in seconds and without human intervention. It accomplishes
              the task because it learns and acquires knowledge of the structure of the
              system that produces cascading instability that is voltage collapse and that
              produces blackout. 

This project has substantial commercial potential by
              reducing blackouts and the economic and societal costs associated with power
              interruption.
