Title       : SBIR Phase I: Reactive Mounting of Heat Sinks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0215109

Award Number: 0215109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy P. Weihs tweihs@reactivenanotech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : RNT
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  212244781    /   -

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop
              a rapid, heat sink mounting technology that produces a metallic bond between
              the heat sink and the microelectronic device. The metallic bond is far superior
              to current mounting technologies in its thermal conduction and its mechanical
              strength. The proposed technology for mounting heat sinks onto substrates and
              chips is a reactive joining process that uses reactive multilayer foils as
              local heat sources for melting solders or brazes. The foils are a new class of
              nano-engineered materials, in which self- propagating exothermic reactions can
              be ignited at room temperature with a spark. By inserting a multilayer foil
              between two solder (or braze) layers and two components, heat generated by the
              reaction in the foil melts the solder and consequently bonds the components.
              This new method of soldering eliminates the need for a furnace and, with very
              localized heating, avoids thermal damage to the microelectronic device. The
              resulting metallic joints are stronger and far more thermally conductive than
              common, commercial mounting technologies (greases, pads and epoxies). The
              reactive bonding process is also far more rapid than most of these
              technologies, offering substantial savings in processing time and convenience.
              Phase I research will (1) demonstrate the feasibility of this mounting process,
              (2) characterize the thermal and mechanical properties of the resulting
              interfaces, and (3) develop a model that predicts thermal exposure of devices
              during the reactive mounting process.

Successful development of this
              reactive mounting technology will advance the thermal management of
              microelectronic devices, and it will help accelerate future improvements in the
              performance of these devices. The world wide market for thermal management
              solutions is about $3.7 billion, with most of this market being outsourced. The
              trends in the computer industry are towards smaller devices with higher power
              dissipation, increasing the need for superior thermal management.
