Title       : Doctoral Research in Political Science: Business Interests, Political Parties
               and the State in Post-Socialist Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0215451

Award Number: 0215451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12239              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaobo Lu xl29@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              



This Doctoral Dissertation Research Support investigation studies the
              causes of varying forms of political corruption observed in post-socialist
              Eastern Europe. Most attention in the academic literature has hovered around
              the orthodox debate about institutional reform and the related policy issue of
              privatization. Consequently, throughout the 12 years of reform, the continued
              large involvement of the state in the economy has received little consideration
              and its resulting impact is not well understood. 

Increasing evidence
              suggests that such interactions, collaborations, and often collusion and
              violence between the state and economic actors are widespread. These
              interactions can be classified according to their form. However, what causes
              these interactions to assume a particular form is one of the major puzzles
              facing political scientists studying post-socialist states. This study is
              designed to explain outcomes in various countries. Since empirical evidence
              shows that extensive relations between the state and the leading 200 firms, are
              a given in post-socialist economies, how can we explain the widely varying
              outcomes of such links? When do links with the state facilitate firm
              development (Poland), when do they spiral into widespread asset-stripping
              (Romania) and when do they create a class of interest holders that is ready to
              enter into a violent conflict with the state (Bulgaria)? 

This study
              approaches the questions above by proposing a theory that links the patterns of
              access to political power and alternation in government (IV) and the resulting
              dynamic of state actor-economic actor interaction (DV). The research has
              testable hypotheses generated through close case studies and original data on
              the network connections between firms and the state in Poland, Romania and
              Bulgaria. It uses regression analysis to test these hypotheses against a larger
              set of post-socialist cases. This study will contribute to the debate on
              state-economy relations in post-socialism by providing a framework through
              which to explain the differences between various countries. The data, research
              and conclusions are also a valuable asset to inquiries on the behavior of
              political parties, interest groups and bureaucracies in post-socialism. 



