Title       : Characterizing Efficient Social Insurance Institutions: Theory and Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0215764

Award Number: 0215764
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525115             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Rust rust@econ.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hugo A. Hopenhayn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Varadarajan V. Chari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will develop theoretical and computational approaches for
              characterizing efficient social  insurance institutions. We define a social
              insurance institution as a compulsory government-run program that provides a
              set of state-contingent taxes (premiums or contributions) and transfers
              (benefits) that cover a well-defined set of risks. An efficient social
              insurance institution is one that provides a given level welfare to the
              individuals in the system at minimal cost. Our research will attempt to provide
              characterizations of efficient social insurance institutions that cover the
              following risks: 1) longevity, via mandatory pensions or "old age insurance",
              2) disability, via disability insurance, 3) unemployment, via unemployment
              insurance, and 4) health care costs, via medical insurance.  Another objective
              of social insurance is lifetime redistribution of income and/or wealth. This
              can be viewed as insurance for a fifth class of risks, namely insurance for
              individuals who have certain fixed characteristics or "types" that may lead to
              permanently lower lifetime employment, earnings, wealth, and welfare.
Social
              insurance programs are large and pervasive in developed economies. In the U.S.,
              spending on Social Security (Old Age, Disability, and Unemployment Insurance),
              Medicare, Medicaid amounted to 48.3\% of total Federal spending and 9.8\% of
              GDP in 2000 (U.S. Congressional Budget Office). All forecasts indicate that
              unless benefits are reduced, social insurance spending will grow rapidly over
              the coming decades as the baby boomers age and start to retire. Although there
              have been proposals to shift the costs of social insurance from the government
              to the private sector via various "privatization" schemes, a variety of moral
              hazard and adverse selection problems hinder the operation of private insurance
              markets. We take market incompleteness as the principal rationale for mandatory
              government provision of insurance, and as the basic point of departure for our
              analysis. We assume that the government can compel universal participation, but
              we also assume that it faces the same informational constraints as private
              insurance institutions would face if they existed. We deal with these
              fundamental informational asymmetries via two very different but related
              strategies: 1) a "dynamic mechanism design" (DMD) approach where we search for
              an efficient policy over an infinite-dimensional space of all possible policies
              that satisfy certain participation and incentive constraints, and 2) a
              "parametric mechanism design" (PMD) approach where we search for an
              "approximately efficient" social insurance institution in a finite-dimensional
              subspace of social insurance institutions and where incentive constraints are
              ignored.

Using these techniques we will not only be able to characterize the
              form of efficient social insurance institutions, we will also be able to
              quantify the degree of inefficiency in current social insurance institutions.
              We expect to be able to characterize optimal social security and disability
              insurance programs as part of a comprehensive, integrated analysis of social
              insurance in the U.S. and other developed economies. Given the large share of
              GDP devoted to social insurance, the potential cost savings from discovering
              more efficient social insurance programs provides a strong, practical rationale
              for this research.

