Title       : SBIR Phase I: Solid State Electrochemical Carbon Dioxide Sensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0215085

Award Number: 0215085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99964              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mourad Manoukian mmanoukian@ginerinc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GINER EC SYSTEMS, LLC
	      89 Rumford Avenue
	      Newton, MA  024661311    781/529-0500

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : ,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the
              development of a miniaturized and inexpensive solid-state electrochemical
              carbon dioxide gas sensor for environmental air quality control, based on a
              novel-sensing concept, utilizing solid polymer electrolytes and thick film
              device miniaturization techniques. Carbon dioxide emissions are a global issue.
              In addition, CO2 monitoring and control in offices, homes, indoor sport arenas,
              enclosed parking garages and schools are of growing importance. The method of
              infrared spectroscopy is predominantly used in commercially available carbon
              dioxide monitors. Although the infrared spectroscopic system offers acceptable
              precision, it is large and relatively expensive. To the best of our knowledge
              no solid state, room temperature electrochemical carbon dioxide sensor is
              commercially available for environmental air quality control applications. The
              proposed novel electrochemical sensor, which could be configured as a handheld
              or a panel mount room device or for surface mounting on air ducts, will be
              reliable, inexpensive and compact and will yield an enhanced response signal at
              room temperature, utilizing miniaturized thick film sensors for CO2 monitoring
              in environmental applications. The feasibility of the proposed novel concept
              will be demonstrated and the best catalyst material and thick film sensor
              design parameters will be identified.

The potential commercial applications
              for the proposed solid state, room temperature electrochemical carbon dioxide
              sensor include: A) Indoor Environmental Quality (IEQ) control applications
              where demand control ventilation based on CO2 concentration of residential,
              commercial and industrial spaces occupied by people, could improve energy
              efficiency while simultaneously improving the indoor environment. B)
              Agricultural and bio-related process applications. The growth rate and
              development of plants can be improved by controlling the concentration of
              carbon dioxide. C) Food packaging industry. In the meat packaging industry, a
              high concentration of CO2 in the packaging inhibits bacterial growth and
              retains the natural color of the meat. D) Medical applications where an
              inexpensive electrochemical sensor could be used to measure the concentration
              of carbon dioxide in an exhaled breathe and could be incorporated in breathing
              systems.

