Title       : Conference: The Global Genome Question: Microbes as the Key to Understanding
               Evolution and Ecology; October 11-13, 2002, Longboatkey, Florida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0215557

Award Number: 0215557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Relman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Soc For Microbiology
	      1752 N Street
	      Washington, DC  200362804    202/737-3600

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9183,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. David Relman (Stanford University) and
              sponsoring organization the American Academy of Microbiology (Washington, DC)
              for a colloquium entitled "The Global Genome Question: Microbes as the Key to
              Understanding Evolution and Ecology," October 11-13, 2002, in Longboatkey, FL. 
              A group of 30-40 invited scientists will participate; spending 2 days in
              deliberations designed to produce the intellectual material for an analytical
              and comprehensive report. The primary objective is to map out a new research
              paradigm that departs from analysis of the genomes of cultivated microbes and
              moves toward understanding the relationship and interplay among the genome and
              community evolution and dynamics.

Microbes carry enormous genetic wealth and
              biological aptitude. Humans have already exploited the biochemical competence
              and versatility of these tiny creatures in medicine, agriculture, ecology, and
              studies of evolution. But while investigators tap into the tremendous resources
              stored in microbial genomes, more questions--and some problems--have become
              apparent.  Many of these difficulties are typical of any rapidly growing
              enterprise; still others are specific to this new scientific arena. The
              unparalleled benefits of genome science make it critical that important
              questions receive coordinated attention and that issues are resolved. Building
              on the groundbreaking work of sequencing individual genomes in the laboratory,
              scientists know that much more can be learned from a new research approach that
              focuses on (1) understanding genomes in an evolutionary and ecological context
              and (2) addressing evolutionary and ecological questions using genomics-enabled
              methods and analyses. Population dynamics, recombination, and lateral gene
              transfer look to be driving forces of genomic and ecosystem evolution. If so,
              genome evolution and ecosystem dynamics are part of the same process--a process
              that can be understood through the study of communities of microorganisms in
              environments, rather than individual strains or isolated systems in the
              lab.




