Title       : MRI/RUI: Acquisition of a Powder X-Ray Diffractometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0215911

Award Number: 0215911
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135885             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Cunningham cunningh@grinnell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grinnell College
	      1121 Park Street
	      Grinnell, IA  501121690    641/269-4939

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Major Research Instrumentation RUI grant supports acquisition of a powder
              x-ray diffractometer (XRD). The XRD is an extremely useful tool in materials
              characterization. The lattice plane distance measurements it yields make
              possible the identification of unknown crystalline compounds. The XRD will
              enhance a vigorous research program in novel materials by identifying compounds
              grown in single crystal form by precipitation from solution, a technique known
              as flux growth. Once identified, these single crystals will be characterized
              using an existing instrument at Grinnell, which measures dc magnetization, ac
              susceptibility, resistivity, magnetoresistivity, and heat capacity. This
              research is pursued as a strongly collaborative effort between the principal
              investigator, undergraduates at Grinnell, and colleagues at Ames Laboratory.
              Examples of current research projects the XRD will support include studies of
              magnetic anisotropy in rare earth intermetallic single crystals and the design
              of a strongly anisotropic spin glass in single crystal form, to be used as a
              model system for testing spin glass theories. The results of these projects
              will be disseminated broadly through peer-reviewed journal publications with
              student co-authors and through presentations at national conferences.
              

Because research is always blended with teaching at Grinnell, the XRD will
              have impact beyond the research projects that it supports. Students will use
              the XRD in collaborative research with the principal investigator,
              faculty-mentored independent student projects, and experiments in courses taken
              by physics majors. Grinnell College has attained national recognition for its
              successful efforts to increase the retention of under-represented groups in
              science through programs such as the New Science Project. The XRD will help to
              broaden the exposure of under-represented groups to research quality
              instrumentation in their education and research training. 

