Title       : Characterization of Xyloglucan Galactosyltransferase Homologs in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0215535

Award Number: 0215535
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolf-Dieter D. Reiter wdreiter@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The extracellular matrix (or "cell wall") of higher plants plays numerous
              protective and growth-regulating roles during the life cycle of a plant. 
              Furthermore, plant cell wall material represents the most abundant source of
              newly synthesized biomass on earth making it an important renewable source of
              energy, and the raw material for industrial applications ranging from textile
              production to wood processing.  Despite this importance of plant cell walls
              both from a basic and applied point of view, little is known about the
              synthesis of cell wall material on the molecular level.  Plant cell walls
              consist primarily of polysaccharides representing long strings of sugar
              moieties that are attached to each other by enzymes referred to as
              glycosyltransferases.  One of the most important and challenging areas in plant
              cell wall research is the identification of genes encoding these
              glycosyltransferases, and the determination of their function.  To address this
              issue by a genetic approach, mutants of the plant model organism Arabidopsis
              thaliana were isolated which showed alterations in the composition of their
              cell wall material.  One of these mutants turned out to be unable to synthesize
              normal xyloglucan (the major hemicellulose in most higher plants) because of a
              defect in a specific glycosyltransferase.  An evaluation of the Arabidopsis
              genome sequence indicated the presence of ten coding regions with substantial
              structural similarity to this enzyme.  These ten genes are expected to encode
              additional glycosyltransferases in cell wall synthesis.  In our future
              research, the functions and properties of most of these enzymes will be
              investigated via three complementary approaches:  (A) Determination in which
              parts of the plant these predicted glycosyl-transferases reside.  (B) The
              identification of mutant lines which are defective in the activity of these
              enzymes.  This will be followed by an analysis of their cell wall composition
              and an evaluation for changes in growth habit, physiology, and wall properties.
               (C) Production of the predicted glycosyltransferases in microorganisms
              followed by enzyme assays to determine their functions.  The proposed
              experiments are designed to further our understanding of cell wall synthesis in
              higher plants with the potential to manipulate the cell wall composition of
              important crop plants to improve digestibility of forage crops, facilitate the
              production of fibers for paper products and clothing, and to improve the
              properties of cell wall components in human nutrition.
