Title       : Combinatorial Regulation of Differential Gene Expression in E. coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0215769

Award Number: 0215769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald F. Senear dfsenear@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1154,1164,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Coordinate regulation of unlinked genes is fundamental to genetic expression in
              all organisms.  Such regulation relies on the cooperative, site-specific
              assembly of regulatory, protein-DNA complexes.  Combinatorial strategies are
              common.  These involve both widely used transcription factors and also factors
              that are specific either to the gene, the tissue or cell type, or the
              development stage.  Variable arrays of DNA sites, as are generally found in
              different genes, assemble different protein-DNA complexes from the same
              factors.  In this manner, unlinked genes can be expressed differentially. 
              Whole programs of gene expression are easily controlled by modulating the
              activity of only the specific factors.  This project addresses the
              combinatorial mechanism of differential gene expression in the E. coli CytR
              regulon.  This gene family consists of nine unlinked transcription units that
              are regulated coordinately by the interplay of just two regulatory proteins. 
              One is the cyclic-AMP receptor protein (CRP) a widely used transcriptional
              activator in bacteria; the other, CytR, is a regulon-specific bacterial
              repressor.  CytR is also a member of the LacI family of homologous repressors.
              A key feature of the regulation is that the various cistrons differ from one
              another in extents of activation, repression and induction.  This differential
              regulation is achieved by nesting levels of local repression, mediated by CytR,
              on the global regulation mediated by CRP.  An unusual feature of most
              CytR-regulated promoters is that they contain two CRP sites.  These activate
              transcription via different mechanisms.  CytR and CRP bind cooperatively to
              DNA, as a result of direct protein-protein interactions.  The importance of
              cooperativity is underscored by the fact that induction occurs when CytR binds
              cytidine because the CytR-CRP cooperativity is lost and despite no affect on
              intrinsic CytR binding to DNA.  Unlike most bacterial repressors, CytR does not
              repress transcription independently; instead it acts by modulating the
              CRP-mediated activation.  It does so by interacting with DNA-bound CRP to
              control the interactions between activating regions on CRP and the bacterial
              RNA Polymerase.  The objectives of the research are: 1) to understand how the
              different structures of CytR-regulated promoters mediate different patterns of
              cooperative interactions between CRP and CytR; and 2) to understand the role of
              CytR-CRP cooperativity in controlling activation and repression of RNAP at
              different promoters, using both site occlusion and allosteric mechanisms.  To
              accomplish these goals a comparison of the interactions among CRP, CytR and the
              four class III CytR-regulated promoters will be made using DNase footprinting
              and gel mobility shift assays.  The role of different binding modes of CytR and
              different arrangements of CytR and CRP binding sites will be assessed
              systematically using artificial promoters.  These will allow independent
              controls on the structure of the CytR operator and locations of regulatory
              sites.  These data will be combined with results of both steady state and
              pre-steady state assays of transcription initiation to develop a comprehensive
              kinetic model of differential gene regulation.  CytR and CRP mutants that are
              defective either in their mutual interaction or in their interaction with RNAP
              will be used to assess the role of the interaction between CytR and CRP bound
              to CRP2 in modulating the class II mediated activation.
This project is
              supported by the Biochemistry of Gene Expression Program and the Molecular
              Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the
              Directorate for Biological Sciences.
