Title       : Paleontological Research in the Lower Miocene of Northeast Uganda
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0215877

Award Number: 0215877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87348              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura M. MacLatchy maclatch@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The aim of this study is to better understand the early evolution of apes and
              other primates through paleontological research at sites in northeastern
              Uganda.  The Ugandan fossil sites have yielded the oldest known ape of modern
              appearance, as well as the oldest Old World monkey and numerous other primates
              and mammals.  Of particular interest is Morotopithecus bishopi.  Analysis of
              fossils of this 20-million year old ape has revealed that unlike
              contemporaneous primates from Kenya who resembled monkeys in overall body plan,
              Morotopithecus would have engaged in upright postures and arm swinging
              behaviors like its modern relatives.  The adaptations for upright posture and
              forelimb suspension suggest a close relationship between Morotopithecus and
              living apes and humans. Furthermore, as the oldest known ape to exhibit these
              adaptations, Morotopithecus is key to understanding their origins.  
	Much
              remains to be determined about Morotopithecus including its relationship to
              both living and fossil ape species, its paleoenvironmental context and its
              anatomy. Research will include field collection of more fossils, as well as
              investigation of the geology and paleoecology of the Ugandan sites.  The latter
              will provide crucial contextual data on the timing of evolutionary events and
              on the conditions under which Morotopithecus and other mammals evolved. 
              
	Broader impacts of the study include the participation of four women (the
              P.I. and 3 senior personnel) and the training of American and Ugandan students.
               Although East Africa is "the cradle of humanity", historically few East
              Africans have participated in paleoanthropological research.


