Title       : Policy Networks and Federal Enforcement: Do Local Networks Enhance NPDES Permit
               Enforcement?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0215426

Award Number: 0215426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201063             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Scholz john.scholz@fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cheng-Lung Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research investigates the little-studied interaction between federal
              agencies and local policy networks concerned with the same policy arenas. The
              project extends Ostrom's (1990) framework to develop the hypothesis that dense,
              overlapping, locally-oriented networks of shareholders involved in "governing
              the commons" will increase both enforcement and compliance with' federal
              regulations.  While Ostrom's analysis clarifies the potentially adverse impact
              of central regulatory policies on local institutions that "govern the commons",
              this project investigates the potentially beneficial impact that local networks
              may have on federal policies in the more complex federal system in America.
              

Water resource management provides the critical research site for observing
              the interaction between two institutional approaches to the governance of water
              usage; the EPA's "first generation" federal permit system created by the Clean
              Water Act of 1972, and the local watershed management networks and institutions
              that have evolved during the last decade to resolve pollution and water usage
              issues not addressed by the federal permit system (Kraft and Vig 2000). 

In
              the complex institutional environment of the U.S. Federalist system, water
              policy networks may involve pollution dischargers, stakeholders affected by
              pollution, and in particular the elected and administrative officials from
              federal, state, and local institutions that have local jurisdiction over water
              management issues. Effective networks can provide cooperative advantages to its
              members comparable to those of the self-organized institutions studied by
              Ostrom (1990). We explore three implications of this perspective for the
              interaction between local networks and federal enforcement: 

*Local Sanction
              Hypothesis: Effective networks increase compliance.
*Magnification Hypothesis:
              Effective networks increase the deterrence impact of enforcement actions on
              compliance. 
* Concentration Hypothesis: Effective networks increase
              inspection activities. 

To test these hypotheses, the project integrates two
              independent traditions that study opposite halves of the enforcement system:
              the democratic control of bureaucracy literature that analyzes political
              influence on regulatory enforcement actions, and the deterrence literature that
              analyzes the deterrence effects of enforcement actions on compliance. The first
              phase of research uses regression analysis based on available archival records
              of all permit holders to test the hypotheses, while the second phase develops
              direct measures of local networks for a sample of permit holders to provide a
              more intensive analysis: 

Phase One: The first phase analyzes quarterly
              enforcement and compliance data from the EP A's Permit Compliance System (PCS)
              for the full period for which data are available, from 1994 to present. The
              required supplementary data on permit holders and local policy networks will be
              appended from census and governmental databases. We apply Feinstein's
              detection-controlled estimation procedure (Feinstein 1989, 1990) to
              simultaneously estimate enforcement actions and compliance responses for all
              major permit holders active throughout this period. Empirical results from
              phase-one analysis are then used for developing the phase-two sample. 

Phase
              Two: The second phase has five specific goals: I) develop survey-based data on
              the local policy networks relevant to the permit enforcement and compliance
              system for a sample of permit holders, 2) calculate survey-based measures of
              network capabilities and analyze the link between these measures and the
              county-level factors from the previous analysis, 3) repeat phase one tests with
              the improved measures, 4) extend phase one tests to include the analysis of
              beliefs and attitudes related to compliance, and 5) develop confirmatory case
              studies in four selected communities. The project will produce journal articles
              in the fields of the political economy of institutions, bureaucratic controls,
              and enforcement and deterrence theory. Detailed efficiency analysis of
              
enforcement will be directly relevant to EPA enforcement policies. Finally a
              book will integrate project findings with the broader research context of the
              design of governance institutions, with a focus on the advantages, limitations,
              and interactions between federal and local approaches to "governing the
              commons." 


