Title       : Atmospheric Adjustment to Generalized Forcing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0215358

Award Number: 0215358
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $553352             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Bannon bannon@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A theoretical investigation of atmospheric adjustment to generalized forcings
              will be carried out by the Principal Investigator.  Atmospheric adjustment is
              defined as the response of a moist compressible atmosphere to a prescribed
              forcing.  Immediately after an instantaneous forcing of arbitrary shape, the
              atmosphere will, in general, be in a state of geostrophic and hydrostatic
              imbalance.  The study of atmospheric adjustment describes the subsequent
              tendency of the air to achieve a state of geostrophic and hydrostatic balance. 
              It is an extension of the classic problem of geostrophic adjustment to include
              the effects of compressibility and to allow for nonhydrostatic and moist
              processes.  The forcings studied will be completely general and include
              momentum, mass, thermal, and moisture forcings.  The impact of the time scale
              of the forcing will also be assessed.  Thus, the research will provide insight
              into the fundamental workings of the atmosphere.  The solutions also will shed
              light on the dynamics of clouds, mesoscale convective systems, and other
              nonhydrostatic circulations driven by moist convection.  Although both heating
              and moistening correspond to an addition of buoyancy to the air mass, there is
              a fundamental difference.  An addition of heat can be transformed to other
              forms of energy that can be propagated away; an addition of water must be
              conserved and cannot be transformed (in the absence of phase changes) and
              propagated out of the system.

A suite of linear problems will be used to
              examine the full effects of compressibility in the adjustment to generalized
              forcings.  Initial value and Fourier transform techniques will be used to solve
              for the linear time-dependent problems analytically.  The energetics will be
              examined and the partitioning of the energy between the acoustic, gravity, and
              Lamb modes and the balanced final state will be assessed.  These solutions
              provide a benchmark to test the dynamical cores of mesoscale, cloud, and
              forecasting models.

These analytic solutions of the linearized adjustment
              problem will be supplemented by numerical investigations.  These numerical
              studies will address the effect of nonlinearities on the atmospheric response
              and enable solutions with a more realistic base-state atmosphere. 

The
              research also will develop an anelastic model that eliminates the acoustic and
              Lamb waves.  This new model will be an advance over existing models in that it
              will conserve mass, moisture, and energy.  Numerical experiments will document
              the merits of these anelastic equations in comparison to the fully compressible
              equations.  Thus in addition to providing insight into the dynamics of the
              atmosphere the research will help to benchmark and develop nonhydrostatic
              models, which are the foundation for numerical weather forecast models.
