Title       : Conjugated Polymer Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0215342

Award Number: 0215342
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christoph Weder chw6@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              It is expected that the introduction of conjugated cross-links between
              conjugated macromolecules can lead to macromolecular networks with most
              interesting optic and electronic characteristics.  However, the knowledge base
              regarding the synthesis and processing of well-defined materials with this
              structural motif is very limited.  Thus, a research program is proposed, which
              is focused on the design, synthesis and exploration of well-defined conjugated
              polymer networks.   The proposed research addresses the  synthesis and
              investigation of different classes of polymeric materials, including
              poly(p-phenylene ethynylene) (PPE_ and poly(thiophene) (PT) deriavatives, and
              various fields of potential applications.  The envisioned activities will be
              focused on organometallic hybrid materials in which metal-ligand interactions
              between the conjugated macromolecules and metals allow the controlled formation
              of conjugated cross-links.  This general framework is particularly attractive,
              since it readily permits synthetic access to the desired target materials
              through ligand-exchange reactions and also allows for adequated processing
              schemes.  On the one hand, it is intended to directly utilize functionalities
              that are integral part of the polymer backbones as binding sites, such as the
              ethynylene moieties comprised in the PPE.  The latter form stable complexes
              with a variety of metal centers, including Pt(0) and Pt(0), which will form the
              conjugated cross-links.  On the other hand, it is envisioned to also integrate
              specific ligand sites into the conjugated polymer.  Bipyridine moieties, which
              are readily integrated into the polymers under consideration and from stable
              complexes with a variety of metal centers, represent an illustrative example. 
              Initially focusing on charge-transport characteristics, electrical conductivity
              and nonlinear optic response, it is planned to systematically investigate the
              influence which the cross-links exert on the electronic and photophysical
              properties of the novel materials.

The research in this proposal contributes
              new and original ideas to the current international effort in the fields of
              chemistry, materials science, and physics of conjugated polymers.  It is
              anticipated that it will provide firm answers to the fundamental questions how
              conjugated cross-links can be conveniently introduced into these materials
              without compromising their processability, and how this structural motif can be
              employed to influence the material's optic and electronic characteristics in a
              beneficial way.  Because of the exemplary and fundamental character, the
              research is expected to provide a broad intellectual basis for the future
              design, synthesis and application of functional materials with unusual and
              unique optic and electronic properties.  With the aim to develop innovative and
              stimulating curricula at undergraduate and graduate level and in an attempt to
              integrate research and education, the proposed research is complemented with a
              number of educational elements.  The latter are intimately related to the
              research activities of the PI and include the creation of undergraduate
              research opportunities, the development of a new cutting-edge course on photo-
              and electrofunctional polymers, and the development of a pioneering outreach
              program - the 'Polymer Science Days' - which is implemented in collaboration
              with the Cleveland Museum of Natural History.  The proposed initiatives
              complement 'routine' teaching assignments and address the development of
              innovative and stimulating curricula.

