Title       : Absentee Ownership and Corporate Environmental Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0215366

Award Number: 0215366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40045              (Estimated)
Investigator: Don S. Grant II grantd@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES-0215366
PI (s) Don Grant II
University of Arizona


 The project
              addresses two questions concerning the environmental performance of absentee
              owned plants: (1) Do plants with out-of-state or foreign headquarters emit more
              toxins than locally owned plants?, and (2) Do plants with remote headquarters
              pollute more depending on the social capital of their host communities. 
              Critics of globalization and capitalist expansion suggest that absentee owned
              plants have no long-term interest in local communities as places to live. 
              Rather they are very willing to plunder their natural surroundings if it will
              maximize their parent firm's profits.  Meanwhile literature on structural
              embeddedness suggest that this organizational model is too simplistic, that
              regardless of where a plant's headquarters is located, a plant's performance is
              conditioned by the local institutional culture in which it is situated.  The
              research will test several hypothesis-(1) chemical plants with out-of-state or
              foreign headquarters have higher emission rates (i.e., release a larger percent
              of chemicals they use on-site to the environment), (2) chemical plants with
              out-of-state or foreign headquarters have higher emission rates when located in
              civically disengaged communities, and (3) chemical plants with out-of-state ore
              foreign headquarters have particularly high emission rates when located in
              communities that are both civically disengaged and comprised of poor
              minorities. 

To test these hypotheses, a data file consisting of roughly
              2000 chemical plants will be used.  The file includes information on each
              plant's toxic releases from the EPA's Toxics Release Inventory, its ownership
              status, and the social and institutional features of its surrounding community.
               A cross-section design will be used to determine the direct and conditional
              effects of absentee ownership on emission rates in 1990.  To assess how these
              effects have changed a lagged panel design will be employed.

Findings will
              provide new insights into what is rapidly becoming the modal type of business
              organization:  absentee ownership.  Prior research has demonstrated that
              absentee ownership has economic and social effects; this study will be the
              first to specify some of the conditions under which absentee ownership also has
              environmental consequences.  Results could potentially guide regulators in
              deciding whether to monitor plants owned by foreign firms more closely, and the
              business community in its efforts at self-regulation. 

