Title       : The Sensitivity of Mesoscale Convective System Development to Land Surface
               Conditions in Semi-Arid Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0215413

Award Number: 0215413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257552             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Mohr mohr@atmos.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The mesoscale convective system (MCS) is an organized ensemble of deep
              convective clouds with a contiguous precipitation area of about 100 km or more
              in horizontal scale.  In semi-arid regions with seasonal rainfall, agricultural
              productivity, stream flow, and aquifer recharge depend greatly on the size and
              characteristics of the MCS population.  MCSs are a critical component of the
              hydrological cycle on local, regional and global scales.

The purpose of this
              research is to quantify the influence of land surface characteristics on the
              initiation and development of MCSs in a semi-arid environment.  The study will
              focus on Sub-Saharan Africa.  The research has two components.  In the first
              component, contemporaneous meteorological and land-surface satellite data
              products will be compared for four wet seasons, May-September 1998-2001.  From
              Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission microwave imager data, convective cloud
              clusters will be identified and classified (e.g., location, size, intensity,
              percentage convective/stratiform).  The Normalized Difference Vegetation Index
              data product will be the proxy for land surface conditions.  The strength of
              the correlation between the characteristics of MCSs and the underlying land
              surface state will be assessed from the accumulation of statistics on
              convective systems at various stages of their life cycles.

In the second
              component of the research, a three-dimensional coupled cloud-resolving and land
              surface model will be used to simulate MCSs.  MCS development will be simulated
              over four common land covers in Sub-Saharan Africa, semi-desert, savanna
              grassland, woody savanna, and evergreen broadleaf forest.  The experiments will
              vary vegetation density, vegetation type, and soil moisture and calculate the
              differences in MCS thermodynamic and dynamic profiles resulting from changes in
              the initial land surface conditions.  Because precipitation from an MCS is a
              function of system size, structure and longevity, the spatial and temporal
              variability of precipitation will be the most important result used to evaluate
              differences among simulations.

Successful completion of this research could
              lead to improved understanding and management of water resources in semi-arid
              climates.
