Title       : Kinship and Behavior in Wild Chimpanzees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0215622

Award Number: 0215622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151458             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Mitani mitani@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1160,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the effects of kinship on the behavior of wild
              chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes).  Kinship plays an important role in determining
              how animals and humans behave.  Evolutionary theory predicts that genetically
              related animals will develop close affiliative ties through the process of kin
              selection.  Empirical observations are often consistent with this prediction. 
              Despite the match between theory and observation, the explanatory power of kin
              selection continues to be debated.  While some question whether the effects of
              kin selection have been overestimated, others continue to show how kinship can
              be used to explain the evolution of several aspects of animal social behavior. 
              This research will provide behavioral observations of chimpanzees living in an
              unusually large community at Ngogo, Kibale National Park, Uganda.  These
              observations will be combined with genealogical information derived from
              laboratory analyses of genetic markers from known individuals.  Together, these
              data will be used to address five, unresolved questions regarding the impact of
              kinship on wild chimpanzee behavior and demography: (1) does kinship affect
              patterns of cooperation among male chimpanzees?,  (2) do male and female
              chimpanzees associate non-randomly with their genetic relatives?,  (3) do male
              chimpanzees share meat reciprocally with kin?, (4) are community males more
              closely related to each other than are females?, (5) do male chimpanzees use
              calls to recognize their genetic relatives?  This project has broad
              theoretical, empirical, and practical significance.  Theoretically, this
              research will contribute to the development of evolutionary models that are
              constructed to explain why animals behave in the way that they do. 
              Empirically, this study will fill important gaps in our understanding of the
              behavior of our closest living relatives.  Practically, research activities
              will help to safeguard one of the last vestiges of rainforest in East Africa;
              training and support of graduate students and Third World scientists will
              ensure that these conservation efforts are maintained in the future.
