Title       : Acquisition of Impact Testing Equipment for Material and Structural Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0215695

Award Number: 0215695
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107260             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yi Zhao yi.zhao@erau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ashok Gurjar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mehmet F. Sozen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric V.Krumreig Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Embry Riddle Aero Univ
	      600 S. Clyde Morris Blvd.
	      Daytona Beach, FL  32114    386/226-6319

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This award is for the acquisition of an instrumented low to medium-velocity
              impact testing equipment (Instron Dynatup Model 8250HV Impact Test System). 
              The equipment will be used to enhance the research capability in the areas of
              mechanics of composite materials and structural mechanics, particular for
              aeronautics and aerospace engineering applications.

This acquisition will
              have a broad impact on improving research environment of Embry-Riddle
              Aeronautical University (ERAU), which is an undergraduate institution. A
              multi-disciplinary research team is formed with five investigators from four
              engineering and technology departments.  Several on-going as well as planed
              research projects will be conducted using this equipment, including "Damage
              Identification for Laminated Composites Caused by Low Velocity Impact Using
              C-scan NDT," "Impact Damage Detection on Filament Wound Pressure Vessels Using
              Acoustic Emission," "Impact Response of New Cross Cell Sandwich Panels," and
              "Impact Behavior of Modified Adhesive Bonded Joints." 

This acquisition will
              also have a significant impact on professional development of the
              investigators.  Three of the five investigators are junior faculty members. 
              Although they have demonstrated some success in their respective research
              areas, they have not yet established reputations in their research fields. 
              This has also reduced their competitiveness in external funding solicitations.
              This award will provide them a much-needed equipment for their research
              activities and eventually makes them more competitive in research funding
              solicitations.

	While the main purpose of acquiring this impact equipment is
              to enhance the capability of ERAU in advanced materials and structures research
              programs, this acquisition will have an extensive impact to strengthen the
              educational quality of the university both at the undergraduate and graduate
              levels.  With this advanced impact equipment, the investigators will be able to
              conduct more research projects.  Students in the involved departments will be
              exposed to the most current research progress in the field.  Such an exposure
              will significantly enhance the departments' capability to prepare students for
              entry into advanced degree programs and/or careers in aerospace/aeronautical
              science and engineering.  The increased research activities by the
              investigators will also provide an excellent opportunity to directly train our
              students by involving them in these projects through research assistant
              programs (both undergraduate and graduate).


