Title       : MRI: Acquisition of a Phosphorimager to Investigate Phosphorylation and
               Regulation of TACE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0215896

Award Number: 0215896
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73863              (Estimated)
Investigator: Blaine Moore bmoore@kzoo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kalamazoo College
	      1200 Academy Street
	      Kalamazoo, MI  490063291    269/337-7162

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Kalamazoo College under the supervision of Dr.
              Moore,to acquire a phosphoimager, which will allow faculty to investigate
              phosphorylation and regulation of the TNF-alpha converting enzyme (TACE).  TACE
              is a protein that works as an enzyme, catalyzing the cleavage of large,
              full-length precursors (known as substrates of TACE) into smaller fragments. 
              Understanding how the activity of the TACE enzyme is regulated will provide
              insights as to how, mechanistically, these fragments are generated.  Specific
              experiments are planned to determine the sites (specific amino acids) on TACE
              that are phosphorylated by PKC, and to determine whether the phosphorylation
              state of TACE directly influences its activity.  The former involves the use of
              mutated versions of TACE that lack critical proposed phosphorylation sites. 
              This experiment will determine where on TACE these phosphate groups are added. 
              The latter also involves the use of the aforementioned mutant versions of TACE
              in cleavage assays to determine whether the cleavage of TACE substrates (other
              proteins that TACE acts on and cleaves) is affected by phosphorylation state.
              

In addition to providing basic science information about the regulation of
              the TACE enzyme, the experiments described above will have a much broader
              impact.  For example, much of what we learn about the TACE enzyme may be
              generalized to similar proteases that are in the same protein "family" as TACE.
               Furthermore, understanding the mechanisms whereby TACE is "turned on" will
              illuminate general strategies used by cells to "turn on" protein enzymes.  The
              broader impact of this work lies in uncovering the complexities of cellular
              function: the more scientist know about how cells work normally, the better
              prepared scientists are to determine what goes wrong in malfunctioning cells in
              disease or injury states.  Moreover, because these experiments will be done in
              conjunction with undergraduate student collaborators, an important educational
              experience will be provided.  In addition several other faculty members in the
              college are anxious to learn application of the technique, and they will
              benefit from the presence of this piece of equipment on the campus. Both
              faculty and students from the biology and chemistry departments will be
              involved in research utilizing the equipment.



