Title       : Acquisition of a High-Resolution, Point-Focusing Small-Angle X-Ray Scattering
               System for Nanostructured Materials Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0215578

Award Number: 0215578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Register register@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program funds a major
              enhancement of the capabilities for small-angle x-ray scattering (SAXS) located
              at Princeton University.  The award permits the acquisition of a point-focusing
              SAXS instrument, which will be shared principally amongst users at Princeton
              and the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT).  This instrument uses
              double-focusing mirror/monochromator optics to focus a substantial solid angle
              of x-radiation to a small spot in the detector plane.  This optical geometry
              provides access to the very small angles needed to characterize structures with
              size scales from 1-100 nm.  SAXS also has the important advantage of being
              readily adapted for in-situ measurements; cells for operation at elevated
              temperature and a scanning calorimeter stage will be incorporated into the SAXS
              system.  Since this instrument permits detailed characterization of anisotropic
              specimens with structure on the nanoscale, it will support a range of research
              avenues where controlling the orientation of nanostructural features is the
              aim.  Projects at Princeton and NJIT which will this instrument will support
              are directed towards: guided self-assembly of mesoporous silicates through
              applied electric fields; templated crystallization in block copolymers;  new
              nanostructured organic/inorganic composites for proton exchange membrane fuel
              cells; orientation of block copolymers and block copolymer/carbon nanotube
              composites; and structure-property-processing relationships in crystalline
              polymer fibers and crystallizable ionomers.   The instrument will be used by
              researchers ranging from postdocs to undergraduates, from Princeton, NJIT, and
              elsewhere.  Moreover, the modular nature of the SAXS system encourages the
              design of new sample stages and modification of existing modules, thus allowing
              students the opportunity to gain valuable experience in instrument
              design.
%%%
This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research
              program funds a major enhancement of the capabilities for small-angle x-ray
              scattering (SAXS) located at Princeton University.  SAXS is a powerful
              technique for characterizing nanostructured materials (size scales from 1-100
              nm), and fully complements existing electron and scanning probe microscopy
              facilities at Princeton.  The new SAXS instrument will be shared amongst users
              at Princeton and the New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) and elsewhere in
              the study of organic, inorganic, and composite materials with applications as
              diverse as nanoporous filters, membranes for portable fuel cells, and
              biodegradable polymer fibers.  The state-of-the-art instrument will be
              incorporated into a facility with two existing SAXS systems (of complementary,
              but more limited, capabilities).  Users will include postdoctoral researchers,
              graduate students, and undergraduates, the last of these through both
              undergraduate research and by utilizing the instrument in an undergraduate
              materials science laboratory course.  

