Title       : Function of Activation Domains in Gene-Specific Transcription Factors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0215758

Award Number: 0215758
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandre M. Erkine aerkin@lsuhsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : LSU Health Scs Cntr-Shreve
	      1501 Kings Highway
	      Shreveport, LA  71130    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Despite major advances in characterizing components of eukaryotic transcription
              machinery, the mechanisms of the recruitment of these components to gene
              promoters are poorly understood. Activation domains (ADs) of gene-specific
              transcription factors are critical for these recruitment steps. Amazingly,
              there are little requirements for the sequences and structure of ADs, and they
              are easily interchangeable with preservation of functionality not only between
              different gene specific activators but even between activators belonging to
              different eukaryotic phyla. The excess of hydrophobic and acidic amino acid
              residues in natural and synthetic ADs suggests that their interacting targets
              may be hydrophobic and basic. The nucleosomal histones are the most abundant
              proteins in the nucleus with such properties. The PI hypothesizes that histones
              are among the targets of some ADs and that distortion of promoter nucleosomes
              by ADs triggers a chain of chromatin remodeling events involving different
              coactivators. In this project, yeast HSF will be used as a model system. The
              chromatin remodeling mediated by HSF ADs at heat shock promoters will be tested
              in yeast strains bearing different AD deletions employing Chromatin
              ImmunoPrecipitation (ChIP) technique. The involvement of known
              histone-modifying and nucleosome-remodeling activities will be tested in the
              strains where these activities will be inactivated.  The above hypothesis of
              AD-nucleosome interactions will be addressed in vivo by an attempt to create a
              synthetic activator with AD substituted by known histone-binding protein and in
              vitro by DNase I footprinting experiments using a reconstituted nucleosomal
              template and recombinant HSF. 
This project potentially can have an impact on
              the dynamically developing area of gene transcription regulation by
              characterizing the general chromatin remodeling mechanisms taking place in any
              eukaryotic cell. Understanding of general mechanisms of natural and especially
              synthetic ADs function potentially will have an impact on pharmaceutical
              directions related to the design of synthetic activators and repressors
              targeting disease-related genes. 
