Title       : Development of a 2D Microwave Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0215957

Award Number: 0215957
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $782965             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brooks H. Pate bp2k@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Gallagher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the Chemistry
              Research Instrumentation and Facilities (CRIF) Programs, Prof. Brooks H. Pate
              of the University of Virginia will develop a state-of-the-art laser 2D
              microwave spectrometer.  This will introduce time-domain molecular rotational
              spectroscopy as a new technique to study chemical reaction dynamics.  Chemical
              reactions are described as population transfer between different localized
              structures.  For example, the reaction can take place between different
              electronic states where the electronic configuration is different for the
              reactant and product.  Molecular isomerization reactions can similarly be
              described as changes in the nuclear configuration of the molecule.  One common
              feature of reactions is that the molecular structure is usually different in
              the reacting configurations.  For isomerization reactions, this result is
              readily apparent.  For reactions between different electronic states, there is
              often a structural change caused by the different bonding of the two electronic
              configurations.  During the chemical reaction the moments-of-intertia are
              time-dependent quantities.  The reaction kinetics can, therefore, be determined
              by measuring the time evolution of the rotational spectrum.   

The
              successful development of this new field of molecular spectroscopy will make it
              possible to unravel reaction pathways for complex reactions involving several
              isomers.

