Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY: High-Precision 13CO2/12CO2 Ratio Measurements Using an Optical
               Fiber Based Difference Frequency Generation Laser Source
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2002   
File        : a0215702

Award Number: 0215702
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1246850            (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Carlson dcarlson@ucar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Fried  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James W. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dirk Richter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank K. Tittel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UCAR
	      PO Box 3000
	      Boulder, CO  803073000    303/497-1000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1689,1694,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project entails the development, test, validation, and deployment of a
              mid-infrared laser based gas sensor system for continuous in-situ measurements
              of the isotopic composition of atmospheric carbon dioxide  (13CO2/12CO2 ratio)
              with a precision equal to or better than 0.1 per mil. A science team from the
              National Center for Atmospheric Research, Rice University, and the University
              of Colorado will utilize the latest developments in optical fiber technology,
              recent advances in difference frequency generation (DFG), and multi-year
              experience in carbon cycle research. The proposed DFG instrument will employ
              commercially available telecommunication lasers which operate at room
              temperature. Such a laser source presents significant advantages over more
              traditional laser systems for achieving high measurement precision.

The
              instrument will be used to acquire high precision atmospheric measurements of
              13CO2/12CO2 ratios - a measurement currently accomplished by a network of flask
              samples followed by mass spectrometric analysis. These data are crucial for
              understanding terrestrial and oceanic carbon sinks which requires an
              understanding of the distribution, contribution, and evolution of regional and
              local CO2 source and sink processes. High precision continuous measurements are
              needed to provide broad temporal and spatial coverage, even though the isotopic
              precision is inferior to the flask method (0.012 per mil) At present there does
              not exist a robust field-deployable instrument capable of continuous
              13CO2/12CO2 measurements with a precision of 0.1 per mil or better with
              verifiable accuracy.

The first phase of this effort will focus on extensive
              laboratory testing to identify and implement optimal experimental conditions
              and data acquisition and retrieval routines. The next phase will focus on
              optimal packaging for field measurements, and this will be followed by an
              extensive set of side-by-side comparisons with state-of-the-art flask
              sample/mass spectrometric measurements carried out in the field at the
              University of Colorado's Niwot Ridge Observatory site. Co-located measurements
              will be carried out on both the ground and the University of Colorado tower
              facility. The new continuous measurements will provide the foundation for a
              long-term database from the Niwot Ridge site as well as the necessary
              experience to further extend these new measurements to other venues and
              platforms. 

This project has potential broad impacts in the area of carbon
              cycle research. In addition, the new instrument and associated new approaches
              can be adapted to other new research problems requiring ultra high measurement
              precision. Moreover, a multifaceted educational program with graduate and
              undergraduate students, high school students and teachers, will transfer the
              understanding and use of this new laser and fiber optic technology to a broader
              scientific community. The students will be introduced to 1) the potential of
              optical fiber technologies and its applications; 2) an overview of the carbon
              cycle; and 3) the challenges of, and information content offered by, high
              precision isotopic ratio measurements of CO2.
