Title       : Cotranslational Events and Folding Pathways of an Alpha-Helical Model Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0215368

Award Number: 0215368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405495             (Estimated)
Investigator: Silvia Cavagnero cavagnero@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Protein folding is a multifaceted poorly understood phenomenon of great
              biological significance. Most of the published literature on the subject deals
              with the in vitro refolding of purified full-length denatured polypeptides. In
              contrast, this project addresses cotranslational protein folding and
              misfolding, as it occurs within the ribosomal machinery. The main goal of this
              research is to develop a novel methodology to study the mechanistic and
              conformational aspects of protein folding within the prokaryotic translation
              apparatus. The folding kinetics of nascent polypeptide chains will be
              investigated in the context of the Escherichia coli translation machinery.
              These studies will be performed by hydrogen/deuterium exchange pulse labeling
              in cell-free systems. Liquid chromatography-coupled time-of-flight electrospray
              mass spectrometry and time-of-flight MALDI mass spectrometry will be employed
              for detection. Apomyoglobin (apoMb) serves as a good model system for these
              studies since it is a well-characterized cytoplasmic protein with single domain
              containing all alpha-helical segments. An apoMb gene with E. coli-optimized
              codon usage will be employed. Control experiments will also be performed in
              parallel on chloramphenicol acetyltransferase. The methodology developed in
              this project will set the stage to enable future investigations addressing
              important aspects of biologically relevant protein folding questions. These
              include (a) studying whether cotranslational folding takes place during
              expression of small single domain proteins; and (b) mapping nascent polypeptide
              conformation, and identifying which specific amino acids become folded or
              misfolded at different stages of chain elongation. Very little is known about
              the structural aspects of how proteins fold or misfold in the cell. This
              project aims at devising initial steps towards filling this gap.
