Title       : SBIR Phase I:Use of Inducible Antimicrobial Peptides for Rapid Diagnosis,
               Prevention, and Management of Disease in Finfish Aquaculture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0215093

Award Number: 0215093
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99548              (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Carlberg jcarlberg@kentseatech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent SeaTech Corporation
	      11125 Flintkoe Avenue Suite J
	      San Diego, CA  92121    858/452-5765

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0521700   Marine Resources                        
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I Project proposes to
              develop novel diagnostic and therapeutic approaches for management of
              infectious pathogens in finfish such as the hybrid striped bass (HSB). HSB
              aquaculture has become the fourth largest form of U.S. fish production. Prior
              research by the investigators on the molecules involved in the innate, non
              specific immunity of HSB has led to the discovery, cloning, and
              characterization of a novel, cysteine-rich, antimicrobial peptide (AMP) that
              has been named bass-hepcidin. Hepcidin homologs are present in many finfish
              species. Bass-hepcidin is strongly expressed in the liver upon experimental
              challenge with the devastating aquaculture pathogen Streptococcus iniae. Phase
              I research objectives include: 1) synthesis and purification of the peptide, 2)
              development of a polyclonal antibody and ELISA assay), 3)  testing of the
              minimum inhibitory concentration of the peptide against important aquaculture,
              agriculture, and human pathogens, and 4) measurement of gene expression in
              finfish tissues in experimental challenges with pathogenic bacteria using
              Northern blots/rtPCR. If successful, this project will allow development  of
              cost-effective test kits for rapid diagnosis of bacterial and fungal infections
              in several species of cultured finfish.

The commercial application of this
              project is in the area of aquaculture. On a worldwide basis, disease costs
              aquaculture producers more than $3 billion annually. The development of a
              cost-effective immunoassay will allow rapid diagnosis of bacterial and fungal
              infections in HSB and other commercially important cultured finfish. 

