Title       : MRI: Acquisition of Microscopy Instrumentation for Multi-Disciplinary Research
               and Research Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0215820

Award Number: 0215820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182868             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Longino longinoj@evergreen.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erik V. Thuesen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth M. Kutter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Evergreen State College
	      
	      Olympia, WA  98505    206/867-6000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

A grant has been awarded to Drs. John T. Longino, Elizabeth M.
              Kutter, and Erik V. Thuesen at The Evergreen State College to acquire a
              variable-pressure scanning electron microscope, an inverted compound
              fluorescent microscope, and a stereomicroscope, including motorized drives and
              computer interfaces that allow remote operation over the internet. The
              Instrumentation will be used In studies of tropical biodiversity, microbial
              processes in biofilms, and ecophysiology of marine zooplankton.  John Longino's
              research focuses primarily on ants, here and in Costa Rica.  The
              variable-pressure scanning electron microscope and stereomicroscope equipment
              will be used to finish a taxonomic revision of the Costa Rican Crematogaster,
              one of the major genera of arboreal ants.  The products will be both
              traditional published work and image-rich identification guides on the web. 
              Elizabeth Kutter will use the fluorescent microscope to study phage infections
              of bacteria in biofilms - very widespread, elaborate communities of convoluted
              towers and fluid channels that are largely resistant to antibiotics and
              disinfectants.  Erik Thuesen is investigating the ability of gelatinous
              zooplankton to survive in low-oxygen environments.  He hypothesizes a
              facilitated diffusion mechanism which will be investigated using fluorescent
              microscopy to examine the distribution of mitochondria. 

Science teaching at
              Evergreen is strongly research oriented.  Many Evergreen faculty members carry
              out research and teaching programs that rely substantially on microscopy, and
              their ability to expand and move in new directions will be greatly enhanced by
              these instruments.  In addition to the microscopy-intensive research of the
              P.I.'s, a number of other faculty involve their students actively in
              smaller-scale, locally-funded research projects and presentations, many of
              which involve sophisticated microscopy.  This includes research into harmful
              algal blooms, environmental microbiology and soil biology.  The instrumentation
              will also be used in ways beyond these specific research activities, attracting
              a broad range of students through exposure to exciting images and concepts and
              improving access for underrepresented groups of students, especially at our
              Tacoma campus, which serves a high proportion of inner city students.  The
              remote control capabilities will support serious research projects in
              bioremediation and microbiology already initiated at the Tacoma campus and
              expand microscope use from laboratory to classroom.  Teaching at Evergreen is
              also inherently and intentionally interdisciplinary, and the SEM and other
              microscopes will serve as foci for full-time programs integrating arts and
              sciences.

