Title       : Mechanism of Promoter Escape by RNA Polymerase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0215992

Award Number: 0215992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arik Dvir dvir@oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      520 O'Dowd Hall
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    248/370-4924

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Transcription of protein-coding genes is one of the most fundamental processes
              that underlies all life and is a primary mechanism of biological regulation. 
              The experiments included in this work are designed to provide new insights into
              the mechanisms of promoter escape, a critical, early event in the process of
              gene transcription by RNA polymerase II.  The few initial steps in the process
              of mRNA synthesis that precede the completion of promoter escape are
              characterized by physical instability of the early RNA polymerase II
              transcription complex, formation of abortive transcripts, and strong dependence
              on ATP cofactor, downstream DNA, and the DNA-helicase activity of the general
              transcription factor TFIIH.  Evidence recently obtained in the P.I.'s
              laboratory indicates that inhibitory interactions impede the forward movement
              of the polymerase and cause its promoter-proximal arrest.  These interactions
              are overcome by the presence of an ATP cofactor, downstream DNA and the
              DNA-helicase subunits of the general transcription factor TFIIH.  Dependence on
              all three cofactors reflects a common mechanism operating to facilitate
              promoter escape, and that this mechanism is continuously needed through the
              addition of the first 14-15 nucleotides to nascent RNA transcripts.  At the
              transition between promoter escape and the elongation stage of transcription,
              it is expected that protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions will be
              disrupted or adjusted, leading to the release of some of the general
              transcription factors that are required for the early transcription complex. 
              The focus of this project is to further explore this hypothetical view of early
              transcription by RNA polymerase II and its underlying mechanism.  The studies
              include (i) tracking functional and physical changes in the early elongation
              complex, with particular emphasis on TFIIH and CTD phosphorylation, (ii)
              identifying polypeptides involved in inhibitory interactions during promoter
              escape, and (iii) determining the role of specific downstream promoter
              sequences in the efficiency of promoter escape.  To pursue these goals, all the
              experiments will be carried out using the in vitro system assembled from highly
              purified polypeptide components, providing the controlled conditions in which
              the contributions of individual cofactors to rate-limiting steps can be
              evaluated.  The experiments included in this work will enhance our
              understanding of the fundamental mechanisms of transcription that are
              applicable to all protein-coding genes in eukaryotic systems.  The studies will
              also provide information necessary to identify possible targets for cellular
              regulatory mechanisms within the basal transcription machinery. 
