Title       : Sexual Dimorphism and UV Signaling in Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0215560

Award Number: 0215560
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59632              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter O. Dunn pdunn@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda A. Whittingham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Lay Abstract for proposal #0215560

Sexual dimorphism and UV signaling in
              birds

The brilliant colors of birds have played a prominent role in the
              study of sexual and natural selection.  In many species of birds males possess
              bright colors, while females are cryptic.  This sexual dimorphism in plumage is
              traditionally explained as a consequence of variation in sexual selection
              (i.e., mating success). However, there are several reasons why this explanation
              may be inadequate.  First, all comparative analyses to date have relied on
              subjective evaluations of plumage color and brightness by human observers, and
              it is now clear that birds see quite differently than humans.  Not only do
              birds see in the ultraviolet (UV) spectrum to which humans are blind, they also
              see differently in the human visible spectrum. Unfortunately, there has not yet
              been a large-scale comparative analysis of UV reflectance in birds, so it is
              not known if UV signaling is widespread or if such signals commonly differ
              between the sexes.  Second, recent studies of sexual differences in plumage
              color have found that evolutionary changes in plumage have been more common
              among females than males, suggesting that we have been focussing on the wrong
              sex.  Indeed, there are many cases of bright colors in both sexes (e.g.,
              parrots, tanagers, toucans) suggesting that selection has acted on females as
              well as males.  Bright plumage in females may be favored by male mate choice or
              aggression between females over access to mates or food.  In addition, natural
              selection may favor brightly colored females when both sexes defend a territory
              year-round or color patterns are involved in camouflage.  Thus, other forms of
              selection besides sexual selection on males appear to be important in the
              evolution of avian plumage patterns.

The three year study proposed here will
              examine the evolution of avian plumage patterns and sexual differences in
              plumage color using objective measures of color (spectrometer measurements)
              taken from museum specimens.  We will measure spectral reflectance of both
              sexes of the1031 species used in our previous study of avian dimorphism.  By
              building on our previous work, this study will lead to significantly deeper
              understanding of signaling in birds and the evolution of plumage patterns, a
              subject that has enthralled and perplexed both biologists and lay persons for
              over 100 years.  In addition, this study will provide opportunities for
              training students in comparative methods, enhance research facilities at UWM
              and produce a web site with spectral data of birds that can be used by other
              researchers and teachers.  

