Title       : Northern Caddoan Languages Documentation Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0215574

Award Number: 0215574
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146922             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. Parks parksd@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Douglas Parks and colleagues will
              conduct one year of linguistic research documenting South Band Pawnee, Skiri
              Pawnee, and Arikara. These languages belong to the Caddoan language family
              spoken on the Great Plains from Texas to North Dakota. Fluent speakers of these
              three languages are no longer living. Most of the linguistic data included in
              the project were recorded by the PI between 1965 and 2001. There are two
              aspects of linguistic documentation in this project: bilingual dictionaries and
              analyzed text collections (the latter primarily traditional stories, such as
              myths and tales) for each of the three languages. These materials will be made
              available on the World Wide Web. An integral aspect of the project is
              completion of software begun under a previous NSF grant. That software
              facilitates the development of multimedia dictionaries and analyzed text
              collections in a single working environment.

This project contributes to the
              long tradition in anthropology and linguistics of scientific documentation of
              American Indian languages. Such study contributes to the understanding of
              linguistic diversity in human speech worldwide and to the understanding of the
              interrelationships and historical development of American Indian languages. It
              also preserves a record of the fast disappearing Native American languages.
              Since South Band Pawnee, Skiri Pawnee, and Arikara are closely related to one
              another, comparison among them will offer insights into the development of the
              Caddoan language family and, more generally, processes of language change.
              Because these languages share exceptionally complex verb structures, their
              documentation will provide linguists with a large amount of new data for the
              theoretical study of language history and structure. The software completed by
              this project will serve as a valuable tool to aid description and analysis of
              endangered languages worldwide. Finally, the dictionaries and texts will
              provide critically needed resources for the three tribes in their efforts to
              revive and teach their native languages, and to perpetuate their cultures.


