Title       : Acquisition of a Magneto-Optical Cryostat for Terahertz Studies of Semiconductor
               Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0215717

Award Number: 0215717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104800             (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Heyman heyman@macalester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Major Research Instrumentation RUI grant supports instrumentation for
              research in ultrafast optics and semiconductor physics as well as undergraduate
              research training at Macalester College. The instrumentation is a 7 Tessa
              superconducting magnet cryostat with optical access. Initial research will use
              the instrument to support a NSF-funded program to study spin and charge
              dynamics in semiconductors. The Projects include ultrafast THz spectroscopy of
              spin-dynamics in semiconductors; time-resolved measurements of magneto-plasma
              oscillations in semiconductors; and quantum transitions in strongly driven
              semiconductor quantum wells and heterostructures. The PI is building an
              ultrafast THz system with spectral bandwidth of 0-30 THz at Macalester College.
              This acquisition will significantly strengthen the capabilities of the system,
              permitting investigation of spin phenomena and other magnetic phenomena. The
              research projects have a common objective of providing education and research
              training opportunities for advanced undergraduate students and will permit
              hands-on training in photonics and experimental materials physics. Student
              research training will also be enhanced through use of the instrument in
              advanced courses, independent projects and senior honors projects. 

As the
              switching rates in electronic devices are pushed to ever-higher frequencies, it
              becomes increasingly important to understand carrier transport phenomena in
              semiconductors on picosecond and femtosecond time-scales. Using ultrafast
              terahertz spectroscopy it is possible to impulsively excite a semiconductor
              with a femtosecond optical pulse or single-cycle electromagnetic pulse and
              record the resulting motion of charge in time. This allows the study of
              semiclassical phenomena such as carrier scattering and charge oscillations in
              semiconductors and semiconductor heterostructures on time-scales, which will be
              crucial to future devices. In addition, this technique is well suited to the
              study of quantum phenomena such as electronic transitions in semiconductor
              quantum wells and heterostructures (intersubband transitions) and spin
              transitions. Intersubband transitions are of interest for quantum coherent
              electronics and for the development of mid- and far-infrared semiconductor
              lasers. Spin-transport devices in which an electron's spin, rather than its
              charge, is used to control transport are of intense current interest. Among the
              most promising systems are quantum wells in narrow-gap semiconductors. 

