Title       : Acquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope for Cell Biology and
               Biophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0215829

Award Number: 0215829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410066             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Smith psmith@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stefan I. McDonough  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Acquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope for Cell Biology and
              Biophysics

Project Summary
A grant has been awarded to Dr Peter J.S. Smith
              of the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL), Woods Hole, for the acquisition of a
              confocal laser scanning microscope and image analysis system with multiphoton
              excitation capability.  The system is to be housed in the MBL Central
              Microscopy Facility, making it available to a wide community of resident
              researchers, including scientists from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute,
              visiting and summer investigators, as well as by many of the graduate- and
              postdoctoral-level education courses offered at the MBL
Several proposed
              research projects have already been formulated by the investigating team,
              spanning basic biology to the biomedical sciences. Amongst the resident
              community of the MBL these include:
1.	An examination of vesicle trafficking
              in trypanosomes. Part of a larger project dealing infectious diseases.
2.	The
              role of Ca/CaM kinase II dynamics in LTP. Part of a larger project
              investigating the foundations of memory; 
3.	The physiology of single-celled
              eukaryotic extremophiles. Part of a larger project to investigate adaptive
              evolution and protein expression/modification.
4.	Multidrug resistance in
              pathogens. 
5.	Architectural dynamics of the mitotic spindle. A continuing
              project on live imaging of cellular dynamics.
6.	Calcium oscillations in
              neurons.  A component of several ongoing projects looking at calcium activity
              domains in the cell membrane and cytosol.
7.	The effects of environmental
              pollutants on neuronal development. A key issue being studied by MBL
              investigators in the field of toxicology.
8.	The mechanisms of iron
              trafficking in erythroid cells which forms part of a new mitochondrial program
              initiated at the MBL.
 Scientists at the MBL have had a long interest in the
              study of cellular dynamics, which by necessity requires observations on living
              systems.  The microscope to be chosen maximizes this ability.  System
              components were chosen to provide 1) capability for confocal fluorescent
              imaging of different fluorophores in the visible spectrum; 2) multiphoton
              excitation; 3) emission fingerprinting for simultaneous recording of multiple
              fluorophores with closely-spaced emission spectra; 4) a sufficient range of
              objective lenses to enable both structural studies and experiments on the
              physiology of living cells; 5) precisely localization fluorescent-labeled
              structures; 6) temperature control of live cells under study; 7) software to
              use fully the data acquisition capabilities of the confocal; and 8) software
              for image analysis and display.   
The research activities proposed in the
              grant reflect the diversity of scientific interest amongst the MBL community as
              well as outreach in research and education.  The new microscope will be an
              invaluable addition the MBL facilities for cutting edge research.  Its
              availability to residents and visitors alike (over 200 seasonal investigators
              visit the MBL for research purposes on an annual basis) will insure a high
              impact and use for the grant awarded.

