Title       : Collaborative Research: Testing the Effects of Campaign Finance Laws in State
               Legislative Elections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0215604

Award Number: 0215604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74985              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Hogan rhogan1@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project examines the effects of laws regulating campaign financing in state
              legislative elections.  A comparative analysis of states with varying statutory
              and regulatory provisions provides analytical leverage necessary for
              determining how the legal context shapes various aspects of electoral behavior.
               Major differences in the regulatory regimes across states provide an ideal
              laboratory for testing how such features affect candidacy decisions,
              fundraising practices, and election competition.  Multiple research strategies
              are employed to test a model of elections in which campaign finance laws play a
              prominent role.  A primary concern of this project is to evaluate the effects
              of legal conditions on such electoral features as contribution strategies of
              interest group and parties, candidate spending, candidate characteristics, and
              electoral outcomes in the states.  The investigtors have confidence this
              project will generate findings that will have important theoretical and
              practical implications.  Such as:
 Define and clarify the statutory and
              regulatory provisions of campaign finance laws across the fifty states for a
              30-year time frame (1972-2002).  
 Propose a model of elections in which the
              influences of campaign finance laws are posited to impact various stages of the
              electoral process. 
 Collect data on campaign contribution patterns, campaign
              spending, candidate characteristics, and election competition in state
              legislative elections during the 2002 election cycle.  
 Analyze the data
              collected to determine both the direct and indirect effects of campaign finance
              laws while holding constant a range of other factors and conditions.  

              Prepare written reports on the findings and disseminate the information to
              scholars and policy makers.  
 Release the data so that other scholars may
              explore additional dimensions of campaign finance laws.  

Overall, the
              results of the project promise to enhance substantially our understanding of
              campaign finance regulations and how these laws shape electoral behavior in the
              United States.  The findings are expected to contribute to the theoretical
              development of several sub-fields in the study of American politics.  In
              addition, the findings are likely to have practical implications by informing
              the policy debate over existing campaign finance policies at both the state and
              national levels.

