Title       : SBIR Phase I: Liquid Phase Epitaxy of Potassium Tantalum Niobate on Low
               Dielectric Constant Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0215046

Award Number: 0215046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent J. Fratello vjfratello@integratedphotonics.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IPI
	      1110 Commerce Drive
	      Richardson, TX  750812307    972/690-0099

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop the
              Liquid Phase Epitaxy (LPE) of potassium tantalum niobate (KTN) on a cubic
              perovskite substrate.  This film material will have much higher electrooptic
              coefficients than current generation lithium niobate waveguides.  This project
              proposes to develop new, low dielectric constant substrate materials that will
              enable better matching of the effective microwave dielectric constant to the
              optical dielectric constant of the film material and lower bias fields.  In
              Phase I, the researchers will identify congruently melting substrate materials
              with suitable lattice parameter match to KTN that can be grown by the
              Czochralski method.  Various flux systems and growth conditions will be tested
              to find those most conducive to LPE growth of good quality films. 

              
Electrooptic devices are used in communications, analog and digital signal
              processing, information processing, optical computing and sensing.  Devices
              include phase and amplitude modulators, multiplexers, switch arrays, couplers,
              polarization controllers, deflectors, correlators and sensors.  The proposed
              work will enable electrooptic modulators and innovative new device applications
              with lower costs, smaller footprints and lower power budgets.  All this
              contributes to improvements of the infrastructure of the Internet and more
              rapid, lower cost deployment, especially in the local loop.

