Title       : Workshops on Political Institutions and Economic Policy (Political Science
               Program: EITM Competition IIIb.)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0215619

Award Number: 0215619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104230             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Shepsle kshepsle@latte.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffry A. Frieden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The Laboratory in Comparative Ethnic Processes (LiCEP) will conduct four 
              biannual workshops on the theme of ethnic mobilization, nationalism and civil
              war. LiCEP is an inter-university research group that seeks to improve our
              understanding of the causes and consequences of ethnic mobilization through the
              systematic cross examination of formal theoretical models and empirical
              evidence.
The substantive questions that LiCEP explores include: What are the
              conditions under which individuals participate in ethnic as opposed to
              non-ethnic collective action? What are the conditions that lead to large-scale
              rebellions against the state? When and why do inter-ethnic riots occur? How are
              inter- ethnic relations renegotiated in the aftermath of civil violence? What
              are the conditions under which ethnic mobilization takes the more "routine"
              forms in the form of ethnic voting and party formation?  What is the impact
              that different forms of ethnic mobilization have on policy-making and processes
              of state consolidation? And how does ethnic mobilization interact with the
              process of identity formation itself? 
The principal goals of the workshops
              are to evaluate lab-generated datasets, reverse engineer statistical, formal
              and agent-based models, and bring formal models into more direct interaction
              with empirical evidence. 


