Title       : Ecology, feeding competition, and social relationships of Phayre's leaf monkeys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0215542

Award Number: 0215542
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297022             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas Koenig akoenig@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carola Borries  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nonhuman primates are the most social among all organisms and exhibit the
              broadest range of variation in social organization. Consequently, research on
              the behavior and ecology of nonhuman primates has been most influential in
              addressing questions as to why organisms including humans live in groups in the
              first place, why they live in groups of particular sizes, and what factors
              influence the social relationships among group members. Leaf-eating monkeys are
              particularly interesting, because the relationship between their ecology and
              social organization is not consistent with current theory. Feeding on
              supposedly large abundant resources, they should live in large groups and
              exhibit weak dominance relationships. Quite often, however, they live in small
              groups with strong dominance hierarchies. The study is following up new
              explanatory ideas to resolve this controversy examining (i) whether indirect
              feeding competition or infanticide or both constrain group size of Phayre's
              leaf monkeys (Trachypithecus phayrei) and (ii) whether resource distribution,
              feeding competition, and female reproductive success conform to the predicted
              female social relationships and dispersal patterns.
Research is conducted at
              Phu Khieo Wildlife Sanctuary, Northeastern Thailand harboring eight sympatric
              primates including two leaf monkeys (T. cristatus, T. phayrei) and four
              macaques (Macaca arctoides, M. assamensis, M. mulatta, M. nemestrina). The
              study area (156,000 ha) is undisturbed including two major habitat types (hill
              evergreen and dry evergreen forest). In the long range this setting will allow
              comparisons within primate genera and species of similar body size across
              habitats as well as across species and genera of similar body size within the
              same habitat. The study is based on a collaboration with researchers from two
              Thai Universities (Kasetsart and Mahidol University, Bangkok) and officials
              from governmental agencies (Royal Forest Department, Bangkok). Per year it will
              involve a minimum of two local staff, two recent graduates and one
              post-doctoral researcher and provide the opportunity for thesis research. The
              study will foster cooperation within Thailand and with the United States,
              support conservation efforts in the sanctuary, and provide training and career
              opportunities for students.

