Title       : SBIR Phase I: Assistive Reading Device for Persons with Disabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0215189

Award Number: 0215189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irene S. Schipper schipper@pageflip.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pageflip
	      111 Woodmere Blvd South
	      Woodmere, NY  115981819    516/374-1607

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
Program Ref : 9102,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I Project proposes to
              further improve an assistive device for reading that is currently under
              development at the company. The device, an electromechanical
page turner,
              allows people with upper extremity impairment to conveniently and easily turn
              pages of a book in either direction. With the touch of a button, the page
              turner can automatically grab the next page, turn it, and keep the book opened
              flat during the entire process. If necessary, an alternate activation method
              can be employed, such as a sip-and-puff switch, chin switch, or foot pedal.
              There are three key phases of the page turning process : page engagement, page
              restraint, and page transport. In its current form, the page turner prototype
              offers superior solutions to each of these phases and addresses the limitations
              of commercially available systems. Several key research problems must now be
              addressed in order to improve the reliability of the apparatus. The problems
              center on the unit's turnstile element which serves two principle functions:
              page restraint and page transport. The turnstile is necessary to hold the book
              open flat, as well as to move a page from one side of the book to the other.
              The turnstile-on-paper and paper-on-paper frictional properties are important
              considerations for successful operation of the page turner. The goal of the
              Phase I Project is to investigate optimal contact pressure between the
              turnstile and the book page, as well as to exxamine the bending stiffness,
              coefficient of friction, and the mechanical characteristics of paper. To
              achieve the stated goals, experiments are proposed to test a variety of paper
              materials and book sizes, and to develop computer models that will help in
              parametric studies of the design. The experimental and computational results
              will be validated with the standard test methods recommended by the U.S. Trade
              Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry (TAPPI) and Japan Industrial
              Standards (JIS). The results of this investigation will allow the company to
              optimize the design and thereby improve the performance and reliability of the
              page turner. 


The commercial applications of this project are in the area
              of assistive home-care technology for the elderly and disabled. A page turner
              would be particularly beneficial to people with limited bilateral upper
              extremity function caused by neurological impairment, musculoskeletal problems,
              and generalized weakness. The proposed device would serve to enhance their
              quality of life by improving their independence in this activity of daily
              living. 

