Title       : Effects of Geographic Distance, Landscape Features and Host Adaptations on
               Genetic Differentiation Among Populations of a Checkerspot Butterfly: An
               Integrative Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0215436

Award Number: 0215436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Singer sing@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ulrich G. Mueller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The investigators propose to use a combination of behavioral, ecological and
              genetic techniques to understand the development of genetic differentiation
              among populations of a butterfly species, Euphydryas editha.  One outcome of
              this study will be an analysis of past and current movement patterns of these
              butterflies among habitats of different types.  The investigators will ask
              whether and to what extent the movements of insects among habitats depend on
              the distance between those habitats, the nature of the landscape in the
              intervening terrain, and the adaptations of the insects to particular host
              plant species.

Plant-feeding insects possess sophisticated behavioral
              mechanisms for choosing their hosts, that is, the plants on which they feed.  
              Understanding of the basic biology of these mechanisms is important in several
              contexts.  It assists humans in tracking and predicting the changes of diet
              that insects undergo, changes that are involved in the transformation of
              innocuous insects to crop pests.   It also helps in assessment and manipulation
              of the quality of habitats for endangered insect species.  This is because
              insects that are introduced to a restored habitat will leave if they are not
              sufficiently attracted to the plants that are present. The proposed work
              includes populations that are closely related to a federally endangered
              sub-species, and will assess how the food preferences of these insects should
              influence plans for habitat restoration and conservation.

