Title       : Nitric Oxide and Oxygen Delivery Among Tibetans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0215747

Award Number: 0215747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178521             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia M. Beall cmb2@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian D. Hoit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Irving Kushner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kingman Strohl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Serpil Erzurum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,5251,9200,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate a newly proposed mechanism by which humans can
              adapt to life in an extreme environment.  Tibetans have lived at high altitudes
              for millennia and have been demonstrated to possess a number of adaptations for
              dealing with life on the Tibetan Plateau and in the Himalayan Mountains.  The
              proposed research is designed to test the hypothesis that the high levels of
              exhaled nitric oxide produced by Tibetan high-altitude natives are responses
              that improve functional capacity in their environment where there are fewer
              oxygen molecules in every breath, a situation called high-altitude hypoxia. 
              Based on the known effects of nitric oxide, it is hypothesized that high levels
              of nitric oxide in the lungs helps in two ways.  First, it may offset the
              high-altitude hypoxia by enabling the extraction of a larger proportion of the
              oxygen in the inspired air.  Second, it may improve oxygen delivery by
              increasing blood flow throughout the body.  The recent finding that
              high-altitude native Tibetans exhale more than twice as much nitric oxide as
              sea-level natives at sea level requires explanation because a large body of
              evidence predicts less, rather than more, synthesis of nitric oxide under
              hypoxic conditions.  The consistent finding of high pulmonary nitric oxide in
              both Tibetan and Andean indigenous high-altitude populations suggests an
              adaptive, beneficial function. 

	The hypotheses will be tested with a sample
              of 91 high-altitude natives of the Tibet Autonomous Region living at 4200m (~
              14,000') altitude. The study participants will be healthy, not pregnant,
              non-smokers, 18-55 years of age.  The concentration of nitric oxide in exhaled
              breath will be measured and it is expected that there will be a wide range of
              variation including values two to three times higher than those found at sea
              level.  The hypothesis of greater oxygen extraction will be tested by measuring
              the difference in the percent of oxygen in inspired air (20.9%) and exhaled air
              (to be measured).  The hypothesis of greater blood flow will be tested
              noninvasively by quantifying blood flow in the lungs and in the forearm.  The
              anticipated outcome is a positive association between exhaled nitric oxide and
              oxygen extraction, pulmonary blood flow, forearm blood flow at rest and in
              response to exercise and in response to breathing 50% oxygen (without the
              stress of hypoxia).  These findings would indicate that Tibetan highlanders use
              elevated nitric oxide in the lungs to offset high-altitude hypoxia and to
              deliver adequate oxygen to body tissues. 

	Pulmonary nitric oxide appears
              central to understanding human adaptation to high altitude and hypoxia.  Nitric
              oxide biology has implications for explaining how Tibetan high-altitude natives
              can achieve sea-level values for necessary biological processes that require
              oxygen, such as basal metabolism and physical work capacity, although they live
              in an environment where ambient oxygen is severely limited relative to sea
              level.  The Tibetan case contributes to basic knowledge of nitric oxide biology
              because healthy people produce amounts that would be considered pathological at
              sea level.  The proposed research contributes new knowledge to a central
              question in physical anthropology:  the causes and consequences of human
              biological variation.   The significance of the proposed research lies in
              improving understanding of how people adjust to life with hypoxia.  It directly
              investigates why the Tibetan population inhabiting a stressful, high-altitude
              environment has very distinctive biological features and  also has implications
              for understanding the responses of sea-level visitors to altitude whether they
              are vacationers in the Rockies or military personnel serving in mountainous
              areas, and for understanding the pathophysiology of patients with diseases that
              cause hypoxia .  

