Title       : Acquisition of a High-Throughput Proteomics Robotic Workstation for the Cornell
               University Bioresource Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a0215897

Award Number: 0215897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelvin H. Lee khlee@cheme.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jocelyn K. Rose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geza Hrazdina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Klaas VanWijk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore Thannhauser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Cornell University to acquire a high-throughput
              robotics platform which will perform two-dimensional protein electrophoresis
              (2DE) gel spot picking, spot digestion, digest clean-up and spotting to matrix
              assisted laser-desorption ionization target plates (MALDI) for mass
              spectrometry (MS). This robotics platform will be housed in and managed by the
              Cornell University Biotechnology Resource Center (BRC) and it will be
              accessible by any investigator at Cornell or at any other institution. The
              Cornell BRC is a shared-use and fee-for-service facility encompassing nine core
              services and generating $1.5 million in income during FY 2000/2001. The robotic
              workstation will enhance the capabilities of the core facility by providing a
              state-of-the-art instrument which will automatically perform many of the
              laborious steps required in proteomics experiments. Although the definition can
              be interpreted broadly, 'proteomics', in this case, refers to the ability to
              measure changes in the protein expression of a given biological system with the
              goal of relating such changes to various disease states, metabolic states or
              other features of biological interest. The acquisition of this instrument will
              have a positive impact on the research programs of many of the investigators at
              Cornell and at any other institution interested in using this resource.

In
              the field of proteomics, proteins are collected from biological samples of
              interest with the goal of identifying changes in protein expression that may be
              interesting. For example, proteins may be collected from various tissue sources
              with the goal of identifying changes that relate to the presence or absence of
              a particular disease. After collection, the proteins are often separated into a
              unique fingerprint of protein expression that serves as a barcode for that
              particular sample. These fingerprints or barcodes of protein expression can be
              compared with the goal of identifying changes in this pattern. Once proteins of
              interest are identified within this barcode, the proteins must be excised from
              their polymer matrix, digested with chemicals and placed onto metal plates
              which can be placed inside separate instruments for analysis. These steps of
              excision, digest and spotting to metal plates is very laborious and the
              high-throughput proteomics robotic workstation will be able to perform all of
              these steps automatically.

Cornell University is uniquely positioned to
              benefit from an integrated proteomics robotics platform because of the
              relatively large number of established laboratories and investigators that are
              committed to proteomics. This commitment is reflected by the newly established
              Cornell Proteomics Program which is a faculty-led, University-wide Program. The
              CPP currently includes eleven core faculty from eight different units at
              Cornell spanning a number of different Departments, Colleges and Research
              Facilities. The acquisition of this instrument will have an important impact on
              several specific federally-funded research projects (NSF, NIH, USDA) which are
              being run by Proteomics Program faculty. Many of these projects involve
              graduate student research assistants that are female or from other
              underrepresented minorities. Further, many of these graduate student research
              assistants are funded through NSF Graduate Research Fellowships. Further, this
              instrument may be used in laboratory teaching activities.


