Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Household Economies: The Role of Animals in a
               Historic Period Chiefdom in Coastal California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0215798

Award Number: 0215798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11881              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne E. Arnold jearnold@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this dissertation project, Anna Noah (UCLA) will analyze large
              zooarchaeological collections from Island Chumash households.  The data were
              recovered by Professor Jeanne Arnold's 1995-1997 NSF-supported Santa Cruz
              Island household archaeological research.  With the exception of two sites in
              the Northwest Coast and Plateau regions, respectively, no other project has
              produced such a large and undisturbed collection representing
              simultaneously-occupied complex hunter-gatherer households.  The excavated
              deposits date to California's  Spanish period between 1782 and about 1820 and
              exhibit substantial cultural continuity with underlying Late period deposits. 
              The data derive from commoner houses at three specialized bead-manufacturing
              villages and from an elite house within a village known ethnohistorically to
              have been a major trading port and home to an elite lineage.  The port site
              also contains a dense stratum of animal remains and artifacts that may
              represent refuse from a feast that followed abandonment of the elite
              structure.

Noah will identify approximately 35,000 fish, mammal, and bird
              bones and animal procurement tools from nine Chumash households representing
              the four villages. The UCLA Zooarchaeology Laboratory will identify another
              25,000 bones. Because the sample is divided among nine households and several
              strata, the large sample size is crucial for reliable statistical results.
              Four-fifths of the faunal assemblage is fish bones, representing up to 100
              species, making identification very time-consuming. A work-study student will
              assist with shellfish analysis, comparing the elite household and hypothesized
              feast strata. 

The fact that these data are provenienced to individual
              houses allows questions to be addressed that normally can be broached only with
              cemetery data and then only incompletely.  By comparing households, the
              research will examine how the political and economic systems in a simple
              chiefdom were integrated in terms of acquiring and distributing animal food
              products. It will determine the extent and status of subsistence-oriented
              occupational specialization, focusing on fishing and sea mammal hunting.  How
              food distribution was carried out within Chumash society, including the
              possibility of elite provisioning, will be explored.  The use of animal
              products such as meat, fat, and furs in defining status will be ascertained by
              seeking evidence for status-related differences in access to these items.  The
              nature of feasting in this kind of simple chiefdom society, actively threatened
              by colonial domination, will be investigated by determining the types of foods
              employed, how they were acquired and prepared, and what other artifacts were
              deposited with the food remains.

This project offers a singular opportunity
              to study subsistence specialization, differential access to status animals, and
              feasting in a simple chiefdom reliant on fishing, hunting, and gathering.  Only
              in the Northwest, where households were constituted very differently, have
              similar topics been systematically addressed, providing important data for
              comparative analysis. The research will fill a gap in our understanding of the
              evolutionary processes by which occupational specialization develops and elites
              become progressively differentiated from commoners. The study results will be
              available to the Chumash community, providing significant new information to
              these direct descendants about the lives of their ancestors. 

