Title       : Biomechanics and Neural Control of Ballistic Tongue Projection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0215438

Award Number: 0215438
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116662             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kiisa C. Nishikawa kiisa.nishikawa@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Pierotti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1155,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              New insights in biology have often come from studies of animals that exhibit
              some extreme of performance. In such animals, principles of function common to
              all animals are exaggerated, and are therefore observed and studied more
              readily. Ballistic tongue projection in toads represents one such extreme of
              performance. During ballistic tongue projection, toad tongues can be projected
              from the mouth at accelerations exceeding 2000 m/s2. Previous and ongoing
              research in our laboratories has focused on elucidating the mechanisms by which
              the mouth opening muscles of toads produce the power required for this
              extremely rapid movement.
During ballistic tongue projection, the mouth
              opening muscles of toads are activated for about 200 ms prior to rapid mouth
              opening. Inspired by this pattern of activation, the investigators developed a
              novel technique to quantify the in vivo force-velocity behavior of this muscle.
              The technique is similar to the well known quick-release or load-clamp
              techniques. The insertion of a muscle is attached to a dual servo motor
              force-lever, preserving the in vivo origin and line of action of the muscle. A
              stimulator is programmed to preactivate the muscle tetanically for a given time
              against a load that prevents the muscle from shortening. The force-lever is
              then released instantaneously to some smaller load that is varied
              systematically. The smaller the load, the greater the velocity of
              shortening.
Preactivated isotonic force-velocity and power curves were
              constructed using data collected from these experiments, an innovation of this
              laboratory. The investigators have demonstrated that 200 ms preactivation
              increases the shortening velocity, and therefore the power output, of the mouth
              opening muscles of toads by about twenty-fold. They further showed that 200 ms
              preactivation increased the power output of a frog hind limb muscle by the same
              factor. These results suggest that enhancement of muscle power by isometric
              preactivation is likely a fundamental, though previously unknown, property of
              skeletal muscle.
Both jaw and hind limb muscles shorten rapidly when clamped
              to smaller loads after 200 ms preactivation, and reach final velocity in a very
              short period of time (3-8 ms), which increases with increasing load. At the
              instant of release when the muscle is shortening rapidly, the force of
              shortening (F) is equal to mv/t, where m = the mass of that part of the muscle
              that is shortening plus the external load, v = the observed shortening
              velocity, and t = the time required to reach the observed velocity. The shorter
              the time required to reach a given velocity, the greater the force at the time
              of release. The present results demonstrate that the force of shortening
              increases substantially when muscles are preactivated compared to standard
              isotonic tests. The proposed studies will permit validation of this new
              technique, and quantification of the effects of preactivation on the
              force-velocity behavior of other muscles. This novel method has the potential
              to significantly impact the field of muscle physiology, and to inform our basic
              understanding of the mechanism of contraction in striated muscle.

