Title       : SBIR Phase I: Ytterbium-Doped Stoichiometric Lithium Niobate for Self-Frequency
               Conversion Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0215211

Award Number: 0215211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99954              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry A. Wechsler bwechsler@novaphase.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nova Phase, Inc.
	      435 Route 206
	      Newton, NJ  078600366    973/300-4400

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate
              the potential of new sources of laser radiation based on ytterbium (Yb) doped
              stoichiometric lithium niobate (SLN) crystals.  The Yb-doped SLN crystal will
              serve as both the laser and nonlinear frequency converter to enable the
              production of a broad range of wavelengths in a simple, compact device.  As an
              active lasing ion, Yb has the advantages of efficient diode pumping, low
              thermal loading, and minimal reabsorption of laser radiation.  This laser
              radiation can be converted to various wavelengths of interest via nonlinear
              optical effects that are intrinsic to lithium niobate.  Recent developments in
              quasi-phase matching techniques in lithium niobate have increased both the
              efficiency and range of wavelengths that can be generated by nonlinear optical
              frequency conversion.  The use of stoichiometric lithium niobate over
              conventional congruent lithium niobate leads to greater ease in fabrication of
              quasi-phase matched structures via electric field poling, and higher power
              handling capabilities. The combined advantages of Yb lasing, quasi-phase
              matched frequency conversion, and fabrication and power handling of SLN in one
              single crystal will enable the realization of new sources of laser radiation at
              wavelengths not currently available. This will make possible new lasers
              characterized by lightweight, compact construction, efficient operation, and
              spectral versatility. 

Commercial applications include the development of
              eye safe lasers for non-laboratory environments such as range finders, laser
              surveying and mapping, and pollution monitoring. Significant medical
              applications also may exist.
