Title       : RUI: Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Photoperiod Flowering in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0215504

Award Number: 0215504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen A. Hicks hicksk@kenyon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kenyon College
	      22 Ransom Hall
	      Gambier, OH  43022    740/427-5114

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1118,9109,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0215504
Hicks

Environmental factors such as light and temperature play a
              major role in regulating plant development and physiology, and have a
              significant impact on agricultural production. This proposal concerns the
              molecular and genetic basis for the regulation of flowering time by daylength,
              or photoperiod, focusing on the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Although
              recent progress has significantly increased the understanding of photoperiodic
              regulation of flowering, it is apparent that a number of key components of this
              signal transduction pathway are still unknown.

Mutations at the EARLY
              FLOWERING 3 locus offer a unique inroad to the interactions between biological
              clocks and complex developmental processes such as floral initiation and light
              regulation. New genes that influence photoperiodic flowering will be identified
              and analyzed by isolating modifiers of the elf3 mutant phenotype using a
              genetic screen. Modifiers of the strong reduced function elf3-1 allele that
              restore photoperiod sensitivity (pse mutants) are likely to identify proteins
              that function downstream of ELF3 in the photoperiodic pathway. A number of
              mutations that restore photoperiod sensitivity in the absence of ELF3 function
              have already been identified. New loci identified in this modifier screen will
              be mapped using PCR-based molecular markers, and positional or candidate gene
              cloning will be undertaken for at least two modifier loci. In addition, this
              project aims to understand the links between photoperiodic regulation of
              flowering, photomorphogenesis, and circadian regulation. Phenotypic analysis of
              pse elf3-1 double mutants will test the hypothesis that these three processes
              are genetically separable.

The discovery of new genes that influence
              photoperiodic flowering time will add to the repertoire of loci that are known
              to affect the transition to reproductive growth and might be manipulated to
              increase agricultural yield. An integral component of this project is the
              training and mentoring of undergraduate students. Their involvement in this
              research program will foster the development of laboratory skills and
              intellectual abilities that will enrich their lives and enable them to
              contribute to further progress in science.






