Title       : Acquisition of a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope for Natural Science Research
               and Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0215847

Award Number: 0215847
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225155             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Runge stever@mail.uca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon Ruehle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Murray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Clancy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Arkansas
	      201 Donaghey Avenue
	      Conway, AR  720350001    501/450-3451

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Steven W. Runge and colleagues at
              the University of Central Arkansas (UCA) to obtain a Laser Scanning Confocal
              Microscope (LSCM).  This instrument has the ability to capture images of cells
              and cellular structures that are tagged with fluorescent markers with a
              resolution unmatched by other types of light microscopy.  The ability of the
              LSCM to acquire optical sections and construct 3-D images from a variety of
              live and prepared tissues and to perform time-course analyses on living cells
              and tissues will impact a wide range of research programs at UCA. 
              Investigations that will employ the LSCM range from 3-D reconstruction of
              complex tissues such as actively growing plant shoots and brains of rats and
              marine snails to tracking the movement of structures inside of cultured cells
              and native tissues.  Collectively, acquisition of this instrument will elevate
              faculty and student research at UCA to new levels of sophistication.  This will
              allow researchers to address questions that previously were inaccessible.  A
              significant benefit of having this work conducted at UCA, rather than at
              distant institutions, will be the heightened opportunities for our
              undergraduates to become involved in research.  Our graduate students (master's
              level) will also acquire important experience and skills that will promote
              future research and professional study.

The LSCM will be used to address a
              wide variety of research questions in the natural sciences.  These include: the
              rapid assay and localization of plant pigments involved in responses to
              UV-light; morphological characterization of neurons in the white matter of
              mammalian brains; tracking the exocytic insertion of potassium channels into
              intestinal membranes for osmoregulation in marine gastropods; visualization of
              synaptic connections involved in behavioral decisions in whole brains of marine
              gastropods; understanding mechanisms that underlie the selective death of
              Purkinje cells during maturation of the rat cerebellum; tracking the movement
              of developmental signals that direct inflorescence architecture in flowering
              plants; examination of secretory canals in plants and the effects of trenching
              insects on latex/oil distribution; and ratio imaging to monitor intracellular
              pH and time-course imaging of vesicular trafficking of Na+/H+ exchangers in
              cultured cells undergoing apoptosis.  Methodologies to be employed include
              visualization of autofluorescent molecules and structures in plant tissues,
              tagging stuctures with fluorescent antibodies, filling individual brain cells
              with fluorescent molecules to identify connections to other cells, and labeling
              cell-surface proteins with fluorescent markers to follow the movement of these
              proteins to and from the cell surface under different conditions.

In
              addition to research, the LSCM will be a valuable addition to science
              instruction at UCA.  Confocal microscopy will help students visualize complex
              3-D processes in biology and make measurements on living cells that will be
              invaluable assets to teaching.  For instance, stages of frog embryo development
              will be recorded as a set of 3-D, time-course images that trace this dynamic
              process.  These images will then be made available for analysis in the
              classroom.  The stunning images produced by LSCM will also be used to generate
              interest in the sciences among high school students and teachers through
              various outreach programs and the Arkansas education media centered here on the
              UCA campus.  The University's enrollment of about 8,500 students is 62% female
              and 19% minority, with the later group steadily increasing in proportion over
              the last decade.  Acquisition of the LSCM will strengthen faculty research
              capabilities, support strong undergraduate research programs, attract more
              women and minority students to careers in the sciences, increase public
              appreciation of science, and support programs in a historically under-supported
              geographic area.

