Title       : SBIR Phase II: High Rate Synthesis of Highly Reactive Solvated Metal Atom
               Dispersion Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0215816

Award Number: 0215816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499959             (Estimated)
Investigator: Slawomir Winecki slawek@nanmatinc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nanoscale Materials, Inc.
	      1310 Research Park Dr.
	      Manhattan, KS  66502    913/532-0179

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1415,9150,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project focuses on the
              development and implementation of a Solvated Metal Atom Dispersion (SMAD)
              technique to support high rate production and commercial application of metal
              nanoparticle materials. Synthesis of gold and silver nanoparticle colloids for
              commercial use in the health care industry will be pursued as part of the
              proposed effort; the SMAD synthesis method will be optimized for
              commercial-scale manufacturing of gold and silver colloids. This approach
              yields high purity colloids, free of unwanted byproducts and ready for further
              processing without the cumbersome purification steps characteristic of other
              synthesis methods. This innovation significantly simplifies the manufacturing
              process of colloidal products and reduces production cost. The proprietary
              digestive-ripening step will be scaled up and developed to achieve
              monodispersion and particle size control of the metal nanoparticles contained
              in the colloids. Methods for transferring solvent-based colloids into an
              aqueous environment will be developed. Synthesis steps involved in the
              manufacturing of colloidal gold and silver will be integrated in a
              semi-continuous or continuous process.
     The commercial potential of this
              project will be for immunological labeling and DNA detection using the
              colloidal gold solutions. The project offers an alternative-manufacturing route
              that significantly lowers the cost. Silver-based colloids have potential
              applications in burn wound treatment or as effective disinfectants and
              anti-inflammatory agents. The development of SMAD technology will enable
              high-volume manufacturing of many nanoparticle materials whose availability is
              currently limited by production inefficiencies. These nanomaterials will
              support future technologies in industry and find application in both commercial
              and academic research, as highly reactive catalytic materials, magnetic
              information storage media, ferrofluids, and magnetic tracers.

