Title       : MRI: Parallel Computing Environment for Computational Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0215942

Award Number: 0215942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173673             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine A. St. John stjohn@comet.lehman.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sean Cleary  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Damian Rouson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gilbert Baumslag  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY H H Lehman College
	      250 Bedford Park Blvd West
	      Bronx, NY  10468    718/960-8107

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Numer DMS-0215942 
PIs: St. John, Baumslag, Cleary, and
              Rouson.

ABSTRACT

This project is a collaborative effort among members of
              several 
Departments and multiple institutions, all parts of the City
              
University of New York (CUNY).  The group effort includes the 
Department of
              Mathematics, the Department of Computer Science,
and the Department of
              Mechanical Engineering at City College of
CUNY; the Department of Mathematics
              and Computer Science, Lehman
College of CUNY, the Department of Computer
              Science of the
Graduate Center of CUNY, and the Department of Mathematics
              of
the Graduate Center of CUNY. The research tool that serves as
the hub for
              the planned activity is a large Beowulf computational
cluster, to be housed at
              City College.

The planned research projects are genetic algorithms
              in
combinatorial  group theory, evolutionary tree reconstruction
              in
computational biology, computer experiments on parafree groups,
modelling
              turbulent fluid flows arising in the early stages of
combustion, and questions
              and simulations in computer networking.
The cluster will be administered under
              the Center for Algorithms
and Interactive Scientific Software (CAISS) at City
              College. This
cluster will also provide an important resource for
              the
undergraduate and graduate students of CUNY, by giving access
to
              computing power not usually found at primarily undergraduate
colleges. 

The
              research topics span a wide range of computer science, 
computational science,
              and mathematics.   They share the common 
approach of involving both
              experiments and theory, relying on 
exploitation of computational resources.

