Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Proteome Analysis Core
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0215759

Award Number: 0215759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Angela V. Klaus                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $490891             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Bernlohr david-b@biosci.cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to the University of Minnesota-St. Paul, under the
              supervision of Dr. David A. Bernlohr to purchase equipment and technology in a
              dedicated facility termed the proteome analysis core.  The resources allocated
              to the proteome analysis core will be used to develop a core facility for
              rapid, quantitative, high-volume detection of proteins from plants, animals,
              insects and bacteria.  The rapid detection and identification of large numbers
              of specific proteins from mixtures and extracts is technically difficult, but
              is essential for a variety of biological applications including
              bio-identification, evaluation of treatment or conditions (bio-responses) and
              assessment of development (crop growth).  The first goal of the project is to
              provide researchers with the experimental technology necessary to assess
              expression of fluorescently labeled protein samples using nano-scale separation
              methodologies.  The second component of the technology is the utilization of a
              robotically driven sample analysis workstation that will interface with an
              existing mass spectrometry facility.  The combination of fluorescence-based
              protein detection coupled with rapid sample identification via mass
              spectrometry allows the user accurate identification of large numbers of
              proteins for a variety of basic and translational research needs.  
              

Specifically, the proteome analysis core will instruct researchers on the
              use of differential in-gel electrophoresis for the analysis of fluorescently
              labeled proteins.   The researcher will in turn be able to identify changes in
              protein expression or protein modification (precursor-product relationship). 
              Using a robotically driven analysis system, target proteins will be harvested
              from the gel, enzymatically digested, and the produced peptides spotted onto a
              MALDI plate.  The peptides are subsequently analyzed via mass spectrometry and
              using genome databases, identify proteins of interest.  The short time of
              analysis coupled with robotically driven workstation allows for scale-up and
              the analysis of hundreds of samples of proteins.   

The major theme of the
              proteome analysis core is one of training and education.  As opposed to an
              analytical service facility, the proteome analysis core trains students,
              postdocs, and faculty such that they themselves can manage a project.  As such,
              the technology has broad significance for training students in such diverse
              research areas such as crop and animal science, horticulture, bioremediation,
              and environmental science.  Because the proteome analysis core will be
              physically located in the BioDale technology corridor on the St. Paul campus of
              the University of Minnesota, it will be adjacent to other facilities linked to
              Genome Analysis, Imaging, Mass Spectrometry and Bioprocess Technology.  Course
              work, both during the academic year and during summer session, are being
              planned to train students in proteomics and mass spectrometry.  During the
              summer, minority scholars participating in the Life Sciences Undergraduate
              Research Program will make use of the proteome analysis core through workshops
              and their own research projects.  The availability of such a training site will
              allow the Univesity of Minnesota to attract, train, and recruit
              underrepresented minorities into our undergraduate and graduate programs and
              ultimately into science and technology based careers.

