Title       : SBIR Phase II: Low-Cost Glass Fiber Composites Tailored Towards Concrete
               Reinforcement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0215179

Award Number: 0215179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fadhel Aouadi dpdinc@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Habibur Chowdhury  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : DPD Inc
	      2000 Turner Street
	      Lansing, MI  489064053    517/347-5648

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,1635,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will refine the
              polymer matrix of glass fiber composites with ion exchangers in order to
              enhance their longevity in the alkaline environment of concrete. Glass fiber
              composites offer a desirable balance of performance and cost for replacement of
              corrosion-prone steel reinforcement in concrete; their rapid deterioration in
              the alkaline environment of concrete is, however, a major setback. Ion
              exchangers are insoluble solids carrying cations (or anions) which can be
              exchanged with ions of the same sign. Cation exchangers of hydrogen form
              replace alkali metal cations (e.g., K + in alkaline solutions diffusing into
              the polymer matrix) with H + . This exchange of cations neutralizes aggressive
              alkaline solutions by converting K + OH - (and Na + OH - , etc.) into H2O.
              Through laboratory investigations and industrial-scale pultrusion efforts, the
              Phase I research demonstrated that introduction of selected ion exchangers into
              the polymer matrix (or a surface layer of matrix) does not interfere with the
              pultrusion process, and yields significant gains in alkali resistance of glass
              fiber composites. The Phase I effort also established a theoretical context for
              selection of the dosage of cation exchanger in the polymer matrix of glass
              fiber composites, and verified the economic viability of our approach. The
              proposed Phase II project will: (1) develop refined theoretical principles and
              design procedures for formulation of polymer matrices with ion exchangers; (2)
              develop and experimentally verify optimum polymer matrix formulations
              incorporating ion exchangers; (3) optimize the pultrusion process of glass
              fiber composites with the refined polymer system, and fully characterize the
              end products; and (4) evaluate the structural performance and durability of
              concrete systems reinforced with refined glass fiber composite bars through
              comprehensive laboratory studies complemented with a field investigation
              involving design, construction and monitoring of a reinforced concrete bridge
              deck. The Phase II effort will receive critical support from major
              manufacturers of composite rebars (including Hughes Brothers, the world leader
              in this field), the leading supplier of ion exchangers (Dow Chemical), Michigan
              Department of Transportation, and Michigan Economic Development Corporation.
              Michigan State University (Composite Materials & Structures Center) will also
              take part in the proposed research effort.

Close to one-third of reinforced
              concrete structures, including bridges, parking structures, buildings in
              coastal areas and offshore structures, are exposed to corrosive environments
              (deicer salt, seawater spray, etc.); domestic sales of steel for reinforcement
              of these concrete structures is about $2 billion/yr. Glass fiber composites
              embodying our technology are resistant to both corrosive effects and the
              alkaline environment of concrete; they offer a desirable balance of performance
              and cost to replace steel reinforcement in corrosive environments. Major
              savings in life-cycle cost can be realized at competitive initial cost through
              replacement of steel reinforcement with alkali-resistant glass fiber composites
              in concrete structures exposed to corrosive environments. Glass fiber composite
              jackets and sheets applied onto concrete surfaces for repair/rehabilitation
              purposes are also prone to attack by the alkaline pore solution of concrete,
              representing another market opportunity for our technology. We have filed a
              patent application, and have reached agreements with Dow Chemical (leading
              supplier of ion exchangers) and Hughes Brothers (world's leading manufacturer
              of composite bars for concrete reinforcement) towards transfer of the
              technology to marketplace.
