Title       : Development of Parameterizations of Aerosol/Cloud Interactions and Assessment of
               Their Potential Climatic Impacts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0215367

Award Number: 0215367
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $477797             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Cotton cotton@atmos.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a modeling-based investigation of the interactions of clouds and
              aerosols and the effects of these interactions on cloud dynamics,
              precipitation, and radiative transfer.  It is an extension of a recent study of
              the cloudy boundary layer, based on what is called the assumed probability
              density function (PDF) method.   Within every computational grid box of the
              cloud model, it is assumed that the joint probability of vertical velocity,
              potential temperature, and liquid water content satisfies a parametric form
              such as the multivariate Gaussian.  Large-eddy simulation (LES) provides
              information on the small-scale variability of these quantities, enabling the
              estimation of the parameters of the distribution.  The cloud model predicts the
              development in time of the mean values of the quantities in the grid boxes and
              the PDF model characterizes the subgrid-scale variability.  In this project,
              the previous work will be extended to include precipitation processes and the
              estimation of the effects of variable concentrations of cloud condensation
              nuclei and ice forming nuclei on the microphysical, dynamic, and radiative
              properties of clouds.  The feasibility of applying the technique to large
              cumulonimbus clouds (deep convection) will be investigated.  Sensitivity
              studies will determine the extent to which changes in aerosol characteristics
              can affect the clouds and influence regional climate.
