Title       : Cardiovascular Performance and Excitation-Contraction Couplng in Tuna Hearts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0215272

Award Number: 0215272
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $398000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Block bblock@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1155,1305,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Tunas are well known for the exceptional physiological and morphological
              adaptations that set this group (Thunnini, Scombridae) apart from other teleost
              fishes. These specializations include unique swimming kinematics, high
              metabolic rates, high cardiac outputs, and regional endothermy. A number of
              studies have demonstrated the exceptional performance of the tuna heart at the
              organ and tissue levels, however little is known about tuna cardiac function at
              the cellular level. Experiments in this project will test the hypothesis that
              tuna hearts have specializations in excitation-contraction (EC) coupling that
              underlie the enhanced performance. Cardiac performance will be examined at the
              molecular, cellular and organismal levels in endothermic tunas (bluefin and
              yellowfin) and their ectothermic relatives (mackerel and bonito).
	Cardiac
              contraction depends on the precise delivery of Ca2+ to the myofilaments, while
              relaxation depends on removal of Ca2+ from the cytoplasm.  In heart cells of
              mammals and birds, the intracellular Ca2+ stores of the sarcoplasmic reticulum
              (SR) reduce diffusion distances and shorten the time course of Ca2+ cycling,
              permitting higher heart rates than in lower tetrapods. In fish, the
              contribution of internal and external Ca2+ stores varies with species and
              temperature, but no cellular studies of tuna heart performance exist. This
              project will address the hypothesis that the high maximal heart rates of tunas
              are achieved in part by increased reliance on intracellular SR stores and
              increased calcium-induced Ca2+  release during EC coupling.  In addition,
              experimental comparisons will be made of cardiovascular function in cold and
              warm temperate tuna and their ectothermic sister taxa in response to acute
              temperature change. Such comparisons will test the hypothesis that Ca2+ cycling
              in yellowfin tunas, which are confined to tropical and warm temperate waters,
              is more temperature sensitive than in bluefin tunas. Thus, an integrative
              approach utilizing molecular, biochemical, structural and whole organismal
              physiological techniques will be employed. Whole-cell voltage-clamp techniques
              will be used to characterize sarcolemma Ca2+ entry via the L-type Ca 2+
              current, and assess its temperature sensitivity in tunas and mackerel. Confocal
              microscopy will be used to visualize whole cell Ca2+ transients at different
              temperatures in fluo-4 loaded myocytes isolated from different species Whole
              organism performance as a function of temperature will be examined by measuring
              in situ cardiovascular performance of perfused bluefin tuna and bonito
              hearts.
	Overall this study will provide comparative data on cardiac function
              in fishes of the family Scombridae, and will characterize specifically the
              thermal relationships of voltage-sensitive Ca2+ channels, SR Ca2+ release
              channels, and the Ca2+ ATPase pump in heart cells from endothermic and
              ectothermic sister taxa. The results will increase our understanding of how
              teleost hearts achieve high metabolic rate and maintain function during acute
              temperature changes. The long-term objective is to understand the evolution of
              endothermy and high metabolic rate in the scombrid lineage. The proposed
              research also will yield insights about the role played by cardiac
              specializations in increasing niche breath of bluefin tuna. The research will
              contribute to basic knowledge about a small group of fishes that are among the
              most economically valuable animals on Earth. Dissemination of information from
              this project will occur by publications, popular articles, a website and public
              exhibits at the Monterey Bay Aquarium. The Tuna Research and Conservation
              faculty and students will provide public lectures throughout the year and
              contribute to efforts at the Monterey Bay Aquarium to educate the public about
              tuna biology and conservation. 


