Title       : SBIR Phase I: Optically Addressable High-Density Interconect
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0215098

Award Number: 0215098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Salvador M. Fernandez fernandez@ciencia.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ciencia Inc
	      111 Roberts Street, Suite K
	      East Hartford, CT  061083605    860/528-9737

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase I proposed innovation is an
              optically addressable, dynamically reconfigurable, bi-directional,
              high-density, optical interconnect micro-array based on the phenomenon of
              grating-coupled surface plasmon resonance). The proposed device addresses the
              need for dense, fast, low power dissipation interconnect technology created by
              highly parallel, next generation computationalsystems. These systems will
              require highly dense connection networks containing many
long-distance
              connections. In such highly connected, highly parallel systems, the
              module-to-module and long distance chip-to-chip connections are responsible for
              the majority of the power dissipation, time delay and surface area. Thus, it
              has become critically important to minimize the area, power and time delay of
              the
chip-to-chip and module-to-module interconnects while, at the same
              time,
increasing density and bandwidth. 

Potential commercial applications
              effort will find applicability in a number of commercial markets. These include
              emerging interconnect devices in electronics, generalMEMs fabrication and in
              photolithography, where it would save time and eliminate expensive photomasking
              processes. Other potential markets include
optical processing, certain
              applications in telecommunications and other miscellaneous applications for
              spatial light modulators. 

