Title       : Aquatic Faunal Survey of a Peruvian Amazon Floodplain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0215388

Award Number: 0215388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325001             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Albert albert@flmnh.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William Crampton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5926,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0215388
Albert and Crampton
Amazonian floodplains are among the most
              species-rich aquatic ecosystems on earth, and contain a large proportion of
              specialized and endemic species.  This three-year project will survey and
              document the aquatic fauna of a poorly known, megadiverse and vulnerable region
              in the Peruvian Amazon.  The project represents a unique combination of
              expertise in Neotropical aquatic zoology, involving international collaboration
              among scientists in the USA, Argentina, Brazil, Peru, Spain, and Venezuela. The
              personnel will conduct a detailed inventory of the aquatic animals, including
              fishes and numerous invertebrate groups, of the Pacaya Samiria National Reserve
              in Peru. This reserve is the largest contiguous area of protected floodplain in
              the Neotropics (21,500 square kilometers). The project will survey the
              principal aquatic floodplain habitats: floating meadows, open waters, lakes and
              river channels. These surveys will embrace seasonal and annual changes in the
              fauna in order to sample all habitats. Collecting efforts will emphasize
              habitats that provide critical low water refuge and/or reproductive substrate
              for most aquatic floodplain animals. The project will provide specimens and
              data to taxonomic experts in several institutions worldwide.
This Project was
              prompted by an invitation from leading Peruvian governmental and university
              scientists to conduct the first intensive aquatic survey of the Pacaya Samiria
              National Reserve. The proposed survey matches the goals and priorities of the
              National Science Foundation's Biotic Surveys and Inventories program and
              Peruvian Ministry of the Environment, in terms of focus, scale, and urgency.
              The aquatic fauna of the Pacaya Samiria Reserve is almost
completely unknown,
              and there are no extensive systematic collections or electronic databases of
              aquatic animals from anywhere in the Peruvian Amazon floodplains. The Pacaya
              Samiria Reserve also retains a relatively intact forest and aquatic ecosystem
              in comparison to unprotected sites closer to urban centers. This Project will
              provide training to local and U.S. students and faculty colleagues and thus
              benefit the conservation, scientific, and education communities. 

