Title       : Equipment Acquisition to Establish an Applied Electromagnetics and
               Communications Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0215810

Award Number: 0215810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226464             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith W. Whites whites@sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Montoya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neil Chamberlain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : ,0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Short abstract for proposal ECS-0215810 "Equipment Acquisition to Establish an
              Applied Electromagnetics and Communications Laboratory"


The purpose of
              this NSF MRI proposal is to acquire the basic equipment necessary to establish
              a laboratory for research and research training in applied electromagnetics and
              communications at the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology (SDSM&T).
              Four instrument systems comprise this equipment request: a vector network
              analyzer system, a sampling oscilloscope and pulse generator system, a
              micro/millimeter-wave probe station and a microwave free space measurement
              system. 
Current and planned research activities at SDSM&T that will be
              impacted by this equipment acquisition include electromagnetic propulsion and
              control of ultra-lightweight space sailcraft; space-based, gossamer zone-plate
              antennas; engineered electromagnetic materials incorporating active and passive
              circuit particles; ultra-wideband sensor webs; beam-steered, ultra-wideband
              radar; high speed circuits; compact antennas; ground penetrating radar; and
              electromagnetic properties of soils.
There is little to no equipment at SDSM&T
              (or anywhere in the region) for microwave or millimeter wave research work or
              for producing and detecting fast rise time signals. While computational
              electromagnetic methods and simulation are valuable components in our research,
              we rely heavily on experimental measurements to provide a critical dimension in
              our work. Such measurement capability is also a key element we expect will
              enhance our competitiveness in future funding opportunities.
The requested
              equipment will also allow us to educate and train engineers in microwave and
              high-speed circuits, which are critical components in wireless communications
              and computer engineering. It will also complement a burgeoning regional
              telecommunications industry primarily based in Rapid City, and assist us in the
              recruitment of faculty, students and underrepresented groups

