Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Development of Reliable Technologies for
               Harsh Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0215808

Award Number: 0215808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290280             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tony J. Anderson tandersn@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard B. Wells  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1057,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
               Competitively awarded support for University of Idaho (UI) research 
has
              steadily grown from $35 million in FY'96 to $63 million in FY'01.
This
              increase is due, in part, to the research activities of
              several
multidisciplinary research institutes and groups. For example,
              UI's
NASA Grand Challenge team provided the top-ranking concept for
detecting
              extraterrestrial life. This concept would be accomplished
in space using
              microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) technology. At
present, UI simply does
              not have the capabilities needed to implement
and test MEMS designs in their
              own laboratories for reliability in
harsh environments. In addition, UI
              researchers are conducting other
projects expected to result in a miniaturized
              tandem mass spectrometer
system, miniature resonators, micro pumps, autonomous
              vehicle guidance
systems, magnetic random access memories, and magnetic films
              for small 
monolithic microwave integrated circuits. All of these research
              activities
will benefit from the added capabilities requested through the
              Major
Research Instrumentation Program. 

 As a result of current progress
              in funded research projects, and with
the support of the university's
              administration, the PIs seek to acquire
instruments to fabricate, test, and
              evaluate the robustness of new
technologies. This request includes a plasma
              enhanced chemical vapor
deposition system, an e-beam evaporator, a vibration /
              shock table, a
thermal vacuum chamber, and a laser vibrometer. Acquisition of
              these
instruments will also provide more opportunities to integrate
              research
training with graduate and undergraduate education. The University
              of
Idaho is requesting approximately $290,000 from the National
              Science
Foundation from a total project cost of over $611,000. This
              equipment
will add significant capabilities to their region by
              complementing
existing equipment at neighboring Washington State University
              and by
providing research equipment that is currently unavailable in the
              inland
Northwest. It will also provide additional opportunities for
              participants
in Idaho's HOIST program (Helping Orient Indian Students and
              Teachers to
Science and Technology) to get hands-on experience in
              engineering
research.

 The project will be managed by experienced PIs who
              will use proven
instrument management approach to ensure efficient operation
              and
maintenance of the equipment. A qualified engineering technician
              will
assist them. The equipment will be housed within a single building
              on
the main UI campus, and this MRI award will receive full
              administrative
support from the Director and staff of the UI Microelectronics
              Research
and Communications Institute.
