Title       : Molecular Mechanism of Protein Transport into Chloroplasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1999      
File        : a9904524

Award Number: 9904524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth G. Keegstra Keegstra@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A significant unsolved problem in cell biology is to understand how
              cytoplasmically synthesized proteins are targeted to the various compartments
              of eukaryotic cells.  In plant cells, chloroplasts offer an excellent system
              for studying this problem.  Most chloroplastic proteins are encoded in the
              nucleus, synthesized in the cytoplasm as higher molecular weight precursors,
              and imported posttranslationally across the two envelope membranes.  The
              long-term goal of this research program is to understand the molecular details
              of chloroplastic protein import.  Two specific hypotheses will be tested in the
              current work regarding the details of this process.  The first is that Hsp93, a
              stromal molecular chaperone in the Hsp100 family of proteins, provides the
              driving force for the transport of precursor proteins across the two envelope
              membranes.  Two strategies will be used to evaluate this hypothesis.  The first
              will be to establish in vitro assays using purified chaperone proteins and
              purified precursor proteins to determine whether any of the events that are
              predicted to occur during protein translocation can be measured in vitro.  The
              major focus will be on interactions between Hsp93 and precursor proteins,
              however the possible involvement of partner proteins will also be investigated.
               Finally, the ATPase activity of Hsp93 will be measured in an attempt to
              understand the role of energy in supporting the chaperone cycle that presumably
              drives protein import.  The second strategy will be to perform reverse genetics
              to either delete or make changes in Hsp93 and attempt to determine the effects
              of these mutations both in vivo and in vitro.  The second hypothesis to be
              evaluated is that a GTP cycle operates early in the import process, possibly
              contributing to the specificity needed during the recognition of precursor
              proteins.  Because of the limitations of current in vitro assays, the strategy
              to be used for the near term will be that of reverse genetics to generate
              plants either lacking the GTP-binding proteins that are part of the receptor
              complex in the outer envelope membrane or with alterations in these proteins. 
              The goal of these studies will be to evaluate whether such a GTP cycle exists
              and to determine its importance for the protein import
              process.

Understanding protein import into chloroplasts is important for at
              least two reasons.  First, it adds to our understanding of a basic cellular
              process, i.e. intracellular protein trafficking.  Significant discoveries
              regarding protein trafficking within eukaryotic cells have been made in the
              last two decades.  Because the components of the chloroplastic protein import
              apparatus have no sequence similarity to components from the mitochondrial and
              ER transport systems, it is hypothesized that the chloroplast system evolved
              independently.  If correct, then clarifying the details of protein transport
              into chloroplasts and comparing them with other intracellular transport systems
              should reveal important features of protein trafficking systems that have been
              selected independently during convergent evolution.  Second, understanding
              protein import into chloroplasts has practical significance for efforts to
              employ genetic engineering to alter the many metabolic processes that occur in
              chloroplasts.  Successful modifications of plant metabolism requires not only
              that new genetic information be introduced into the nucleus and expressed at
              the proper time, but also that gene products be targeted to their proper
              locations within cells.  Thus, understanding protein targeting to plastids has
              considerable practical significance.

   

