Title       : Evolution of Axial Patterning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a9904757

Award Number: 9904757
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans R. Bode hrbode@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Accumulating evidence indicates is that a common set of regulatory genes
              involved in a common, or related, set of mechanisms underlie many of the
              developmental processes of the metazoans studied so far.  How early did these
              genes arise during metazoan evolution and to what extent has their function
              been conserved?  A useful approach to these questions is to study such genes in
              a cnidarian, the first group of animals to have a defined body plan.  Among the
              cnidaria, hydra is particularly useful as the developmental processes are
              extensively understood.  The overall aim of the proposed work is to determine
              if the genes and mechanisms underlying axis formation and axial patterning in
              hydra are similar to those found vertebrates and arthropods.  The four detailed
              aims are the following.

In hydra, axis formation and axial patterning can be
              studied during the process of bud formation, the animal's asexual form of
              reproduction.  Two of the aims focus on clarifying aspects of bud formation. 
              [1] Of the three cell lineages in hydra, the two epithelial lineages [ectoderm
              and endoderm] play an obvious role.  A possible role of the interstitial cell
              lineage will be investigated by manipulations that alter or eliminate this
              lineage.  [2] A number of homologues of axial patterning genes found in
              vertebrates and Drosphila have been isolated from hydra and show to be
              expressed during bud formation.  More direct evidence of their particular roles
              will be investigated by introducing anti-sense oligonucleotides against such
              genes into budding tissue.

The other two aims focus on the isolation of new
              genes involved in axial patterning in hydra.  One approach will be to look for
              homologues of genes involved in dorsal-ventral patterning, which is in part,
              highly conserved among vertebrates and Drosophila.  The other involves using
              the induction of a 2nd axis in frog embryos to identify hydra genes involved in
              axial patterning.  Any genes isolated with either procedure will be examined
              for their role in axial patterning in hydra by examining their expression
              patterns in a variety of developmental situations as well as using the
              anti-sense approach to gain more direct information.

The results should
              extend the understanding of the evolution of axis formation as well as how
              animals with a single axis evolved into animals with more than one axis.

