Title       : DNA-Binding Studies of Taq Polymerase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a9904680

Award Number: 9904680
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent J. LiCata licata@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Technical 
MCB-9904680 
LiCata 


This project will provide detailed
              biothermodynamic and biochemical studies of Thermus aquaticus DNA polymerase
              (Taq polymerase) in order to define and characterize the thermodynamic behavior
              and non-covalent driving forces that allow the polymerase to function at a
              temperature optimum of 750C. These studies will primarily focus on the initial
              step of DNA replication: binding of the polymerase to DNA. The specific aims of
              this study are: 1) To quantitate the DNA binding thermodynamics of Taq
              polymerase, and quantitate the change in the amount of associated water during
              binding. The thermodynamics of binding (AG, AH, AS) of the polymerase to short,
              defined pieces of DNA will be measured using calorimetric and
              spectrophotometric direct binding assays, augmented by "separation" assays such
              as filter binding and gel shift assays. The dependence of binding on osmotic
              stress will be measured, and used to calculate the change in associated water
              upon binding. 2) To characterize the temperature, pH, and ionic dependencies of
              Taq polymerase and Pol I polymerase binding to the same DNA. Binding of the
              polymerases will be quantitated versus temperature in order to calculate the
              change in heat capacity (ACp) associated with the binding reaction; and binding
              will be examined as a function of different ionic conditions and pH in order to
              quantitate the participation of linked ions and protons. 3) To determine the
              contributions of the DNA sequence to the global thermodynamics of binding and
              hydration. Sequence dependence studies will include binding to template-primers
              containing homopolymeric template regions and/or primer regions, in order to
              establish reference values for each base type's contribution to binding within
              a simplified context. This will be followed by increasingly more complex base
              sequence changes within these regions to assess base position contributions and
              the level of additivity or nonadditivity of multiple sequence changes. 4) To
              quantitatively determine the thermodynamics of unfolding of Taq and E. coli Pol
              I polymerases; and determine the change in DNA melting thermodynamics when
              polymerase binds.

Non-Technical

This project will provide the first
              detailed functional biochemical and bioenergetic studies of a thermophilic DNA
              polymerase. Studies will be carried out with Thermus aquaticus DNA polymerase
              (Taq polymerase) in order to define and characterize the thermodynamic behavior
              and non-covalent driving forces that allow this polymerase to function at a
              temperature optimum of 75C. These studies will focus primarily on the initial
              step of DNA replication: binding of the polymerase to DNA. Using an array of
              biophysical and biochemical techniques, the binding reaction will be determined
              under different conditions, and the linked ions, linked protons, and linked
              waters of the polymerase-DNA interaction will be determined from these solution
              dependencies. The DNA sequence dependence of the binding will also be assessed.
              Further, this project will provide the first quantitative thermodynamic
              characterization of the temperature stability of Pol I and Taq polymerases. 
              Due to its use in the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), Taq polymerase is one of
              the most important biotechnological reagents in use today, yet its biochemistry
              and functional biophysics remain almost completely uncharacterized. This
              project will extend our fundamental understanding of the general requirements,
              characteristics, primary forces, and predominant non-covalent interactions
              involved in the binding of DNA by polymerases. Advancing our understanding of
              DNA-protein interactions is also directly relevant to many aspects of
              biotechnology such as bioprocess development. Further, this project will begin
              to provide an understanding of how the same essential process of DNA binding
              and replication must be energetically fine-tuned in order to operate across the
              broad environmental range of Earth's biosphere.

