Title       : Acquisition of Differential GPS System for Use in Geologic Field Mapping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1999    
File        : a9904298

Award Number: 9904298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46903              (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Grotzinger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9904298
Grotzinger

This grant provides partial support of the costs of
              acquiring a digital data acquisition system for use in geologic mapping.  The
              PI, John Grotzinger, has a broad program in geologic field mapping, with
              emphasis on sedimentary and structural geology.  Use of the digital data
              acquisition system will significantly increase the capability of this group in
              three directions.  In the first case, the data is obtained directly in the
              field in digital format for easy input into graphics workstations for data
              display and analysis.  In the second case, data acquisition may be greatly
              accelerated through the implementation of outcrop-scale remote sensing
              capabilities.  In the third case, digital data collection will allow definition
              and quantification of uncertainties in field measurements.

Equipment to be
              acquired includes a differential GPS system (Leica 9500), with two rovers and
              reflectorless laser range finders (Vector GIS), a conventional total station
              with reflectorless range finders for detailed mapping of small-scale geologic
              features (Leica TM1800), and two portable pen-based computers and software for
              data storage and real-time viewing.  Position measurements from the Vector GIS
              laser range finder can be directly applied as offsets to measurements taken by
              the GPS receiver in real time.  This will allow rapid mapping, with a minimum
              number of equipment and data set merging problems.   This equipment will find
              immediate use for mapping along the steep slopes and cliff faces that flank the
              network of canyons in highly dissected terrains.  By mapping the steep slopes
              in multiple canyons, serial sections can be obtained through volumes of
              sedimentary rock.  These can be rendered in three dimensions and then
              interpolated between data points to provide state-of-the-art depictions of
              stratigraphic relationships in three dimensions.  Once in the workstation
              environment, the length scales of architectural elements, and the volumes of
              rock defined by facies boundaries or other stratal boundaries can be
              immediately quantified.

***

