Title       : RUI: Regulation and Role of Glutathione During Preimplantation Development of
               the Mouse Embyro
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  2000  
File        : a9904006

Award Number: 9904006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine S. Gardiner Csgardi@bentley.unco.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Northern Colorado
	      SPARC
	      Greeley, CO  80639    970/351-1910

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Gardiner
The objectives of this research project are (1) to investigate the
              mechanisms regulating glutathione (GSH) in the preimplantation embryo; (2) to
              investigate the role of GSH in the control of development of the mouse
              blastocyst; and (3) to improve the research environment and undergraduate
              science education at this institution.  The investigator's earlier studies
              indicate that the preimplantation mouse embryo is an intriguing and useful
              system for investigating processes that regulate glutathione (GSH) and the role
              of GSH in differentiation. Glutathione is the major intracellular antioxidant
              and has been shown to have roles in protection from reactive oxygen species,
              protection from toxicants, regulation of cell differentiation, and triggering
              of apoptosis in other cell types. Unlike all other animal cells, the cleavage
              stage preimplantation embryo cannot synthesize glutathione de novo. In
              addition, the embryo cannot take up glutathione from extracellular sources and
              is exquisitely sensitive to reactive oxygen species and glutathione-depleting
              chemicals. Therefore, it appears that the cleavage stage embryo is uniquely
              deficient in its ability to regulate total cellular glutathione. For these
              reasons, it is of interest to study how and why this deficiency occurs, and
              what effect it has on differentiation. The studies described in this grant will
              investigate the following questions: 1) why is the cleavage stage embryo
              incapable of synthesizing GSH, 2) at what time and in which cells does this GSH
              synthetic capability begin and why, 3) can GSH synthesis be induced in the
              embryo by treatments that typically induce it in other cells, and 4) what
              effect will altering the GSH status of the embryo have on differentiation?  The
              research will be conducted on mouse embryos during the first four days of
              development from the unfertilized oocyte to the blastocyst stage.  Embryos will
              be collected and analyzed for the total amount of oxidized and reduced
              glutathione using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). The expression
              of genes that code for enzymes used to synthesize glutathione will be
              investigated with reverse transcriptase - polymerase chain reactions and
              western blotting. Embryos will be treated with oxidants and GSH-depleting
              chemicals and the ability of the different cell types in the embryo to recover
              will be measured with HPLC and fluorescence microscopy. Furthermore, the
              effects of these treatments on gene expression will also be determined. The
              embryo will be treated with chemicals that increase the amount of GSH or
              chemicals that lead to oxidation of glutathione in the embryo and the effects
              on cell number, cell differentiation, and apoptosis will be measured using
              fluorescence microscopy.

This project is designed to further investigate the
              overlying hypothesis that glutathione regulatory mechanisms have unique
              features and important roles during the early development of the mouse embryo.
              Improving  the understanding of the basic processes regulating GSH and the role
              of GSH in differentiation has significance for development of techniques for
              scientific inquiry (development of embryonic stems cells for production of
              genetically engineered animals, etc.), for understanding causes of embryonic
              mortality, and for furthering the understanding of other biological processes
              (signal transduction, redox regulation, apoptosis, etc.). Undergraduate
              students will be active participants in the research and will present their
              results at scientific meetings and publish their studies in scientific
              journals.





