Title       : Co-Transmitters in Cerebellar Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a9904715

Award Number: 9904715
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318091             (Estimated)
Investigator: Georgia A. Bishop   (Principal Investigator current)
              James S. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Burry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Georgia Bishop
IBN #99-04715


      It is well established that
              communication in the brain is mediated by different chemicals.  These different
              chemicals are released from nerve endings after which time they diffuse across
              a narrow space to reach their targets.  Target cells contain membrane
              specializations, called receptors that bind the released chemicals.  The act of
              binding the chemicals causes changes in the target neuron, which may make it
              more or less excitable.  Recent studies have shown that most, if not all nerve
              terminals contain several different types of chemicals or co-transmitters.  The
              presence of different combinations of co-transmitters in nerve terminals
              indicates that there are chemically coded subpopulations of neurons that are
              capable of eliciting unique responses from target cells that are dependent on
              the specific combination of chemicals released following nerve cell activation.
               The intent of this proposal is to investigate a co-transmitter called
              corticotropin releasing factor (CRF) in the cerebellum, a part of the brain
              that is involved in co-ordinating motor activity.  Of all the co-transmitters
              described in the cerebellum, only CRF is present in all species examined to
              date suggesting it is a highly conserved substance that plays an important role
              in mediating neurotransmission across species.  It is our hypothesis that CRF
              is released only when activity in nerve fibers is very high.  Further, we
              postulate that CRF will influence the way a target nerve cell responds to other
              chemicals released by the same or other nerve terminals.  To test these
              hypotheses we must establish whether changes in firing rate alter the amount of
              CRF that is released.  Further, we must determine how CRF interacts with other
              chemicals that are released in the vicinity of a target cell.  Finally, we will
              use anatomical techniques to identify the location of the receptors that
              mediate the effect of CRF.  Two different types of CRF receptors have been
              described.  In this study, we will determine which one is in the cerebellum and
              exactly where it is located.  At present, little is known about how CRF, or
              other chemicals, are released from nerve terminals.  The data from this study
              will advance our understanding of the complex manner in which CRF acts as a
              co-transmitter in cerebellar circuitry.  These data will further our
              understanding of how the cerebellum controls and co-ordinates movements.

