Title       : FASEB Summer Conference: Ubiquitin and Intracellular Protein Degradation to be
               held July 31- Aug. 5, 1999, in Saxton's River, VT.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1999      
File        : a9904915

Award Number: 9904915
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4760               (Estimated)
Investigator: Cecile M. Pickart   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1114,1144,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Pickart
The conference "Ubiquitin and Intracellular Protein Degradation" will
              be held from July 31 through August 5, 1999, at the Conference Center of the
              Vermont Academy in Saxton's River, VT. This meeting is sponsored by the
              Federation of the American Societies for Experimental Biology (FASEB). It has
              been held biennially since 1989. It is the only regularly-held international
              meeting devoted to the biology and biochemistry of ubiquitin. This award
              provides partial funding for the 1999 conference.

The conserved protein
              ubiquitin is essential in eukaryotes. The biological functions of ubiquitin are
              mediated by its covalent attachment, through its C-terminal carboxyl group, to
              lysine residues of cellular proteins. The best-understood function of ubiquitin
              is that of a signal which targets proteins for ATP-dependent degradation by the
              26S proteasome. In this novel proteolytic pathway, substrate selection and the
              chemical catalysis of substrate hydrolysis are carried out by separate enzymes,
              allowing diverse substrates to be recognized and degraded with high selectivity
              and efficiency. The proteasome is the paradigmatic example of a universally
              distributed set of ATP-dependent proteases which feature sequestered active
              sites and a necessity for the coupling of substrate unfolding to proteolysis.
              By setting the levels of key regulatory proteins, the ubiquitin--proteasome
              degradation pathway controls fundamental intracellular processes, including the
              progression of the cell cycle. Besides ubiquitin, eukaryotes possess a family
              of ubiquitin-like proteins which undergo a metabolism parallel to, but distinct
              from, that of ubiquitin. These molecules appear to function as covalent signals
              which target their substrates to specific locations within the cell. The
              presentations and discussions in the 1999 conference will substantially advance
              the understanding of the functions of ubiquitin and its homologs.


