Title       : Cell & Molecular Biology of High Capacity Calcium Sequestration in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9904562

Award Number: 9904562
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent R. Franceschi vfrances@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1114,1132,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Calcium oxalate crystal idioblasts are cells that are specialized for high
              capacity calcium sequestration.  They provide an excellent model for
              elucidating the biology of calcium transport and accumulation in plants.  To
              continue the characterization of specific components of the high capacity
              calcium sequestration system, the matrix protein (MP), a unique high capacity
              calcium binding protein specific to crystal idioblasts, will be characterized
              as to its role in the biophysical process of calcium oxalate precipitation. 
              Using both in vivo and in vitro methods, bacterial expressed cloned MP will be
              studied to further elucidate the role of this novel protein.  The effects of
              overexpression of the MP in E. coli cells will be studied in relation to the
              bacterium's ability to grow in the presence of elevated soluble calcium and
              changes in the level of endogenous calcium will be studied.  These studies
              should further the understanding of the physiological function of the MP in
              calcium sequestration.

While there is considerable information on the
              biophysical properties of calcium channels in plant cells, advances in our
              understanding require that calcium channel protein components be isolated and
              cloned from plants.  Thus, the high capacity calcium accumulating cell type
              will be used to isolate cDNAs for a plant calcium channel(s) and allow the
              further study of the nature of the channel in the crystal idioblast system.  An
              antibody that recognizes a calcium channel-like protein in plants will be used
              for initial studies of localization and expression patterns in developing
              crystal idioblasts and idioblast fractions.

