Title       : Role of the Too Many Mouths Gene in the Regulation of Asymmetric Divisions and
               Stomatal Patterning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2002   
File        : a9904826

Award Number: 9904826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324278             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred D. Sack   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeanette A. Nadeau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   Stomata consist of specialized epidermal cells that regulate gas
              exchange
for photosynthesis and are essential for plant productivity.  They
              are also
a valuable developmental system for studying the role of
              asymmetric
divisions in cell fate specification and in cell patterning in
              plants.  In
wild-type plants, stomata are spaced at least one cell apart. 
              This spacing
pattern is generated in Arabidopsis through asymmetric divisions
              that are
extrinsically referenced through apparent cell-cell communication to
              orient
those divisions with respect to a pre-existing stoma or precursor.  The
              too
many mouths (TMM) mutation induces stomatal clusters in leaves that
              result
from excess asymmetric divisions that are often misoriented. 
              This
phenotype suggests that TMM functions in referencing or
              interpreting
spatial information to correctly position and allocate cell
              fate
determinants.  In contrast to the stomatal clustering found in leaves,
              tmm
eliminates the formation of stomata in other organs such as stems. 
              These
opposite phenotypes indicate that TMM plays a key role in
              stomatal
production and patterning at several different levels.  The work
              proposed
focuses on the completion of the sequencing of the TMM gene;
              the
determination of its expression pattern in wild-type plants and in
              stomatal
patterning mutants; the analysis of the effects of its misexpression
              in
transgenic plants; the characterization of the cytology of patterning
              and
mispatterning; and a developmental analysis of how stomatal formation
              is
suppressed in stems.  Long term goals are to identify key fate
              determinants
and the genes and events involved in cell signaling in stomatal
              patterning.  
