Title       : Dissertation Research: Parliaments, Parties, and MPs: A Comparative Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9904249

Award Number: 9904249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianne C. Stewart                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Bingham Powell bpow@trol.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	Parliamentary government is all about building and maintaining cohesive voting
              blocs in the legislature.  The development over time of political parties
              largely has done away with the problem of bloc formation (MPs arrive at
              parliament already sorted into partisan camps).  Bloc maintenance remains
              problematic, however -- witness the disintegration of the British Conservative
              Party over the issue of European Union.  The principal objective of the
              dissertation is to determine whether political institutions influence the
              ability of a party  to act cohesively.  In particular, the dissertation
              examines the effect of electoral, parliamentary, and party rules on party
              unity.
	Party unity does not depend entirely on institutions; contentious
              political issues and ideological disagreements between party members can
              undermine unity just as norms of solidarity can foster it.  Thus, the research
              design of this project must meet two challenges:  it must (1) maximize
              variation in instituional structures so that the effects of institutions on
              party unity (if they exist) are visible, and (2) provide enough statistical
              control to separate the impact of institutions from the impact of issues,
              ideological conflict, and norms.
	The single-country research design that is
              common in the existing literature is ill-equipped to meet these two challenges.
               Accordingly, the dissertation adopts a more effective and ambitious research
              design that has been employed previously.  The design is comparative and
              multi-leveled, examining party cohesion in Australia, Canada, Great Britain and
              New Zealand from 1945 to 1997 from the perspective of MPs, political parties,
              and parliaments.  Comparing across space and time increases variation in
              institutional variables, adds degrees of freedom, strengthens statistical
              control, and improves external validity.  Studying cohesion at three levels of
              analysis allows one to generate more observable implications of hypotheses,
              assess the reliability of results, and uncover connections between individual
              behavior and party and parliamentary rules.  

