Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Smart Composite Materials for Monitoring
               Structural Damage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a9904493

Award Number: 9904493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24966              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor Giurgiutiu victorg@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Abdel E. Bayoumi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : X325      AGRICULTURE-US EGYPT S&T PROG
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9904493
Giurgiutiu

Description: This award is to support a collaborative
              project by Drs. Victor Giurgiutiu and Abdel Moez Bayoumi, Department of
              Mechanical Engineering, University of South Carolina, Columbia, South Carolina
              and Dr. Yehia A. Bahei-El-Din, Structural Engineering Department, Cairo
              University, Cairo, Egypt.  They plan to develop composite panels with
              integrated sensors for damage detection of structures.   Specifically they plan
              to develop and calibrate wafer sensors, design, analysis and fabrication and
              calibration of smart composite panels, examination of the interaction between
              the embedded sensors and the containing matrix and its effect on the relayed
              signals, and instrumentation, testing and damage monitoring of full-scale
              structure members.  The novelty of the research lies in the electromechanical
              sensing technique for assessing structural integrity.  This approach offers
              several advantages of existing techniques and is the subject of developing
              interest in the adaptive structures community.  Electromechanical Impedance
              techniques for monitoring structural health are a recent development gaining
              interest in the adaptive structures community. This approach offers several
              potential benefits over current inspection techniques.

Scope: The proposal
              has high intellectual merit, and the research plan is well organized.  There is
              a need for data from large scale testing, of the type described in this study,
              to validate smart composite concepts.  Bayoumi and Giurgiutiu have worked in
              the field of smart materials and composites for several years and have
              published in this area.  Bahei-El-Din adds the structural engineering
              credentials that are important to successful completion of this study. 
              Graduate research assistants from both universities will collaborate on the
              research, and will gain experience in international scientific activities. 
              This proposal meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative research in
              areas of mutual interest.  This project is being supported under the US-Egypt
              Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
              countries to carry out these cooperative activities.

