Title       : SICB SYMPOSIUM: Genotypic and Phenotypic Strategies in Chronic Hypoxia to be
               held in Denver, Colorado
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9904390

Award Number: 9904390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2920               (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank L. Powell fpowell@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Studying how different animals respond to environmental stress identifies not
              only how animals work but also provides insights into how certain bodily
              functions may have evolved.  Hypoxia, or a reduction in the oxygen level of
              either the air or water an animal breathes, is one environmental stress that
              all animals, including humans, encounter at high altitudes.  Heart and lung
              disease can cause physiological changes that are similar to those observed at
              high altitude.  Hence, researchers from several fields are studying the
              biological responses to hypoxia and more than 5900 articles have appeared on
              the subject in the past five years.  In general, animals respond to hypoxic
              stress either by reducing their metabolism, and thereby reducing their demand
              for oxygen, or by improving the body's ability to transport oxygen to increase
              oxygen supply.  Adjustsments in oxygen supply and demand involve changes in an
              animal's cells, in its organs (such as heart, lungs, and kidneys) and in the
              nervous and hormonal control and integrations of the body's function,  In
              addition, there may be genetic adaptations that occur in populations of humans
              and animals exposed to hypoxia for several generations.  This symposium will
              bring together scientists from the many areas of biology that study hypoxia,
              including medical researches, zoologists and evolutionary biologists.  The
              speaker will compare and contrast the biological responses to hypoxic stresses
              of different durations from minutes to generations in the animal kingdom.  The
              goal of the symposium is to develop new interdisciplinary research to discover
              how an individual adjusts, and a population evolves, in response to a common
              environmental stress.
