Title       : An Ecophysiological Approach to Understanding Mycorrhizal Community Functioning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2001      
File        : a9904007

Award Number: 9904007
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274996             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Dighton   (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Baxter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent studies of the relationship between biodiversity and ecological 
              functioning suggest that ecosystem processes are influenced by species 
              diversity.  However, the mechanisms by which species diversity controls 
              ecological processes remain unclear and untested.  This research will test a
              mechanistic model relating the species diversity of  ectomycorrhizal (EM) fungi
              to host tree performance based on the  physiology of the
              associations.

Ectomycorrhizae are symbiotic associations between fungi and
              the roots of  many forest trees. These fungi greatly enhance nutrient and water
              uptake by trees.  Despite their ecological importance, there is little
              information on the role of EM fungal diversity in the functioning of forest
              ecosystems.  Most physiological studies have been conducted on interactions of
              single fungal species with single tree species. The PIs propose to investigate
              the  effect of multiple fungal species on a single tree host.  Because most
              forests managed for commercial timber production are ectomycorrhizal,
              understanding the role of EM fungal diversity may be  important for sustainably
              managing these forests.  Thus, there is a clear need for experimental tests
              that assess the role of EM fungal diversity in forest ecosystems.

The
              proposed research will test a conceptual model relating changes in EM  fungal
              diversity to host nutrient uptake and growth.  Assemblages of EM fungi with
              differing nutrient acquisition capacities will be constructed  on single tree
              hosts. The model will be tested by: 1) comparing the physiological capacity of
              a range of EM fungi to acquire inorganic and  organic nutrients in culture and
              in host association; 2) manipulating EM diversity on individual tree root
              systems and quantifying tree performance; and 3) measuring host responses to
              selected two- and four-species EM communities that differ substantially in
              their nutrient uptake capacities.

This research is important for several
              reasons.  First, understanding the role of a diverse ecological community is
              needed for developing  appropriate conservation strategies and effective
              management of the  world's natural resources.  Second, the proposed research
              will provide the first experimental test of a plausible physiological mechanism
              for the relationship between biodiversity and ecosystem function.  Third, loss
              of, or shifts in, mycorrhizal species diversity due to human activities may
              have broad implications for ecological functioning.  

