Title       : Power, Craft Production, and Exchange in Southern Mesoamerica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1999      
File        : a9904025

Award Number: 9904025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141769             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Urban urban@kenyon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marne Ausec  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward M. Schortman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kenyon College
	      
	      Gambier, OH  43022    614/427-2244

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Patricia Urban and Edward
              Schortman will conduct two seasons of archaeological survey and excavation in
              the Cacautapa Valley in Northern Honduras. In the course of previous survey
              work Schortman and Urban discovered a massive prehistoric center near the
              modern town of Pueblo Nuevo. Termed "La Coyota", it is spread over roughly .75
              km square of high terrace. While dense vegetation has precluded making a clear
              assessment of the center's form and dimensions, it is clearly a major site. It
              is dominated by a monumental core located on its northeastern margin with
              sizable quantities of stone-faced platforms stretching out to the South.
              Several massive stone terraces were built to support putative residential
              groups against the foot of the steep northwestern slopes. The concentration of
              structures implies a significant degree of political concentration with a
              powerful elite able to settle large numbers of subordinates in close proximity.
              Based on correlations between ecology and social structure from other regions
              in Honduras, this concentration of population is surprising because supporting
              agricultural land is located in relatively small scattered patches which would
              increase the difficulty an elite would have in exercising direct and tight
              social control. The goal of this research is to understand the processes which
              led to the nucleation and centralization which La Coyota  clearly indicates did
              exit. The investigators believe that it was the site's central geographic
              position in relation to rivers and mountain passes and its through control of
              trade that political centralization was achieved. 

     To evaluate this
              hypothesis, the team will conduct a survey of all prime agricultural land to
              determine its distribution and the nature of prehistoric human habitation on
              it. All sites will be noted and their size established. Surface materials will
              be collected. Extensive excavation will be conducted at La Coyota and at a
              sample of rural settlements. Extensive lateral clearing will be conducted
              within patio groups both to increase sample size and to determine the spatial
              distribution of activities. Through examination of the distribution and
              intensity of craft production insight will be gained into the degree of central
              control.

     This research is important for several reasons. It will shed
              new light on how social complexity arises and is maintained. It will provide
              data on a virtually unknown region of Middle America and it will assist in
              training many undergraduate students.

