Title       : Teachers Experiencing Polar Research Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a9904860

Award Number: 9904860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1676828            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephanie Shipp   (Principal Investigator current)
              Debra A. Meese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marjorie Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clarice M. Yentsch  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9904860
SHIPP

This 5-year program works with 12-16 new teachers each year
              who are participating in the NSF Teachers Experiencing Antarctica or Arctic
              program.  Its plan is to help with the selection of those teachers, help
              prepare them for research in the polar regions, work with them on transfer to
              the classroom activities, prepare the scientists to work with the teachers in
              both the research and education setting, and oversee and manage an extensive
              website for communication between teachers.  To increase the effectiveness of
              communication from the ice in near-real or real-time the program will leverage
              the use of technology (Internet and CU-See Me).  This electronic networking
              along with that at national meetings is designed to sustain the growing network
              of teachers, researchers, curriculum developers, administrators, and students
              that constitute the Polar Learning Community.  Teachers who participate in a
              research experience in either polar region are expected to close mentor three
              of their peers in the use of the research paradigm in their classroom and use
              the NSF supported polar curriculum (Project GLACIER).  Mentoring is for a
              minimum of 127 hours for each of three teachers and is required upon completion
              of the polar research experience. Accountability is maintained through a
              journal shared with the senior personnel of the project and project evaluator. 
              Transfer to the classroom activities begins with a workshop session before
              going to the ice and in extensive follow-up workshops upon return from the ice.
               In addition to the TEA teachers, TEA associates will participate in the
              program's activities as well.

