Title       : Scaling Issues in the Direct Use of Satellite Data in Mesoscale Model
               Land-Surface Parameterizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9904039

Award Number: 9904039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Capehart William.Capehart@sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the accurate representation of the surface in mesoscale
              atmospheric prediction models.  The research methodology is to couple a subgrid
              land-surface parameterization to a proven mesoscale atmospheric model.  The
              subgrid parameterization is specifically designed to estimate surface
              properties (e.g., albedo; heat and moisture fluxes) from satellite data.  In
              order to assess the effectiveness of this subgrid scheme, results of the
              coupled atmospheric-subgrid model will be compared to in-situ observations and
              remotely-derived estimates of surface energy fluxes.  Model results will be
              compared to gridded analyses of atmospheric properties. In addition, the
              importance of scale effects on the accuracy of the model system will be
              investigated.  These scale effects include (a) sensitivity of model output to
              the resolution of the subgrid; (b) the method used to distribute atmospheric
              data to the subgrid and how calculated subgrid fluxes are transferred back to
              the atmospheric model's grid; (c) the sensitivity of model output to the
              orientation of the atmospheric model grid and the surface subgrid; and (d) the
              determination of a physically reasonable ratio between the atmospheric model
              and subgrid resolutions.

This project will benefit the mesoscale modeling
              community by providing an improved method for introducing subgrid variability
              into mesoscale models which should lead to improved numerical weather
              prediction.  This study also will benefit the remote sensing community since
              many of the scale issues to be investigated are of importance in the remote
              estimation of surface parameters.  Improvements in satellite derived surface
              parameterizations will provide flux data at scales required to validate the
              surface component of various numerical modeling schemes. 

