Title       : Endosomal Sorting of P-Selectin: A Model for Receptor Downregulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a9904433

Award Number: 9904433
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374906             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel A. Green   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              One important way in which cells communicate in order to influence each other's
              behavior, metabolism or gene expression, is via receptor-mediated signaling. 
              This kind of communication is critical for the proper coordination of cellular
              functions within an organism or within a population of cells.  However, when
              one cell type produces a "signal" intended to interact with a specific target
              cell type, it is important not only for the target cell to be able to interpret
              and respond to the signal, but also, it is important for the target cell to be
              able to shut down its own responsiveness once the response is underway, in
              order to maintain the proper quantitative level of response.  For signals that
              are received by target cells via receptor-mediated signaling, target cells
              generally down-regulate their responsiveness to the signal by removing the
              receptor from its cell surface.  This is usually accomplished by internalizing
              the receptor via endocytosis.  Some of the membrane proteins that are
              internalized by endocytosis are then sorted to lysosomes for degradation, while
              others are not fated for degradation and are instead recycled back to the
              plasma membrane.  The long-term goal of this project is to understand, at the
              molecular level, how cells are able to sort specific plasma membrane proteins
              selectively and efficiently to lysosomes following internalization.  This work
              has significance for all aspects of organismal homeostasis.

The model
              protein for these studies is P-selectin, a cell adhesion protein involved in
              inflammation.  P-selectin is rapidly internalized, then sorted constitutively
              in early endosomes from recycling membrane proteins and rapidly degraded in
              lysosomes.  This attenuates the activity of P-selectin in the inflammatory
              response.  The cytoplasmic domain of P-selectin contains a sorting determinant
              that is necessary and sufficient to drive this sorting event.  This sorting
              determinant is recognized in several cell types that do not normally express
              P-selectin, suggesting that the sorting machinery is ubiquitous, and serves a
              general function in the endocytic pathway.  Part of this function may be to
              limit the activity of many types of membrane proteins by targeting them to
              lysosomes for degradation.  The relative simplicity of the P-selectin system
              offers important advantages as an experimental model for endosomal sorting.  It
              is very likely that information gained from studying endosomal sorting of
              P-selectin will be widely applicable to other membrane proteins, including
              growth factor receptors.  

The specific aims of this project are: 1, to
              directly measure the sorting of P-selectin and other membrane proteins away
              from recycling receptors in early endosomes; 2, identify candidate endosomal
              sorting machinery proteins that interact specifically with the endosomal
              sorting determinant in P-selectin; and 3, reconstitute early endosomal sorting
              in permeabilized cells to study the molecular basis of this process in detail. 
              To measure early endosomal sorting, carrier vesicles derived from early
              endosomes will be accumulated in living cells, then separated from endosomes by
              subcellular fractionation.  Pulse-chase labeling of cell surface proteins will
              be employed to measure quantitatively the delivery of P-selectin and other
              membrane proteins into the carrier vesicle fraction.   Affinity chromatography
              on GST fusion proteins is being used to determine whether any known sorting
              proteins interact with the endosomal sorting determinant of P-selectin.  Yeast
              two-hybrid screening will also be pursued to identify proteins that interact
              specifically with P-selectin.  Reconstitution of the sorting event will be
              pursued using Streptolysin O to gain access to the cytoplasmic compartment.  A
              point mutation in the cytoplasmic domain of P-selectin that abrogates endosomal
              sorting, identified through earlier mutagenesis studies, will be employed as a
              negative control, both for the cell fractionation experiments and interaction
              assays. 


