Title       : Osteology and Phylogeny of Basal Theropod Dinosaurs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1999    
File        : a9904045

Award Number: 9904045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott D. Sampson ssampson@umnh.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew T. Carrano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9904045
Sampson & Carrano
Theropods are a diverse clade of predatory dinosaurs
              with a global distribution and a lengthy Mesozoic tenure (also persisting to
              the present day in the guise of birds).  A basal division into two monophyletic
              taxa, Ceratosauria and Tetanurae, has been supported since publication of the
              first rigorous analysis of the group 12 years ago.  Yet most systematic studies
              of theropods have focused on a single derived subclade within Tetanurae
              (Coelurosauria), due in large part to ongoing controversy over the origin of
              birds.  The few more inclusive analyses of theropods conducted to date have
              underscored the poor resolution of relationships among ceratosaurians and basal
              tetanurans.
	A major objective of the proposed research is to conduct an
              exhaustive analysis of the historical relationships of basal theropods,
              including virtually all known genera.  This study, based almost entirely on
              firsthand examination of specimens representing more than 60 taxa, will
              constitute by far the most extensive investigation of the systematics of
              ceratosaurians and basal tetanurans.  It will also include the first
              genus-level cladistic assessments for several theropod clades.  The second,
              related objective is to assess the stability of the tree(s) resulting from the
              phylogenetic analysis, and compare these results with those of previous
              analyses of theropod relationships.  The resulting analyses will be richly
              illustrated with osteological drawings and descriptions.
	The significance of
              the study goes well beyond the fundamental insights it will provide into the
              systematic relationships and osteology of theropod dinosaurs.  A robust
              phylogeny is prerequisite to any higher-order inferences relating, for example,
              to functional morphology or biogeography.  Ultimately, phylogenetic and
              stratigraphic data can be compared with geophysical data to investigate the
              large-scale pattern and timing of Pangean fragmentation.  Moreover, this
              project will constitute a prime case study in the analysis of missing data
              using a large paleontological data set. 

