Title       : Urban Social and Political Choice Situations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9904482

Award Number: 9904482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115351             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine B. Sharp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1187,9168,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on city governments' handling of the potentially explosive
              conflicts surrounding "morality policy" or "culture wars."  Morality or culture
              war issues involve city governments in important ways, as when city governments
              wrestle with the order maintenance, free speech, policy and political
              implications surrounding regulation of abortion clinic protest, adoption of gay
              rights ordinances, regulation of pornography and prostitution, adoption of
              needle exchange programs for drug addicts, decision-making about local funding
              for arts projects, and the like.  There is substantial variation in city
              governments' handling of these issues.  Preliminary work on the topic, based
              upon secondary analysis of published case studies, suggests that city
              governments play any of six different roles with respect to these potentially
              explosive topics:  evasion, repression, responsiveness, non-responsiveness,
              hyperactive responsiveness, and entrepreneurial instigation.
Despite its
              significance in the urban context and despite the emergence of a substantial
              literature on national and state-level politics surrounding morality issues,
              the topic has until recently been relatively neglected by urban scholars,
              perhaps in part because the distinctive features of morality politics may seem
              ill-suited for explanation via the paradigmatic theories in urban scholarship,
              which are situated in a political economy framework.  However, the proposal
              shows how existing theories can be synthesized and applied to the phenomenon at
              hand, generating a variety of promising hypotheses that specify how
              institutions, socio-cultural factors, and economic circumstances shape urban
              governments' responses to morality issues.
The larger problem is lack of
              systematic data, for a representative set of cases, on what city governments do
              in case of morality issue controversy.  This research assembles such a data set
              to test hypotheses and provide a test-bed for other hypotheses on the
              phenomenon.  To overcome the current limitations of single-city case studies or
              single issue analyses despite the cost constraints imposed by the field study
              methods that must be used to obtain information on the dependent variable, the
              research design incorporates principles for expansis of observations in a way
              that maximizes the capacity for valid inference.  Using a selection matrix that
              minimizes collinearity and maximizes variance of the values of key explanatory
              variables, ten cities are selected as study sites; based upon pilot study work,
              each is expected to generate approximately 50 morality issue cases.  In
              collaboration with faculty associates in 7 of the 10 sites, archival analysis
              and elite interviewing will be used to build the database.

