Title       : Detection and Metabolism of Phenolic Compounds by Agrobacterium tumefaciens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9904917

Award Number: 9904917
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Winans scw2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1168,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Winans, Stephen C.
MCB-9904917
Abstract

	Bacteria that live in association
              with eukaryotic hosts often  have intricate mechanisms to detect host-released
              chemical signals.  This theme is well-studied in the plant pathogen
              Agrobacterium tumefaciens, which detects several classes of plant-released
              signals.  This project focuses on the perception of a class of phenolic
              compounds that are released from plant wound sites.  These compounds are
              detected by a two-component system consisting of the transmembrane histidine
              kinase VirA and the cytoplasmic response regulator VirG, which direct the
              induction of the vir regulon.  Products of the vir regulon mediate the transfer
              of oncogenic DNA fragments from the bacterium to the nuclei of host plant
              cells, resulting in crown gall tumors.  VirA is a dimeric protein that has four
              domains: the kinase itself and three domains that modulate kinase activity.  In
              the past,  functions have been assigned to each domain by systematically
              ablating each one at the genetic level.  In this project,  genetic techniques
              will be used to create VirA heterodimers containing just one phosphodonor
              and
one phosphorecipient and the role of each domain will be determined in
              vivo.  Soluble VirA fragments will be tested for binding of phenolic inducers
              and phenolic-responsive autophosphorylation and phosphotransfer reactions.  The
              Winans' laboratory recently determined that one of the operons in the vir
              regulon (virH) directs the destruction of phenolic vir-inducers.  For example,
              wild type strains can demethylate ferulic acid (a strong vir gene inducer),
              creating caffeic acid (a noninducer), while virH2 mutants fail to carry out
              this conversion.  Whether related phenolic compounds are substrates for VirH2
              or for the closely related protein VirH1 will be addressed.  They will also
              test whether the products of these reactions are further catabolized by other
              A. tumefaciens proteins.   Finally, they will learn what biological role these
              enzymes play in plant colonization.  
	All pathogens must detect their hosts
              and make appropriate responses.  Detection is generally carried out using
              olfactory mechanisms (essentially, by sense of smell).  This project will
              provide use genetic and biochemical techniques to learn how a particular plant
              pathogen (Agrobacterium tumefaciens) detects host plants.  It was recently
              discovered that Agrobacterium can destroy these signal molecules, and this
              project will
study whether all types of these molecules are destroyed, or only
              certain ones.  It will also study the overall effects of these reactions on the
              ability of this bacterium to colonize its host.  These studies will provide
              fundamental information about host-pathogen interactions that will be useful in
              combating this and other pathogens.


