Title       : Mechanism of Action of an Unusual Mobile Regulatory Cassette: The C Genes of
               Restriction-Modification Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9904523

Award Number: 9904523
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Blumenthal rblumenthal@mco.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Col of Ohio
	      3035 Arlington Avenue
	      Toledo, OH  436145804    419/383-4252

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Type II restriction-modification systems comprise two genes that specify a
              restriction endonuclease and a modification methyltransferase, and in many
              cases one or more additional genes that specify regulatory proteins.  The genes
              for these restriction-modification systems can be mobile, in some cases
              naturally residing on plasmids.  Because plasmids are essentially mobile
              elements, when these genes move into a new host cell that has completely
              unmethylated DNA, early expression of the endonuclease gene would lead to
              lethal cleavage of the host chromosome.  Once the host cell DNA has been
              protected by methylation, the expression ratio of the methyltransferase and
              endonuclease genes must change to favor the defensive function of the system
              (restriction of incoming bacteriophage DNA).  Despite the importance of
              restriction-modification genes to biotechnology and genetic ecology, there is
              no restriction-modification system for which the full complement of regulatory
              mechanisms is understood in detail.  Several of these systems are known to be
              controlled by a family of regulators, the C genes, with intriguing properties. 
              C genes from bacteria as different as Bacillus amyloliquefaciens and Proteus
              vulgaris function well in cross-complementation assays.  The C protein from the
              PvuII system appears to be a transcriptional activator and yet binds to the DNA
              just upstream of the start of transcription -- its binding site overlaps the
              apparent -10 hexamer of the activated promoter.   This project continues the
              study of the regulatory mechanisms that control the PvuII genes.  Three
              questions will be addressed.  First how do the C proteins activate
              transcription?  To address this question, and to understand the broad host
              range of the C proteins, comparative studies will be carried out with the
              Bacillus and Proteus proteins.  These studies will include collaboration with
              an x-ray crystallography group characterizing the structure of the Bacillus
              protein.  Second, C.PvuII also appears to stimulate expression of the
              endonuclease gene at a step subsequent to transcription initiation; does this
              stimulation involve the alternative RNA hairpins that precede the endonuclease
              gene?  Whether or not C.PvuII is involved, do these hairpins affect expression
              of the endonuclease gene?  Finally, what is the kinetic behavior of the PvuII
              genes following introduction into new host cells, and how is it determined by
              the components of the regulatory system?  This research will contribute to our
              understanding of development of regulation of highly transmissable genes that
              may ultimately prove to be instrumental in bacterial speciation.
