Title       : U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research: Image Reconstruction Algorithms for
               Structural Biology and Environmental Remote Sensing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9904481

Award Number: 9904481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31360              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rick P. Millane rmillane@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5941,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9904481
Millane

This award supports collaborative research between Rick
              Millane, Center for Carbohydrate Research, Purdue University, and Philip Bones,
              Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of Canterbury, New Zealand. 
              The proposed research seeks to augment NSF-funded work being done on electron
              density modification algorithms for macromolecular X-ray crystallography.  The
              collaboration capitalizes on the complementary expertise of the two groups:
              biological x-ray crystallography at Purdue University and image processing for
              remote sensing at the University of Canterbury.  Both groups will benefit from
              the collaboration through the opportunity to learn ideas and techniques used in
              one discipline, and to apply them in the other.  

Biological x-ray
              crystallography and imaging of the Earth's surface are unrelated disciplines. 
              However, the common thread of image reconstruction and the potential advances
              in improved image reconstruction algorithms for both x-ray crystallography and
              environmental remote sensing suggest the collaboration has the potential to
              provide significant added value. New and improved image reconstruction
              algorithms will be developed for a variety of problems in biological x-ray
              crystallography and environmental remote sensing.  The methods of generalized
              projections and Bayesian inversion will be applied to image reconstruction
              problems in protein crystallography, fiber diffraction, visible and infrared
              imaging, and synthetic aperture radar.  These problems all involve the
              measurement of radiation (x-rays, visible or infrared light, microwaves)
              diffracted or reflected from a target (a protein crystal, the Earth's surface)
              and reconstruction of some useful characteristics of the target (protein
              structure, forest cover, land use) from the measurements; and therefore all
              have a common theoretical underpinning.

