Title       : Resonance Raman Studies of Electron-Nuclear Coupling, Time Resolved Dynamics,
               and Magnetic Perturbations of Biomolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2001     
File        : a9904516

Award Number: 9904516
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Champion champ@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J T. Sage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1248,1253,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Champion
Sage
MCB 9904516.


This research project utilizes resonance
              Raman scattering and its time domain analog, femtosecond coherence spectroscopy
              (FCS), to probe the electronic and nuclear structure/function relationships of
              biological molecules such as heme proteins (myoglobin, hemoglobin and
              cytochrome c) and photosynthetic systems (light harvesting antenna and reaction
              centers).  Related techniques, such as electronic absorption and infrared
              spectroscopy, will also be utilized, and theoretical models that account for
              the experimental FCS measurements will be developed. FCS signals, induced by
              rapid photoinduced biochemical reactions, will be  used to  extract key
              parameters that quantitatively model the  level crossing dynamics describing
              the  reaction.   Variations of external conditions such as  temperature,
              viscosity, and magnetic field  will be  used to probe the effects of protein
              relaxation and spin-state selection rules on the reaction dynamics.  Use of
              site directed mutants and chromophore replacements will probe the effect of
              protein amino acids and chromophore peripheral substituents on the FCS signals.
               Quantitative studies and comparisons of field and reaction driven coherent
              motions will be carried out using variations in laser pulse shape, optical
              carrier frequency,  and monochromator detection frequency.  Measurements of the
               relative phases of the oscillatory signals will be used to test for the
              presence of intermediate spin-states  on the Fe-L dissociation  pathway. 
              Heme-ligand binding and dissociation reactions involving  NO, CO and O2 will be
              compared. Further experimental and theoretical studies involving the dynamic
              effects of protein distributions and conformational interconversions  will be
              carried out. Laser mediated  thermal perturbations will be followed using pump
              induced changes of the Stokes and anti-Stokes Raman scattering.  

Overall
              the project's objectives are to achieve a better understanding of  the optical
              properties  of biological molecules, both in and out of  equilibrium, and to
              apply this knowledge to elucidate  their mechanism of action. These studies are
              significant not  only in their relationship  to the biological sciences, but
              also in their connection to the understanding of basic light-matter interaction
              associated with complex systems in the condensed phase. This project is
              supported by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and
              Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the
              Divisions of Physics and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate. 



