Title       : A Database of General Biomolecular Information for Education and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a9904796

Award Number: 9904796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408710             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Goodsell goodsell@scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              



This project will define, implement and evaluate a resource that will
              bridge the boundary between the scientific literature and web-accessible
              databases of primary scientific data. The goals are: 1) to create a prototype
              that integrates general biomolecular information with supporting data found in
              the Protein Data Bank (PDB), 2) to evaluate this prototype as an extensible
              model by which textual and graphical information in general may be linked to
              primary scientific data, providing a model for use in other resources and
              journals.

The proposed database will contain general information on a wide
              range of biological molecules, including information on their structure,
              function, and relevance to human life. The entire resource will be authored at
              a non-technical level, providing quick, easily-comprehensible background
              material for use by researchers, educators, students, and the general public.
              The database will allow a PDB user, when approaching a new protein, to obtain a
              general introduction to the structural and functional features of the molecule,
              from which the user may gain a deeper understanding of the context of the
              molecules within the PDB. Linkages to the primary data will allow users,
              empowered by this introductory material, to explore topics of interest in more
              detail.

The database will be composed of two types of information. First,
              the database will contain information on individual molecules, describing the
              structure and function of the molecule and its relevance of each molecule to
              human life. Links to the PDB and to other appropriate databases will suggest
              files that would be most appropriate for further study. Second, the database
              will include information on topics of interest to human life, health, and
              industry. These entries will refer the user to relevant molecules and to
              related topics.

The resource will be built upon XML (extendable markup
              language), allowing creation of a flexible, extensible resource. Authoring of
              new pages will be fast and straightforward, and an XML-based WWW interface will
              allow new pages to be immediately incorporated into the resource. A simple set
              of tags inserted into the textual material will identify topics. The WWW
              interface to the resource will allow searching of all avallable pages within
              the resource, and will use the XML tags to create links dynamically, linking
              appropriate pages from the entire database at the time of the search. In this
              way, new pages may be added at any time, and obsolete pages may be discarded
              without the need to resolve linkage problems.

