Title       : Molecular and Biochemical Determinants of Floral Scent Production in Antirrhinum
               majus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9904910

Award Number: 9904910
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Natalia Doudareva   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Volatile compounds play an important role in plants as insect
              attractants,
repellents and signal molecules.  Floral scent is a key
              modulating factor
in plant-insect interactions and plays a central role in
              successful 
pollination, and thus in fruit development of many crop species. 
              Despite
the economic importance of floral scent for plant reproduction, little
              is
known about the molecular mechanisms involved in the production of floral
              
volatiles.  The objectives of this proposal are to use molecular,
              genetic,
and biochemical approaches to understand how production of volatiles
              could
be manipulated in plants using floral scent as a model system.
              Although
production of scent volatile compounds appears to be very widespread
              in the
plant kingdom, the information about their biosynthesis and regulation
              is
limited and based to date on the analysis of a single model system
              -
Clarkia.  Bee-pollinated Antirrhinum majus (snapdragon) will be used as
              a
model system for this study due to its important advantages over
              the
Clarkia system such as a well developed genetic map, transposon
              gene
cloning system, available transformation protocol, and rhythmic
              emission.
Floral scent is often a complex mixture of low molecular weight
              compounds,
which are mainly distributed within three groups: fatty acid
              derivatives,
benzenoids and isoprenoids.  Esters of such compounds are among
              the most 
common in many plant species where they contribute significantly to
              the
total floral scent output. However, the biochemical pathways, enzymes
              and
genes controlling the biosynthesis of volatile esters in plants have
              
received little attention.  The focus of the proposed research is on
              the
molecular mechanisms of the synthesis of the volatile ester
              methylbenzoate,
an important insect attractant and a major component of
              snapdragon floral 
scent.  This research specifically addresses the questions
              of how plants
regulate the production of volatile esters and how pollination
              and
circadian rhythm affect scent emission at the molecular level. 
              The
availability of a cloned S-adenosyl-L-methionine:benzoic acid
              carboxyl
methyltransferase  (BAMT), the final enzyme in the biosynthesis
              of
methylbenzoate, recently isolated in the PI's lab, provides a
              unique
opportunity to make a detailed study of the regulation of floral
              scent
production.  The mode of expression of BAMT gene will be characterized
              in
different tissues during flower development to determine the
              molecular
mechanisms (transcriptional, translational or post-translational)
              involved
in the regulation of methylbenzoate emission. Special attention will
              be
paid to comparative analyses of Antirrhinum varieties that
              emit
methylbenzoate with 
non-emitting plants.  To determine the specific
              molecular and biochemical
mechanisms that are 
responsible for the
              postpollination changes in floral scent production in
plants, the levels of
              BAMT mRNA, BAMT protein, BAMT activity, emission, and
the possible
              accumulation of methylbenzoate inside the cells will be
determined at
              different times after pollination.  Overall, this research
will lead to
              significant contributions to 
understanding of the fundamental processes
              underlying the formation of
floral scent. While this proposal is designed
              primarily to address
fundamental questions about molecular mechanisms
              controlling production of 
volatiles in plants, the results obtained may
              ultimately find application
in agriculture and horticulture.  An understanding
              of the enzymology and
regulation of metabolic pathways (including
              developmental changes and 
subcellular compartmentation), obtained in these
              studies, will provide the
knowledge for engineering plants with improved scent
              quality to increase
the attraction of pollinators to flowers and thereby
              increase the yield of 
important agricultural crops.
