Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Advanced Cooling of Electronics, Training and
               Enhancing Manufacturing Capabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9904786

Award Number: 9904786
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. El-Genk   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : Y851      STATE-OES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9904786
El-Genk

Description: This award is to support a collaborative
              project by Dr. Mohamed S. El-Genk, Director, Institute for Space & Nuclear
              Power Studies, the University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico and Dr. S.
              Wahsh, Power Electronics Department, Electronics Research Institute, Cairo,
              Egypt.
They plan to develop new cooling methods and manufacturing techniques
              for microelectronic components and devices that will help make these products
              suitable for the compact and high speed applications needed by the computer and
              telecommunications industry.   They plan to develop and implement an agenda to
              establish the research infrastructure, build capability and enhance interest in
              this important field of heat transfer and cooling of microelectronics.
              

Scope: The US PI is an expert in heat transfer, and his expertise covers a
              variety of areas relevant to the electronic cooling applications.  The Egyptian
              counterparts have excellent background in electrical engineering and
              electronics.  The two scientists have laid out a good organizational plan, with
              a seminar, integrated research activities, an international conference and
              training activities to provide a solid array of opportunities to accomplish the
              stated objective.  The impact of this program is promising.  The interactions
              with industry, through surveys and training, coupled with the joint research
              initiatives with academia are important factors.  The specific knowledge of the
              PIs in the area of electronic cooling is supplemented by extensive experience
              in heat transfer theory and applications.  This proposal meets the INT
              objective of supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual interest. 
              This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which
              provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out
              these cooperative activities. 

