Title       : Rural Responses to Early Urbanism: Village Economy and Ecology in the Jordan
               Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1999 
File        : a9904536

Award Number: 9904536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179245             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven E. Falconer falconer@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia L. Fall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer E. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation Drs. Stephen Falconer and
              Patricia Fall will continue their archaeological research in the Jordan Valley.
              They will conduct one season of excavation at the site of Tell Abu en-Ni'aj and
              follow this with two seasons of analytic work. Together with the adjacent site
              of Tell el-Hayyat, also excavated with NSF support, Drs. Falconer and Fall will
              be able to trace changes in settlement, economy and social organization over a
              ca. 800 year time span. The earlier Tell Abu en-Ni'aj documents the terminal
              period of the Early Bronze Age while Tell el-Hayyat was occupied during the
              succeeding Middle Bronze Age. Both sites are relatively small and represent
              rural "towns" rather than central urban capitals and therefore have the
              potential to shed light on the world in which the vast majority of the populace
              of these times lived. To accomplish this large scale horizontal excavations
              will be conducted. These will yield large samples of floral, faunal and other
              cultural remains and also permit examination of the spatial organization of
              this small village site. The data thus collected will be compared from similar
              classes of material from Tell el-Hyyat.

While, through the long lens of
              time, one can trace a trajectory of increasing social complexity in which
              culminated in the emergence of Near Eastern "civilization", the process in
              reality is both much more complicated and poorly understood. Change was not
              unidirectional but characterized by cycles of increasing and decreasing
              complexity. The terminal Bronze Age is of particular interest because it
              evidenced a sharp decline in complexity and is often referred to as a "dark
              age." In the succeeding Middle Bronze Age cities and large political entities
              emerged once again. Taken together the two sites allow Drs. Falconer and Fell
              to examine the entire cycle. Preliminary data indicate a strong degree of
              continuity across these periods and suggest that small settlements retained a
              substantial degree of independence and adapted resilient strategies which
              buffered them against change. The proposed research will permit the
              investigators to investigate this process in detail.

This work is important
              for several reasons. It will shed new light on the rise of complex society in
              the Near East and provide data of interest to many archaeologists. Because the
              research is set in a strong ecological context it will also offer insight into
              how humans respond to climatic change and how they adapted to and affected
              their surroundings.

