Title       : Genetic Mechanisms of Vasopressin Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a9904808

Award Number: 9904808
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick D. Grant   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Children's Hospital Corp
	      320 Longwood Ave
	      Boston, MA  021155746    617/355-7044

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	Vasopressin is a brain hormone with a number of important functions in
              the
body.  Its primary function is maintaining the water balance of the body
              by
regulating water excretion in the kidney.  Vasopressin also is involved in
              blood
pressure control and is an important part of the hormonal response to
              stress. 
Vasopressin expression is altered by a wide variety of specific
              physiological inputs including blood concentration, dehydration, hemorrhage,
              low blood pressure, and stress.  The vasopressin response to these stimuli is
              regulated by a complex neuronal circuitry in the brain.  When physiological
              stimuli are sensed by some regions of the brain, signals are transmitted to
              other neurons where the vasopressin gene is activated to synthesize
              vasopressin.  Vasopressin is then transported to other regions of the brain or
              secreted into the bloodstream where it can exert its effects on the rest of the
              body.  The specific intra-cellular messengers involved in the regulation of
              the
vasopressin gene are not known.  The specific aim of this project is to
              determine the intra-cellular mechanisms that mediate the response of
              vasopressin to specific physiological stimuli.  To accomplish this goal,
              cellular extracts will be obtained from the neurons of mice that are either in
              a resting state or have been exposed to a physiological stimulus.  Two
              laboratory techniques will be used to characterize the interactions between
              cellular proteins and the vasopressin gene.  Comparing the results obtained
              with resting and stimulated mice will help pinpoint the region of the
              vasopressin gene that is important in the response to each stimulus and will
              identify the intra-cellular protein messengers involved in the vasopressin
              response to different physiological stimuli.  These studies will lead to a
              better understanding of the control
of water balance in the body, the
              contribution of vasopressin to blood pressure
control, and the hormonal
              responses of the body to stress.   

