Title       : Structure and Function of Iron-Hydrogenases in a Hyperthermophilic Bacterium and
               of an Analogous Protein in Higher Eukaryotes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9904624

Award Number: 9904624
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $394106             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Adams   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc F. Verhagen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1166,1168,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Adams

	This project seeks to expand upon our knowledge of the structure,
              function and assembly of biological iron-sulfur (FeS) clusters, the most
              ubiquitous electron carriers in nature.  The research concerns the properties
              and role of hydrogenase, an enzyme that has the unique ability to catalyze H2
              oxidation and H2 production.  The enzyme will be obtained from the
              hyperthermophilic bacterium, Thermotoga maritima (Tm), an organism that grows
              at 90 degrees C and is one of the two most thermophilic bacteria known.  Its
              heterotrimeric (abg) hydrogenase of mass 160 kDa is proposed to contain eleven
              iron-sulfur clusters.  These include the catalytic site, the so-called H
              cluster, which consists of six iron atoms.  The genes encoding the three
              subunits, which have already been cloned and sequenced, will be expressed in
              Escherichia coli and the proteins will be characterized individually and in
              combination, including structural determinations.  Two enzymes thought to be
              involved in the in vivo assembly and activation of hydrogenase, the
              hydrogenase-activating protein (HAP) and cyanide dihydratase, will be purified
              and characterized, and their genes will be coexpressed with those of
              hydrogenase.  The recently completed genome of Tm will be used to identify
              other accessory proteins involved in hydrogenase synthesis, as well as those
              that participate in the terminal electron transfer pathway of Tm.  These
              various proteins will be identified and their regulation will be studied using
              proteomics and transcriptional analyses.  Finally, eukaryotes including human
              and Drosophila contain an analog of bacterial Fe-hydrogenase, and this will be
              purified and characterized using yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) as the model
              system.  The overall objectives of this research are, therefore, to define the
              pathways of intra- and intermolecular electron transfer in hydrogenase and
              associated enzymes, respectively, to determine the nature and role of the metal
              centers involved, and how novel clusters such as that involved in H2 activation
              are assembled. These goals will be achieved by a combination of techniques
              including large scale (600 liter) fermentations and large scale anaerobic
              protein purifications, crystallography, various biochemical, kinetic,
              potentiometric and molecular biology techniques, together with genomic and
              proteomic analyses.
	This project will provide fundamental information on an
              enzyme which catalyzes the simplest of reactions, the production and
              consumption of hydrogen gas, reactions of fundamental chemical and biological
              significance.  This will include how the enzyme's novel iron-containing center
              is able to carry out these reactions, and how the protein is assembled inside
              the cell.  A protein analogous to hydrogenase is found in higher organisms,
              including humans, but such organisms are not known to metabolize hydrogen gas. 
              This research will lead to an understanding of the nature of this intriguing
              protein, which may well function in sensing small molecules other than
              hydrogen, such as carbon monoxide, nitric oxide or cyanide.  


