Title       : Seeds of Urbanism: Paleothnobotany at Harappa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2002   
File        : a9904240

Award Number: 9904240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Weber weber@vancouver.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Steven Weber will analyze
              botanical material from the archaeological site of Harappa. At about 2600 BC, a
              highly organized economically centralized and culturally integrated
              civilization emerged along the floodplains of the ancient Indus and Saraswati
              rivers in South Asia. Large, well planned and walled cities like Harappa
              evolved from independent village farming communities and an urban society
              emerged as the result of both a successful food producing economy the control
              of several trade routes. By the beginning of the second millennium BC, this
              period of integration and centralization came to an end. With disruptions in
              trading networks and food supply, distinct local cultures once again began to
              dominate the region. The goal of this research is to examine, on a micro level,
              the relationship between this cultural change and subsistence strategy. Dr.
              Weber will focus on the site of Harappa which because of its size, length of
              occupation (ca. 3300-1900 BC), large horizontal exposures and high quality of
              organic preservation make it ideal for such a study. During past and ongoing
              excavation, particular attention has been paid to the recovery of organic
              remains including charcoal and seeds from wild and domesticated food plants.
              

The primary objective of the project will be to determine what shifts in
              plant occurrence, use and resulting agricultural strategy occurred at Harappa
              and how these relate to other indications of culture change. The principal
              focus will be on seeds and other identifiable plant parts recovered from the
              soil through flotation. The variation in the types of plants recovered, their
              distribution and their abundance in a given sample can be attributed to a
              number of natural and cultural processes. Using information about the
              stratigraphic, architectural and artifactual contexts of recovery, together
              with proven methods of quantitative analysis, plant occurrence will be
              explained and a model for the evolution of plant use at Harappa constructed.
              Because of the highly organized and standardized nature of the settlements and
              artifacts of the Indus Civilization, models drawn from Harappa data should be
              applicable at other sites within this region.

