Title       : Entropy and Same-Different Conceptualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a9904569

Award Number: 9904569
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289981             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Wasserman ed-wasserman@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Animal Behavior Program

Non-technical Abstract



Title:  		Entropy and
              same-different conceptualization

PI: 		Wasserman, Edward A.

Proposal
              #:	9904569


Dr. Wasserman and Dr. Young will study the acquisition and
              application of an abstract
concept by a nonprimate species - the pigeon. 
              Pigeons will be taught to
choose one key when the items of a multi-item
              display are all the same as
one another and to choose a second key when the
              items are all different
from one another - a "same-different" discrimination. 
              Previous
experimentation has suggested that the pigeon's discrimination
              performance
is a function of the variability, or more precisely the entropy,
              of the
visual displays.  In ten experiments, the will seek to better
              understand the
acquisition of the same-different concept, to explore the
              generality of the
acquired same-different concept, to study the role of
              spatial organization
in same-different discrimination learning, and to
              elucidate the role of
entropy in same-different conceptualization.

This has
              the potential to disclosing new and important parallels between human and
              animal cognition, and in demonstrating that even the most advanced forms of
              cognition can be given precise and rigorous explanations.  Documenting that
              even pigeons are capable of abstraction and that deterministic computational
              principles may lie at the root of this complex cognitive process should help
              stimulate neuroscientists to uncover the biological mechanisms of this amazing
              ability.



