Title       : Protein Model Refinement and Flexible Docking by Constrained Free Energy
               Minimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a9904834

Award Number: 9904834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $556356             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandor Vajda vajda@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles DeLisi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
This project focuses on two fundamental problems. The first is the development
              of flexible protein docking algorithms for the case in which the association
              occurs with substantial conformational change involving side chains and loop
              regions. The second problem is the development of con-formational search
              algorithms for refining low resolution protein models with 6 to 10 A RMSD from
              the native structure, obtained by homology modeling, fold recognition. or ab
              initio structure prediction. In both applications, free energy potentials,
              combining molecular mechanics with em-pirical solvation and entropic terms,
              will be used as target functions. It has been shown that such potentials can be
              more effective in decoy discrimination than purely empirical functions. However
              even with a normalization procedure to reduce the noise in the van der Waals
              energy, the combined potentials exhibit a multicomponent/multifrequency
              behavior, and are very difficult to minimize. The free energy is regarded as
              the sum of three functions: a smooth component that includes elec-trostatic,
              solvation, and entropic contributions, an intermediate frequency component of
              internal (bonded) energy terms, and the van der Waals term which is essentially
              a high frequency noise, and carries little information about the distance from
              the native state.

Most established methods of finding the global minimum of
              a multicomponent/multifrequency potential generate a large number of trial
              conformations and then rank them according to their free energies. This project
              will use a radically different approach that mimics native folding or
              association pathways. The basic idea of the method is performing minimization
              of the smooth free energy components, but restricting the search to regions of
              the conformational space with low van der Waals energy. Since this group has
              already shown that the combined potential has good discriminatory power, the
              key to a successful docking or model refinement is the ability to generate
              enough near-native conformations. It is expected that exploiting the gradient
              of the smooth free energy components will substantially increase the efficiency
              of sampling, and the resulting methods will be useful to the broad molecular
              biology/biochemistry community.

