Title       : Cheater Mutants in the Development of Dictyostelium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2001      
File        : a9904615

Award Number: 9904615
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert Ennis he28@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The current application stems from an effort to isolate genes of Dictyostelium
              that participate in the determination of cell type and the regulation of cell
              proportion.  To accomplish this, Dr. Ennis has taken advantage of the genetic
              tools available in this organism and its aggregative life style.  The selection
              he employed was the result of a reconsideration of the evolution of this
              organism and is based on the idea that mutant ameobae can enter an aggregate
              and compete to form a live spore rather than a dead stalk cell.  He performed a
              large mutagenesis and selected a mutant, which he calls cheater A (ctrA), which
              makes only spores when in a chimera.  The frequency of ctrA mutants increases
              gradually in the population during several cycles of growth and development. 
              In chimeras with wild-type, the ctrA mutant cells always from spores and
              infrequently form stalk.  The mutant appears to suppress the spore forming
              ability of isogenic parental strains.  The ctrA gene has been isolated and
              characterized.  It codes for a developmentally regulated mRNA and contains
              several WD repeats, indicating a potential role in protein-protein interaction.
               A number of suppressor mutants have been isolated and the genes for these are
              being characterized in order to determine the pathway within which CtrA
              operates.  Selections for other counter-suppressor mutants are proposed and a
              model to account for the non-autonomous behavior of the ctrA mutant will be
              presented.  Dr. Ennis proposes that ctrA is a gene with an important role in
              cell-cell communication and regulation and presents a series of experiments to
              determine how development is regulated.
