Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Combining Roles and Framework Layering in
               Intelligent Tutoring System Framework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1999 
File        : a9904783

Award Number: 9904783
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20020              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohamed E. Fayad   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : X325      AGRICULTURE-US EGYPT S&T PROG
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 5944,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9904783
Fayad

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project
              by Drs. Mohamed Fayad, Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
              University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska and Dr. Abdelaziz Khamis, Department
              of Computer Science, Institute of Statistics, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. 
              They plan to develop an Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS) framework by
              combining object and framework layering.  They will examine how an ITS
              framework can be layered in order to manage their dependencies and reduce their
              coupling (Framework Layering).  The framework layering allows for splitting the
              ITS framework into a core concept part and several implementation parts.  Using
              the role objects will allow the extension of the core concept without having to
              change it, and thus without having to touch the framework layering.  The role
              objects will also provide a clear understanding of ITS user models (the
              responsibilities and collaboration within the given role). The work takes
              software engineering know-how and applies it to produce the basis for
              educational materials.  The ITS Framework will be extended to various
              applications of wide use.  The problem of maintaining the consistency of
              objects across several layers is a key problem in many areas, such as business
              process modeling and object oriented domain modeling.  The solution to it would
              benefit a large community.  

Scope:  The proposed ITS Framework has
              potentially large applications. The cost of its dissemination and duplication
              is small.  The results could serve as a basis for a future product of wide
              interest in education.  Fayad is an authority in Object Oriented (OO) software
              development in general, and OO application frameworks in particular. 
              Intelligent tutoring systems seem to be ideal test systems for application
              frameworks. The project may have far-reaching results and high impact on a
              large number of students, teachers, and researchers in Egypt and in other
              developing countries.  The software industry in both the United States and
              Egypt will benefit from this research.  The project will support a US graduate
              student who will have an opportunity to gain experience through this
              international collaboration.  This proposal meets the INT objective of
              supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual interest.  This project is
              being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
              scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
              activities. 

