Title       : Analysis of Apetala3 and Pistillata Floral Homeotic Gene Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a9904876

Award Number: 9904876
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vivian F. Irish vivian.irish@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In Arabidopsis, two floral homeotic genes, APETALA3 (AP3) and PISTILLATA (PI),
              are required for the formation of petals and stamens.  AP3 and PI are both
              expressed in petal and stamen primordia, consistent with their proposed organ
              identity roles.  AP3 and PI both encode MADS-box proteins; the MADS-box is
              required for DNA binding and has been found in a number of other yeast and
              mammalian transcription factors.  AP3 and PI bind to DNA as an obligate
              heterodimer, and several lines of evidence suggest that the specificity of
              AP3/PI action may depend on interactions with other cofactors as well as on
              protein modification.  This proposal aims to investigate how the action of the
              AP3 and PI proteins is regulated.  A modified one-hybrid screen is proposed to
              identify cofactors that interact with AP3 and PI to modulate their biological
              specificity.  Since both AP3 and PI contain a conserved potential
              phosphorylation site, it is possible that protein modification may also play a
              role in modulating AP3/PI action.  Immunoprecipitation experiments and
              transgenic studies will be used to ascertain whether the phosphorylation status
              of AP3 and/or PI plays a role in modifying their function.  Finally, AP3 and PI
              may act in a non-cell autonomous fashion, indicating that these gene products
              may play a role in intercellular signaling.  Plants mosaic for AP3 (or PI) will
              be generated using a modified Ac/Ds system.  Mosaic patches generated at
              different times in floral ontogeny will define the temporal parameters of AP3
              (or PI) action.  In addition, anti-AP3 and anti-PI antibodies will be used to
              assess whether AP3 and PI proteins actually traffic between cells to effect
              their non-autonomous functions.  Using complementary biochemical, genetic, and
              developmental approaches to elucidate the mechanisms by which AP3 and PI act
              will provide a framework for uderstanding how these floral homeotic gene
              products attain functional specificity.  Furthermore, these analyses should be
              valuable in beginning to define the mechanisms by which plant cells communicate
              with each other to coordinate their growth and differentiation. 



