Title       : GOALI: STM and AXAFS Studies of Electronic Effects due to Metal Support
               Interaction on Noble Metal Supported Catalysts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1999 
File        : a9904033

Award Number: 9904033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eduardo E. Wolf wolf.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a GOALI university-industry collabortive project.  Prof. Wolf and Dr.
              Miller will measure the electronic properties of noble metal catalysts on
              various supports and verify whether changes in those properties are correlated
              with the observed changes by orders of magnitude in turnover frequency and
              selectivity.  The model catalysts will consist of Pt and Pd deposited on thin
              films of metal oxide supports (alumina, silica, titania, and K-doped alumina,
              deposited or grown on Mo (110)).  They will be compared with standard high
              surface are catalysts.  The electronic structure of surfaces of surfaces will
              be probed with scanning  tunneling spectroscopy (STS); its morphology with
              scanning microscopy (STM); and its reactivity with the kinetics of
              hydrogenolysis of neopentane and oxidation of methane.  Metal particles will be
              synthesized with different sizes.  STM will be used to ascertain the particle
              size distribution and STS will yield the electronics characteristics via I-V
              curves on the bare support and the particle-coated catalyst. Diffuse
              reflectance infrared spectroscopy (DRIFTS) of adsorbed CO will yield structural
              and electronic property information.  The near neighbor structure of metals and
              support will be determined with EXAFS.  The interatomic potential of Pt will be
              determined with atomic absorption x-ray spectroscopy (AXAFS) and correlated
              with catalysis and DRIFTS results.  Acidity determinations will involve ammonia
              chemisorption.  The STM work will be carried out at Notre Dame, while the EXAFS
              work by BP Amoco will require resources of the Argonne National Laboratory.
