Title       : Ecology and Evolution of Photosynthetic Light Responses in the Hawaiian
               Lobelioids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a9904366

Award Number: 9904366
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $427984             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Givnish givnish@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Guillermo H. Goldstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The Hawaiian lobelioids are one of the most spectacular examples of ecological
              diversification among plants. These woody plants occur in alpine bogs, dry sea
              cliffs, moist scrub, and tropical rainforest interiors and edges, and display a
              striking variety in growth form and leaf morphology. Based on the PIs' DNA
              family tree for this group, these plants appear to have invaded densely shaded
              habitats from the open, sunny sites they occupied before and shortly after
              their ancestors colonized Hawaii. 

The central aim of this project is to
              understand how plants acquire photosynthetic adaptations to sunny vs. shady
              conditions.  The PIs will attempt to reconstruct changes in photosynthetic
              physiology, leaf form, biochemistry, and whole-plant growth that occurred when
              shady habitats were invaded from open sites.  Species representing groups of
              related Hawaiian lobelioids, including species of relatively open habitats and
              closely related species that have more recently invaded deeper shade, will be
              studied.  Field studies will be conducted to characterize the natural light
              environments of each study species and to measure their response in leaf form
              and photosynthesis to light availability under natural conditions.  Greenhouse
              studies will be conducted to determine the extent to which different lobeliads
              show genetic differences in photosynthetic response, leaf traits, and
              whole-plant growth under different light regimes.  Furthermore, these studies
              will reveal whether species of different habitats respond to variation in light
              in ways thought to be advantageous (e.g., do species of sunny habitats have
              photosynthetic rates and leaf traits that tend to increase growth in brightly
              lit environments at the cost of relatively poor growth in the shade (and vice
              versa for species of shaded habitats), and whether understory species - which
              inhabit a light environment that is patchy and relatively unpredictable - show
              more ability to alter their photosynthetic form and physiology in response to
              changed light conditions than species of more open habitats.  When combined
              with information on the evolutionary relationships among the study species,
              this information will tell us what changes occurred at different stages in the
              invasion of shaded habitats, what characteristics appear to be adaptive to
              shady environments, and what characteristics appear to be constrained by the
              evolutionary history of the different groups.

This research will allow the
              PIs to investigate, for the first time, the rise of photosynthetic adaptations
              to sun vs. shade in a historical framework. The results should increase our
              understanding of the ecological constraints on photosynthetic performance in
              plants generally, and of the habitat requirements for lobelioids specifically,
              many species of which have become quite rare.

