Title       : FASEB Summer Research Conference: Genetic Recombination and Chromosomes
               Rearrangements: Snowmass, CO, August 7-12, 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9904010

Award Number: 9904010
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sue Jinks-Robertson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The 1999 FASEB Summer Research Conference on Genetic Recombination and Genome
              
Rearrangements will be held August 7-12, 1999, in Snowmass, Colorado.  The
              program includes eight plenary sessions featuring speakers who are at the
              forefront of biochemical, molecular and genetic studies of homologous,
              site-specific and nonhomologous recombination.  Homologous recombination is an
              important DNA repair mechanism and also is generally essential for the proper
              segregation of homologous chromosomes in meiosis.  Site-specific recombination
              is the mechanism underlying most programmed genome rearrangements and thus is
              important in controlling gene expression.  Finally, nonhomologous recombination
              also constitutes an important DNA repair mechanism (nonhomologous end joining)
              and is the mechanism whereby most transposition occurs. The major topics of the
              plenary sessions will be: recombination mechanisms, eukaryotic recombination,
              recombination and DNA replication, recombination and DNA repair, site-specific
              recombination, genome rearrangements, meiotic processes, and recombination
              structures.  Recombination systems operating in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes
              are included in the program, and emphasis will be placed on areas where
              knowledge is rapidly developing and where methodologies can be widely
              exploited.  In addition to the plenary sessions, informal interactions will be
              fostered through poster sessions and ad hoc workshops.  This particular
              conference occupies a unique niche within the recombination field in that it
              focuses exclusively on recombination and productively brings together the
              diverse experiences and insights represented within the field.  NSF funds will
              be used to support student travel and participation in the meeting.

