Title       : Are Effects of Forest Fragmentation on Avian Nesting Success Mediated by
               Landscape Composition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a9904058

Award Number: 9904058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367246             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott K. Robinson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Heske  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Joselyn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Brawn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy Van Deelen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9904058
Robinson
Habitat fragmentation fundamentally affects community
              structure and trophic interactions. Numerous studies of forest birds support
              the widely held notion that the fragmentation of breeding habitat significantly
              decreases annual reproductive success. The mechanisms underlying this effect
              are generally reported as increased rates of nest predation and brood
              parasitism. Nonetheless, most studies have focuses on local, patch-specific
              features of fragmentation such as distance to edge and tract size. Less
              consideration has been given to the broader landscape outside forest fragments.
              Indeed, recent evidence suggests that the effects of fragmentation on forest
              birds change with landscape composition. Interactions between local and
              landscape processes are poorly understood, but potentially complex because many
              processes co-vary with the magnitude of forest fragmentation. This study will
              assess directly how landscape composition affects the outcome of fragmentation
              on birds nesting in southern Illinois. This region contains over 500,000 ha of
              forest in landscapes that vary widely in the amount of forest cover and
              relative coverage of different non-forest cover types (crops versus grassland).
              This study will first classify habitat type surrounding forest patches. Then,
              replicate patches will be selected in four different landscapes (high and low
              fragmentation in grassland or crop matrix) in which studies of reproductive
              success of songbirds will be measured. Factors affecting song bird reproductive
              success include brood parasitism, nest predation and alteration of understory
              vegetation by deer browsing. These factors will then be quantified and related
              to reproductive success. Results of this study will inform local and regional
              conservation strategies and will constitute a unique case history of how and
              why local demographic processes can be conditional upon larger-scale
              phenomena.

