Title       : Evaluation of the Cloud Particle Imager and Investigations of Ice Multiplication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a9904710

Award Number: 9904710
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296128             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Paul Lawson plawson@specinc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SPEC, Inc.
	      3022 Sterling Circle
	      Boulder, CO  80301    303/449-1105

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is centered on an evaluation of the performance characteristics of
              a new instrument called the CPI (cloud particle imager) and application of the
              instrument to airborne studies of ice crystals in clouds.  Based on advanced
              optical design and complex image processing, the CPI detects and produces
              high-resolution images of cloud particles down to a size of several
              micrometers, far exceeding the capabilities of previous instruments.  For
              quantitative cloud physics studies, the CPI must be able not only to detect and
              form images of ice crystals, but also measure their concentration in space. 
              This measurement requires an understanding of the sensitivity and response of
              the instrument, and the dependence of the observed signals on adjustable system
              parameters such as the intensity of the laser beam, the minimum acceptable
              particle size, and the particle detection threshold.  Accordingly, the first
              objective of the program is to carry out theoretical calculations, laboratory
              studies, and airborne measurements designed to evaluate the performance
              characteristics of the CPI.  This work will be done in collaboration with
              researchers from the National Center for Atmospheric Research.  The second
              objective is to employ the CPI in studies of cloud regions having high
              concentrations of ice crystals.  These studies bear on the question of ice
              crystal multiplication and will be conducted in collaboration with Dr. Alan
              Blyth of the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology.  The program is
              expected to lead to a thorough understanding of the capabilities and
              limitations of the CPI, new algorithms for processing CPI data, and data on ice
              crystals in convective clouds that will enable the testing of different
              theories of ice crystal multiplication.
