Title       : ESR Dating at Archaeological Sites in Europe, Africa and Asia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a9904376

Award Number: 9904376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214147             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bonnie A. Blackwell bonnie.a.b.blackwell@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne F. Skinner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joel I. Blickstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pierre Brassard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Drs. Bonnie Blackwell and Anne Skinner will conduct a series of laboratory
              experiments to improve the electron spin resonance (ESR) technique and apply it
              to a variety of significant paleoanthropological samples. ESR provides a method
              to date teeth and appropriate categories of stone artifacts which date between
              ca. 20,000 and possibly as much as 4,000,000 years old. Because both categories
              of artifacts are common in archaeological sites and because many such
              occurrences are not datable by other available techniques, ESR, if properly
              developed, can provide an important anthropological tool. The technique depends
              on the fact that buried objects absorb small amounts of uranium from the soil
              and the internal as well as external bombardment by disintegration byproducts
              creates time dependent displacement of electrons within the sample. ESR
              provides a method to measure the extent to which this has occurred. When the
              dose rate has been determined, it is then possible to calculate age. Many
              prehistoric peoples heated lithics before they fashioned them into tools
              because the structural changes caused by heating made the material easier to
              work. Luckily, heat also sets the electron displacement clock to zero thus
              making heat treated pieces amenable to ER analysis.

While it is feasible in
              principle and has produced intuitively reasonable dates, ESR is not well
              developed and the results have been treated with understandable caution.
              Uranium uptake rates are hard to determine and several different models have
              been proposed. Blackwell and Skinner's research focuses on technique
              development. They shall conduct a number of experiments to: compare geochemical
              characteristics of enamel with associated dentine, cementum and adjacent
              sediments; learn how teeth absorb uranium to provide more accurate uptake
              models; develop a non-destructive technique which will allow hominid teeth to
              be dated without loss of valuable evolutionary information; compare external
              dose rates derived from isochron analysis with those from standard ESR
              measurements. They will also date samples from a series of anthropologically
              significant sites.

