Title       : Low-Energy Electron-Molecule Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9904843

Award Number: 9904843
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380935             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Moore jm89@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Tossell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              John Moore and John Tossell of the University of Maryland, College Park, are
              supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to study discrete
              steps in the processes leading to chemical change when low-energy electrons
              interact with polyatomic molecules and molecular fragments.   Dissociative
              electron attachment to molecules and molecular radicals will be examined in
              experiments in which a low-energy electron beam passes through a gas phase
              target.  Techniques will be developed to produce and quantitatively detect
              radicals in the gas phase.  In addition, dissociation and subsequent chemical
              reactions induced by electron impact upon molecules adsorbed onto metallic and
              semiconductor surfaces will be studied.  Quantum chemical calculations will be
              carried out to describe the relevant electronic properties of target molecules
              and radicals, selected for their pertinence to plasma-chemical processing and
              electron-and ion-beam deposition.  Outcomes are expected to provide
              quantitative information, such as cross sections, that can have useful impacts
              in modeling and optimizing industrial fabrication technologies.  

Low energy
              collisions of electrons and molecules can lead to chemical bond rupture.  The
              products of these interactions tend to be radicals and ions, which are
              chemically reactive species that are ordinarily only found at very high
              temperatures.  This creation of aggressive chemical species at low temperatures
              from relatively benign starting materials accounts for the exploitation of low
              energy electron collision processes in a number of industrial fabrication
              technologies.  Examples include electron- and ion-beam lithography and plasma
              and chemical processes used for cleaning, etching, and deposition in the
              manufacture of integrated circuits.  
