Title       : Towards a Monograph of Jakobid, Trimastigid and Metamonad Protists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1999    
File        : a9904444

Award Number: 9904444
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Hyman                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82631              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Andersen randersen@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The jakobid flagellates may be among the most ancestral of living
eukaryotes. 
              Information from the mitochondrial genomes of two jakobid
species, Jakoba
              libera and Reclinomonas americana, suggests that the
ancestors of jakobids
              were among the first eukaryotes to acquire
mitochondria. The jakobids,
              therefore, may represent an informative model
system for the study of the
              origin and early divergence of eukaryotic cells.
 To better understand these
              organisms, a knowledge of their taxonomic
diversity and relationship to other
              protists is required.  We do not have
this knowledge at present.

In this
              "proof of concept" study, existing species descriptions of jakobid
flagellates
              will be assembled and critically analyzed, with examination of
type specimens
              when these exist.  Data on the morphology, ultrastructure,
and life history of
              jakobid species will be obtained from published papers
and from new
              investigations on species isolated from nature.  These data
will be used to
              construct data matrices for phylogenetic analysis.  Nuclear
small-subunit
              ribosomal RNA gene sequences will be obtained from cultivated
species for use
              as species identifiers (e.g., for subsequent molecular
probe design) and, with
              the morphological data, for phylogenetic analyses.
Preliminary data in these
              categories will be collected from exemplar taxa of
Trimastigida,
              Retortamonadida and Diplomonadida, three groups of protists
that closely
              resemble the jakobids in many ways and may be their closest
relatives.

This
              work is expected to result in the description of several new jakobid
species
              and in preliminary assessments of the relationships of jakobids with
each
              other and with other protists.  The resulting monograph, online and in
print
              form, together with associated publications, should provide a welcome
resource
              for persons interested in early organismal evolution and
              microbial
diversity.


