Title       : Rapid Computational Analysis of Biomolecular Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a9904841

Award Number: 9904841
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1551472            (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry Honig   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY

The major objective of the proposed research is the
              development of computational tools for the analysis of intermolecular
              interactions involving biological macromolecules. Since such interactions are
              primarily localized at the molecular surface, particular emphasis will be
              placed on databases, software, and algorithms for the mapping, analysis and
              comparison of physical and chemical properties on the molecular surface. The
              proposed research builds on concepts embodied in the GRASP (Graphical
              Representation and Analysis of Structural Properties) program which was
              developed in previous funding periods. The widespread use of GRASP has led to
              the need for its continued development and integration with the growing body of
              sequence, structural and functional data currently becoming available,
              particularly from genome sequencing projects. In parallel, the increasing
              number of three dimensional protein structures that have been determined, as
              well as progress in structure prediction has produced both a need and an
              opportunity for the development of new approaches aimed at extracting
              functional information from structure.

The specific goals of the proposed
              research include: 1) The development of a new version of GRASP with greater
              generality and portability and enhanced capabilities to calculate molecular
              properties such as electrostatic potentials, binding five energies and pKas.
              The program will be based on a new, multi-platform, object-oriented software
              library with convenient programmer and user interfaces so as to allow maximum
              flexibility, extendibility and usability. 2) The use of this program to
              construct and interrogate a fundamentally new type of database that will
              contain geometric, physical, chemical and biological descriptions of protein
              surfaces and interfaces formed by proteins.

The proposed research will have
              significant impact on the understanding of the principles of molecular
              recognition involving biological macromolecules. The tools to be developed will
              be used by structural biologists, molecular biologists and biochemists
              interested in integrating structural information and biophysical methods into
              their research programs.  In addition, this proposal represents an effort to
              integrate genomic information, structural information, physical chemical
              principles, mathematical algorithms and software development into a unified
              research program. The interdisciplinary research and training involved should
              add to both the scientific and human resource infrastructure of the emerging
              area of Structural Genomics.



