Title       : Analysis of MAPK Nuclear Transport During RTK Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9904606

Award Number: 9904606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lizabeth A. Perkins perkins@helix.mgh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Protein tyrosine phosphorylation/dephosphorylation is a major growth and
              differentiation regulatory mechanism.  The Drosophila protein tyrosine
              phosphatase (PTP) Corkscrew (Csw) is structurally complex and has been shown to
              play an essential role in the transduction of receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)
              initiated signals.  Unlike other members of the RTK signaling cassette (e.g.,
              Ras, MAPK) whose mechanisms of action are seemingly invariant, the molecular
              mechanism of Csw function differs depending upon the RTK under consideration. 
              In a screen for Csw binding proteins, DMRanBP7, a member of the importinB
              superfamily of nuclear import proteins, was found to interact with Csw.  The
              DmRanBP7 protein localizes in either the cytoplasm or the nucleus, and the
              nuclear staining pattern resembles that of activated MAPK.  Stimulation of
              cells promoted tyrosine phosphorylation of DmRanBP7 and, significantly, its
              association with MAPK.  Embryos carrying overlapping deficiencies, that delete
              DmRanBP7, exhibit dramatically reduced nuclear MAPK in tissues whose
              development is dependent upon EGF and FGF RTK signaling.  Significantly, MAPK
              nuclear staining can be rescued in these embryos when a wild type copy of
              DmRanBP7 is the nuclear import receptor that transports activated MAPK from the
              cytoplasm into the nucleus.  II.   The interaction between Csw and DmRanBP7
              constitutes part of a mechanism whereby the import process can be regulated at
              the level of the activated receptor.  The experiments in Objective 1 will
              reveal the molecular mechanism by which nuclear import of MAPK is regulated at
              the level of the activated receptor.  Specifically the residues/domains
              required for the Csw:DmRanBP7 and DmRanBP7:MAPK interactions to occur will be
              identified and their significance determined by genetic and biochemical means. 
              The experiments in Objective 2 detail the developmental consequences of
              mutations in the DmRanBP7 gene.  The experiments in Objective 3 and 4 will
              explore interactions between DmRanBP7 mediates the nuclear import of other MAPK
              family members.  Specifically, these studies will resolve the molecular
              mechanism linking MAPK activation to its nuclear import, and more broadly, will
              contribute to an understanding of cellular growth processes in both normal and
              aberrant states.
