Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Inter-Community Sociopolitical
               Relations Among Pueblo IV Settlements: A Case Study from the Jumanos Pueblo
               Cluster, Central New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1999     
File        : a9904932

Award Number: 9904932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine A. Spielmann kate.spielmann@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1391,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Katherine Spielmann, Mr. William Graves will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological excavation
              at Pueblo Blanco, a late prehistoric site located in the Rio Grande region of
              New Mexico. Because of extensive prior research in this and comparable areas
              within the Southwest the general outline of the prehistory is well known. From
              ca. 1300 to 1450 AD ancestors of the present day Hopi peoples lived in small
              dispersed settlements. At the end of this time people aggregated into larger
              sites which formed village clusters. Series of villages, located within
              kilometers of each other appear to have interacted extensively among themselves
              and were separated from similar clusters by considerable distance. While this
              pattern is well described the reasons for it are not well understood. Mr.
              Graves will concentrate on relationships not between clusters but rather
              between villages in one individual group. He is interested in the processes
              which underlie the growth of social complexity and the factors which lead to
              and maintain centralized control. Such clusters provide an excellent context to
              examine this issue. Several conflicting models ranging from essential
              intervillage parity to a hierarchy based on ritual control have been
              proposed.

The Jumanos pueblo cluster consists of four villages of which
              Pueblo Blanco is one. Under Dr. Spielmann's direction student participants in
              the Arizona State University summer field school program have excavated two
              other sites which partially overlap in time and Mr. Graves has conducted a
              preliminary analysis of the material collected to determine the relationships
              between them. Excavation of Pueblo Blanco will provide a large enough data base
              to determine whether a status hierarchy was present and whether control was
              vested in a single site. Evidence to date, including ritual objects as well as
              pottery and bison meat imported from considerable distance suggests that such
              was the case. With National Science Foundation support Mr. Graves will conduct
              one season of excavation in the extensive trash middens which are widely
              distributed across the site and analyze the lithic, ceramic and faunal
              materials recovered.

This research is important for several reasons. It will
              shed new light on the prehistory of the United States and provide data of
              interest to many archaeologists. It will increase understanding of how social
              complexity develops and assist in training a promising young scientist.

