Title       : Analysis of Protein-Protein Interactions of Eps15 Using Fluorescence Resonance
               Energy Transfer (FRET)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9904802

Award Number: 9904802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander D. Sorkin alexander.sorkin@uchsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Endocytosis, the process whereby cells internalize regions of their cell
              surfaces (plasma membranes), is a critical property of living cells.  For
              single-celled organisms, endocytosis is an important mechanism for sampling the
              environment and for ingesting microbial food.  Cells that are part of a
              multicellular organism must communicate with one another in order to coordinate
              their activities.  Often, such communication is in the form of signaling
              molecules, such as hormones, that are produced by one cell type and that bind
              to specific receptors on other (target) cell types.  Endocytosis of the
              receptor-signal complex is generally then a necessary second step in order for
              the target cell to respond appropriately to the signal.  Endocytosis is also
              the means whereby cell surface components that are no longer needed are removed
              from the surface.  Because of the critical importance of endocytosis to the
              lives of cells and organisms, the mechanism of endocytosis has been an
              important focus of cell biological research.  This project addresses a very
              specific molecular aspect of the endocytic machinery of cells.

Eps15 is a
              recently identified component of the cellular internalization machinery. Eps15
              is constitutively associated with the a-adaptin subunit of clathrin adaptor
              protein AP-2, and is located in the plasma membrane clathrin-coated pits and
              vesicles. The importance of Eps15 in the clathrin-mediated process has been
              demonstrated in functional studies that used dominant-negative Eps15 mutants
              and microinjection techniques.  However, the precise function of Eps15 in
              clathrin vesicle formation is unknown.  Eps15 is a prototype of the large
              family of proteins containing the EH (for Eps15 Homology) domain, conserved
              protein-protein interaction modules that are found in mammals, frog, fly,
              nematode and yeast proteins. EH domains of Eps15 bind several proteins
              containing Asp-Pro-Phe (NPF) sequence motifs.  The role of EH domain
              interactions in endocytosis remains to be determined.  Eps15 is also
              constitutively dimerized/tetramerized, although the mechanism of Eps15
              oligomerization is not fully understood.  Elucidation of the molecular details
              of Eps15 interactions is essential for understanding the function of this
              protein.

The goal of the project is to analyze the Eps15 interactions that
              are important for the steps of endocytosis regulated by Eps15. New technical
              approaches will be developed to study the dynamics of Eps15 complexes in living
              cells. A high-resolution microscopic technique called Fluorescence Resonance
              Energy Transfer (FRET) will be used to investigate protein interactions. FRET
              is based on the transfer of energy between two proximate fluorochromes. Recent
              development of green fluorescent proteins (GFP) with different spectral
              characteristics allows utilization of chimeric proteins tagged with such
              molecules as tools for the analysis of near-neighbor protein interactions in
              live cells.  Dr. Sorkin has already constructed and characterized a GFP-Eps15
              chimera for use in a FRET-based assay.  Additional chimeric Eps15 constructs
              tagged with yellow (YFP) or cyan fluorescent protein (CFP) will be constructed
              and co-expressed in the same cells to study the mechanisms of dimerization and
              tetramerization of Eps15. To analyze the interactions of Eps15 with cargo
              receptors and the components of the internalization machinery, Eps15-CFP will
              be co-expressed with YFP-tagged epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor,
              clathrin adaptors, clathrin assembly lymphoid myeloid (CALM) protein or
              intersectin. In FRET experiments, CFP, when excited by low energy light of an
              appropriate wavelength, can transfer the energy directly to YFP if the YFP is
              located in close proximity, thus allowing the emission of higher energy photons
              by YFP. The measurements of FRET efficiency on a pixel-by-pixel basis will
              permit monitoring the protein-protein interactions of Eps15 in live cells in
              real time, and will also permit the precise determination of where in the cell
              these interactions occur.

In addition to providing important specific
              information about Eps15 interactions with other Eps15 molecules and other
              proteins, the development of this sensitive assay to study protein:protein
              interactions in living cells using Eps15 macromolecular complexes as a model
              system may lead to a breakthrough in the analysis of the interactions involving
              various other protein complexes and cellular machineries in living cells. 

