Title       : MRPG: The Changing Scale of Economic Regions: An Examination Using Exploratory
               Spatial Data Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9904389

Award Number: 9904389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13775              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander C. Vias acvias@unco.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Northern Colorado
	      Carter Hall 4000
	      Greeley, CO  80639    303/351-2881

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The role of scale in socioeconomic processes has become prominent in the
              geographic literature, following on the seminal work of Lefebvre. While new
              theoretical research is changing how we conceptualize the role of scale in the
              world economy, this study will extend and test these concepts  by emphasizing
              empirical aspects.  Specifically, the project will focus on the changing scale
              of economic activities and on the formation and disintegration of economic
              regions over the past fifty years in the United States. Research questions to
              be addressed under this research planning grant (MRPG) include the following:
              Is the scale of economic processes that groups the fates of individual areas
              (county-level units) together into a region constant over time?  Are there
              times when economic activities are linked over a wide geographical scale
              (multi-county or even multi-state regions) and thereby creating patterns of
              fairly even growth or decline over a large portion of the US? Alternatively,
              are forces in the US producing a fragmented landscape of uneven growth and
              decline, with small adjoining areas often moving in different directions in
              terms of economic change? 

Following on a study by Smith and Dennis (1987)
              on the coalescence and eventual fragmentation of the Northeastern Manufacturing
              Core, the proposed research will reevaluate the results of their study
              utilizing new techniques in exploratory spatial data analysis that provide a
              finer spatial resolution to examine growth, decline, and the scale associated
              with change. Previous work studied these issues at a scale too large to capture
              the heterogeneity of the changes taking place in the region (Smith and
              Dennis,1987), or used relatively simple statistical measures (Shelton, 1995).
              Furthermore, the continued decline in manufacturing suggests that the analysis
              of regional economic change should also include the role of services in
              defining economic regions. Analyses using this alternative approach can offer
              new insights on scale that might be useful for a larger study on the
              determinants of regional growth and decline in the US as a whole, and on the
              scale of these processes. Additionally, this research will inform discussion
              among policymakers on the appropriate scale for implementing regional policies
              for economic growth and development.

