Title       : U.S.-Czech Research on Antibody Repertoire Development in Fetal and Neonatal
               Piglet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9904130

Award Number: 9904130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38790              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Butler jebutler@blue.weeg.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
Program Ref : 5930,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              INT 9904130
Butler


This U.S.-Czech research project between John E. Butler
              of the University of Iowa and Helena Tlaskalova of the Institute of
              Microbiology, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, features refinement of
              a swine model for B-cell lymphogenesis.  Research over the last decade revealed
              significant differences in the organization of the immune system among
              different animals.  These differences are reflected in the number and
              organization of the genes or gene segments encoding their antibody molecules
              and in the mechanisms and organs used in antibody repertoire development.  This
              international project builds upon the Iowa expertise in genetics and molecular
              biology and Czech expertise in cellular immunology.  Both laboratories use the
              same animal model, swine. 

The overall objective of this collaborative
              effort is to establish the site of primary B-cell lymphogenesis using a
              combination of in situ immunohistochemistry and molecular biology as well as
              surface phenotypic and molecular biological analysis of lymphocytes isolated
              from various sources.  B-cell development will also be monitored in secondary
              lymphoid tissues throughout fetal development and in piglets reared under
              various conditions in isolator units.  Among the issues addressed will be
              whether the bone marrow is a site of continuous B-cell development as in mice
              and humans and to what extent B-cells in the thymus differ from those in other
              lymphoid tissues.    Results are expected to broaden fundamental understanding
              of B-cell lymphogenesis and pre- and post-immune repertoire development in
              another mammalian system.  If successful, these studies should expand overall
              concepts of immunological development in warm-blood animals and specifically
              advance knowledge of gene coding for the immunogobulin protein.

This project
              in signal transduction fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
              knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe to
              combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong
              mutual interest and competence. 


