Title       : Packaging DNA into th Herpes Simplex Virus Capsid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2001     
File        : a9904879

Award Number: 9904879
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367464             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay C. Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Brown
MCB 9904879

Technical 

Like all herpesviruses, herpes simplex virus
              1 (HSV-1) consists of an icosahedral capsid surrounded by a membrane envelope.
              The virus DNA is contained inside the capsid. Infection with HSV-1 begins when
              the virus membrane binds to the cytoplasmic membrane of a host cell and fuses
              with it. Fusion results in introduction of the DNA-containing capsid (the
              nucleocapsid) into the cytoplasm where it migrates to the nucleus and injects
              its DNA through a nuclear pore. Virus DNA is then replicated and capsids are
              assembled in the nucleus. Further virus maturation includes packaging of DNA
              into a capsid which is enveloped at the inner nuclear membrane before exiting
              the host cell, a process that may proceed by de-envelopment at the outer
              nuclear membrane followed by re-envelopment in the cytoplasm. Packaging of
              HSV-1 DNA into a capsid is required for virus growth. The process involves
              participation of capsids, concatemeric DNA and the products of eight virus
              genes, UL6, UL15, UL17, UL21, UL25, UL28, UL32 and UL33. In cells infected with
              mutants (e.g. ts or null mutants) in any of the eight genes, capsids and HSV-1
              DNA accumulate, but no encapsidation is observed. Previous studies have
              suggested potential roles for some of the eight processing/ packaging proteins.
              For example, the UL15 and UL28 gene products have been proposed to bind to DNA
              pac sites and translocate DNA into the capsid in a fuction analogous to that of
              the large subunit of bacteriophage terminase. The UL6 protein, a minor
              component of the capsid, may function like the bacteriophage portal or
              connector protein to mediate attachment of capsids to the terminase homolog.
              pUL25 may serve as a stopper or cap to keep DNA inside the capsid once it has
              entered.The goal of this research is to use ultrastructural and biochemical
              methods to clarify how HSV-1 DNA is encapsidated and how the
              processing/packaging proteins participate in encapsidation events.
              Ultrastructural studies will involve electron microscopic examination of
              HSV-1-infected cells after specific immuno-gold staining for capsid and
              processing/packaging proteins. It is expected that high resolution (~10 nm)
              information about the location of a protein in the infected cell nucleus will
              provide clues about its function. For instance, if pUL15 is involved in DNA
              translocation into the capsid, then it ought to be found near the site where
              DNA enters the capsid shell. Similarly, the cap protein should be localized to
              one particular site on the capsid shell after DNA packaging is complete, but
              possibly not before. Biochemical studies will be carried out to develop an in
              vitro system for HSV-1 DNA packaging. Such a system would facilitate more
              detailed analysis of the encapsidation process by providing the opportunity to
              manipulate the conditions of packaging outside an infected cell. Efforts to
              develop an in vitro packaging system will involve lysing infected cells,
              incubating the lysates and testing for evidence of DNA encapsidation during the
              incubation period. Evidence for packaging in crude cell lysates will be
              established before more purified systems are examined. 



Non-technical
              

In herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1), viral DNA is contained inside an
              icosahedral capsid which in turn is surrounded by a membrane envelope.
              Infection involves the fusion of viral and host cell cytoplasmic membranes and
              the introduction of DNA-containing capsid into the cytoplasm.  The viral DNA
              migrates into the nucleus by injection through a nuclear pore. Viral DNA
              replication and assemblage of the virus take place within the nucleus. A
              further step for the maturation of the virus is packaging of the newly
              replicated DNA into viral capsid, which is then enveloped at the inner nuclear
              membrane before exiting the host cell. This step may proceed by de-envelopment
              at the outer nuclear membrane followed by re-envelopment in the cytoplasm. A
              total of eight proteins coded by the virus genome have been identified to
              involve in these various processes. The goal of this study is to clarify
              specially how HSV-1 DNA is encapsidated and how some, if not all, of these
              proteins participate in encapsidation events. High resolution (~10 nm) electron
              microscopy with specific immuno-gold staining will be used to track these
              proteins in cells upon infection. This information is expected to provide clues
              about their function.   Biochemical studies will also be carried out to develop
              an HSV-1 DNA packaging system using reconstituted cell extracts. Such a system
              would facilitate more detailed analysis of the encapsidation process by
              providing the opportunity to manipulate the conditions of packaging outside an
              infected cell.  






