Title       : The Role of EnvZ and OmpR in Osmoregulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2002  
File        : a9904658

Award Number: 9904658
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325827             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda J. Kenney kenneyl@ohsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Linda Kenney
ABSTRACT

	All organisms must communicate effectively with their
              environment and adapt in order to survive.  A paradigm for adaptive responses
              has emerged called two-component regulatory systems.  In its simplest form, a
              two-component system contains a sensor and a response regulator.  Changes in
              the environment result in the phosphorylation of the sensor followed by
              trans-phosphorylation of the response regulator.  The two-component system
              which is the focus of this research consists of EnvZ, the sensor and OmpR, the
              response regulator.  OmpR regulates the porin genes in response to changes in
              osmolarity of the growth medium.  At low osmolarity, the major porin in the
              outer membrane is OmpF and at higher osmolarity, ompF is repressed and ompC is
              activated.  A model arising from genetic studies predicts that phospho-OmpR
              (OmpR-P) binds with high affinity to activate ompF and with low affinity to
              repress ompF and activate ompC. Recently published work indicates that this
              currently accepted hypothesis cannot account for porin gene regulation.  In
              this current work, the amino acids in OmpR that contact the DNA specifically
              will be determined. Preliminary studies suggest that OmpR may be in a different
              conformation when bound at ompF compared to ompC.  The role of various bases in
              conferring high affinity DNA binding at OmpR binding sites will be examined. 
              Information gained in studying the porin regulon is relevant to systems in
              animal cells in which transmembrane signaling-dependent changes in kinase
              activity result in a phosphorylation cascade and ultimately to changes in gene
              expression.  It is also relevant to pathogenic systems that use two-component
              systems to modulate their virulence properties.
 
