Title       : RUI: Collaborative Research: Understanding the Roles of Natural Selection and
               Evolutionary Constraint in the Maintenance of Invariant Floral Traits.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9904164

Award Number: 9904164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128610             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith M. Karoly kkaroly@reed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Reed College
	      3203 S E Woodstock Blvd
	      Portland, OR  972028138    503/771-1112

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9904164
Karoly

A remarkable property of biological diversity is the
              patterning that is observed when characteristics of organisms are compared. 
              While some features show considerable variation and can uniquely identify
              individuals within a population, other traits are less variable and are shared
              by large groups of related species.  Although biologists have long recognized
              the importance of variation as the raw material for future evolution, the
              reasons why variation may sometimes be lacking are less often studied.  This
              lack of variation could be due to constraints on evolution, caused by a lack of
              genetic variation or by genetic correlations with other traits.  Alternatively,
              the lack of variation could result from natural selection eliminating unfit
              variants and maintaining a narrow range of traits that are well-adapted to the
              environment.  

In this research, a novel combination of artificial selection
              in the greenhouse and studies of natural selection in the field will be used to
              determine whether constraints or selection cause the low levels of variation
              found in two sets of floral traits. The research will be done using the wild
              radish (Raphanus raphanistrum Brassicaeae) and two aspects of anther
              morphology, the ratio of long- and short-filament lengths and the extent of
              long-filament exertion beyond the corolla.  The basic understanding of
              constraints and selection generated by this research may be applicable to
              understanding a variety of applied evolutionary problems, such as whether crops
              and wild species can adapt rapidly to global climate change, conservation of
              endangered species (which often lack genetic variation), and the evolution of
              resistance to antibiotics, pesticides, and herbicides by pathogens and
              pests.




