Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Performance of Recycled Concrete
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a9904484

Award Number: 9904484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24396              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adolfo B. Matamoros   (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven L. McCabe  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : X325      AGRICULTURE-US EGYPT S&T PROG
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9904484
McCabe

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project
              by Dr. Steven McCabe, Department of Civil Engineering, University of Kansas,
              Lawrence, Kansas and Dr. Mohamed Abou Zeid, Department of Construction
              Engineering, The American University in Cairo (AUC), Cairo, Egypt.  The
              scientists plan to evaluate various aspects of using recycled concrete as the
              aggregate for new concrete.  They plan to study bond behavior and durability of
              recycled concrete. They will prepare concrete mixtures using two types of
              recycled aggregates and one conventional natural aggregate that is similar to
              the one present in the original concrete before it was recycled.  The mixtures
              will be evaluated for workability, compressive strength, chloride-ion
              penetration test, bond with reinforcing steel rebars, fracture behavior  and
              potential alkali-aggregate reaction behavior. The study is to include
              analytical and experimental components.  Finite Element Analysis (FEA) will be
              used to study the bond and fracture behavior of recycled concrete.

Scope:
              This study may provide information that can be used in codes of practice for
              recycled concrete in the US and elsewhere. Professor McCabe is well known to
              the research community for his work in areas related to the project.  Both
              investigators have extensive experience and expertise in the area of the
              proposed research and are well qualified to conduct the project. They have
              collaborated on research projects in the past, and will benefit from the
              proposed collaboration.  They have access to the needed facilities.  The impact
              of this study will be economic and also environmental, with potential impact on
              the concrete industry.  The scientists plan to set a web site at the University
              of Kansas and AUC to facilitate the dissemination of the project findings over
              the Internet.  A US graduate student will participate in the research, and will
              gain experience in international scientific activities.  This proposal meets
              the INT objective of supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual
              interest.  This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund
              Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to
              carry out these cooperative activities.

