Title       : A Novel Pyridoxine Biosynthetic Pathway and its Role in Singlet Oxygen
               Resistance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2001     
File        : a9904746

Award Number: 9904746
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret E. Daub margaret_daub@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marilyn Ehrenshaft  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Daub
The goal of this project is to identify and characterize genes involved in
              a novel pyridoxine (vitamin B6) biosynthetic pathway in the filamentous
              phytopathogenic fungus Cercospora nicotianae, and to determine the role of this
              vitamin in active oxygen resistance.  C. nicotianae produces and is resistant
              to cercosporin, a light-activated, photosensitizing compound that in the
              activated state, reacts with oxygen through electron or energy transfer
              reactions to produce active oxygen species including 1O2.   While studies of
              active oxygen resistance have primarily focused on other active oxygen species
              such as superoxide, hydrogen peroxide, and the hydroxyl radical, the highly
              toxic singlet oxygen has received less attention, and thus there are few known
              biological defenses.   In addition to cercosporin resistance, C. nicotianae
              also exhibits resistance to other singlet-oxygen-generating photosensitizers. 
              Prior work identified and characterized the C. nicotianae gene SOR1 (singlet
              oxygen resistance), required by this fungus for resistance to cercosporin and
              to other photosensitizers.  Although 1O2 resistance is rare in nature, SOR1 was
              found to be highly conserved in organisms from four kingdoms, suggesting it
              also had a conserved metabolic function.  It has recently been demonstrated
              that SOR1 (now PDX1, pyridoxine 1) is required for pyridoxine (vitamin B6)
              biosynthesis in fungi, and that it appears to be a component of a previously
              undescribed pyridoxine pathway present in plants, fungi, archaebacteria, and
              some, but not all, of the eubacteria.  In addition, it has also been
              established that pyridoxine is a potent quencher of 1O2.    Neither this new
              pyridoxine biosynthetic pathway nor the role of  pyridoxine in antioxidant
              defense have been describe previously.  The specific objectives of this
              research are to 1) isolate additional genes in the new pyridoxine synthesis
              pathway by a combination of functional complementation, differential
              expression, and mapping and sequencing, and characterize these genes, and 2)
              characterize how pyridoxine and its vitamers function to provide active oxygen
              resistance by measuring levels and further characterizing quenching
              ability.

Although oxygen is required for life, biological and medical
              research has strongly implicated a deleterious role for slightly modified,
              toxic forms of oxygen in human aging and disease and in damage to cells of all
              living organisms.   It is known that vitamins C and E can protect against such
              damage, however the role of vitamin B6 has not previously been recognized. 
              This work will further define the recent discovery of this novel function for
              vitamin B6.  In addition, a hitherto unknown pathway for vitamin B6 synthesis
              has been uncovered, and the genes involved in this pathway will be identified. 
               This work will lead to an increased understanding of how organisms synthesize
              vitamin B6 and of the mechanism by which this vitamin acts in cell protection
              against damage caused by toxic forms of oxygen.










 

