Title       : Collaborative Award: Computational Center for Macromolecular Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9904559

Award Number: 9904559
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1227780            (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Tainer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Duncan E. McRee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Pique  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victoria A. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth D. Getzoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY

The Computational Center for Macromolecular Structure (CCMS)
              is a group project to develop, test, distribute, and support software for
              determining and analyzing the structural properties that determine the function
              of biological macromolecules. Research groups at the University of Califor-nia
              at San Diego (UCSD), the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC) and The Scripps
              Research Institute (TSRI) provide synergistic interactions among
              computationally sophisticated experimen-talists, theoretical biophysicists, and
              mathematicians. The primary objectives of CCMS are to develop, test, package,
              and support important but complex methods in such a fashion that they can be
              reliably used by researchers who understand the science but cannot dedicate
              ma-jor resources to the computational aspects. These goals require thorough
              analysis and professional software engineering. XtalView is a complete system
              for solving macromolecular crys-tal structures by multiple isomorphous
              replacement, and for fitting atomic models of macromolec-ular structures to
              electron density maps. During 1998, 939 copies of XtalView were downloaded from
              the CCMS Web site, http://www.sdsc.edu/CCMS. A recently developed and promising
              soft-ware product is DOT, a parallelized Fourier correlation docking program
              that has already proved successful at predicting both transient and stable
              protein-protein interactions. This award supports substantial improvements in
              tools for solving, manipulating, and analyzing macromolecular structures in
              XtalView. New plug-in modules and a restructuring of the plug-in interface to
              bring other major crystallographic computational packages, including the CCP4
              suite, into the same powerful interactive visual environment will be completed.
              Key XtalView developments will include a) automated chain-tracing and electron
              density map characterizations, b) evaluations of local and global shape and
              steric parameters, atomic packing interactions, plus elec-trostatic gradients
              and c) compatibility with emerging standards from the new Protein Data Bank
              (PDB), especially mmCIF structure factors. The development of XtalWeb, a
              web-browser for view-ing electron density and key experimental neighborhood
              volume parameters (physical, biochemical, genomic, and three-dimensional
              properties evaluated in the space surrounding a molecule) will pro-vide
              non-crystallographers with tools to evaluate the actual experimental results
              alongside derived coordinates and images of computed neighborhood parameters.
              The tool DOT synergistically interfaces with these efforts by providing a
              powerful means to comprehensively map docking energy and free energy
              landscapes. The Fourier correlation methods of DOT will be expanded to
              objectively and comprehensively evaluate molecular neighborhood volume-based
              pseudo-potentials relevant to molecular function and recognition, such as
              fractal dimension and amino acid sequence conserva-tion. Refinement of DOT
              predictions will incorporate molecular flexibility by using the Convex Global
              Underestimator algorithm for global optimization.

