Title       : Signal/Noise Modeling and Detector Design for Media Noise Dominated Magnetic
               Recording Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a9904458

Award Number: 9904458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aleksandar Kavcic kavcic@deas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The object of the project is the development of the necessary tools and know-how
              to design and implementable signal detector for magnetic recording systems
              operating in signal-dependent correlated noise environments, i.e., media noise
              dominated environments.  According to recent studies, it is anticipated that
              the current magnetic recording technology will hit the superparamagnetic limit
              in approximately five years.  The superparamagnetic limit occurs when the
              magnetic media particles become so small that thermal energy at room
              temperature is enough to destabilize the particle by randomly switching its
              magnetization orientation.  To push back the approaching superparamagnetic
              limit, signal processing circuits will have to cope with a radically changed
              signal/noise environment: the signal-to-noise ratio will drop, the magnetic
              media noise will dominate over the electronics white noise, and the overall
              noise will become extremely correlated and signal-dependent due to the
              intersymbol interactions in the magnetic media and due to the coloring
              introduced by the read head.  This project will develop a fundamental
              understanding of nonstationary stochastic modeling and use it to develop a
              magnetic recording detector ideally tuned to correlated nonstationary media
              noise.

The project will be conducted through collaboration between Harvard
              University and IBM Almaden Research Center.  IBM, a recognized global magnetic
              recording technology leader, is in a unique position to provide the cutting
              edge experimental support required establishing the link between the
              theoretical and experimental parts of the project.  The project combines three
              major efforts. (i) A understanding of signal-dependent noise modeling issues
              will be developed.  This is an extension of widely used autoregressive modeling
              methods in stationary processes to nonstationary processes.  Particular
              attention will be given to objective model-size estimation through the
              adaptation of Akaike's information theoretic criterion or Rissanen's minimum
              description length principle.  (ii) The receiver will be designed through a
              complexity-constrained optimization procedure.  Since both the intersymbol
              interference length and the noise memory length contribute equally to the
              receiver complexity, the constrained-complexity detector will minimize the sum
              of the two lengths under a performance specification.  (iii) The final goal is
              the implementation of the detector in VLSI technology.  Towards this goal, a
              software detector and then a hardware detector will be developed.  Both
              detectors will be tested in real channel environments at IBM Almaden Research
              Center.

