Title       : GOALI: Double Cemented Carbide Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a9904352

Award Number: 9904352
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385027             (Estimated)
Investigator: Burton R. Patterson bpatters@eng.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zak Z. Fang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Krishan K. Chawla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9904352
Patterson

The objective of this program is to understand the
              relationships between microstructure and mechanical properties of a class of
              hybrid composites that incorporate discrete granular composite reinforcements
              within a metal matrix.  The particular composite system to be studied has
              double cemented carbide granules (DCC) within a matrix of cobalt, steel, or
              other metal.  The project involves creating composites with wide variations in
              microstructural properties, such as granule size, volume fraction, toughness,
              matrix metal and associated heat treatment, and interface strength.  Specimens
              are produced by blending the desired grades of carbide granules with the
              metal-matrix powders and hot pressing to produce fully dense DCC composites. 
              Mechanical properties are measured, including four-point bend strength,
              fracture toughness, hardness, and wear and thermal fatigue resistance, for each
              microstructural variation.  Mechanical property measurements involving wear
              testing of the composites are performed by the UAB students at Smith
              International, Inc. (SII) in Houston, TX.  Functional tests such as fatigue
              life of shaped rock drill inserts and drilling performance of optimized DCC
              compositions are performed by SII personnel.  The measured mechanical
              properties of the hybrid composite will be related to the composite
              microstructure and the intrinsic properties of the reinforcement and toughening
              phases via three-dimensional stereological modeling.  These data are also used
              to evaluate the applicability of current composite models to DCC materials. 
              This GOALI activity is co-funded with the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities.
%%%
This program provides an opportunity to explore the nature of
              a new family of composite materials with unique combinations of high fracture
              toughness and wear resistance.  These composites show great promise for
              applications in a wide range of industrial applications, such as high
              performance bits for oil well drilling that require properties typical of
              cemented carbides with significantly greater toughness.
***

