Title       : Erythrocyte Membrane Structure and Phospholipase A2 Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a9904597

Award Number: 9904597
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274051             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Bell JOHN_BELL@BYU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan M. Judd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9904597
Bell
Secretory phospholipase A2 (PLA2) is an enzyme that binds to and
              hydrolyzes the phospholipids of susceptible biological membranes.  In the
              normal state, most cell membranes are resistant to hydrolysis by this enzyme;
              however, they become susceptible under specific conditions such as elevated
              intracellular calcium.  Although significant information on the mechanism of
              action of this enzyme has been learned from studies with artificial membranes,
              there is little data addressing the degree to which the principles identified
              in these artificial systems applies to biological membranes.  This study uses
              human erythrocytes as a biological model to test this applicability.  The
              specific factors that appear to govern membrane susceptibility to PLA2 are
              membrane surface charge, membrane curvature, and the presence of microdomains
              in the bilayer.  The relationship between these factors and PLA2 binding and
              hydrolytic activity is examined in both intact cells and a systematic series of
              erythrocyte membrane preparations containing various permutations of these
              properties.   These objectives are achieved using a variety of biophysical and
              biochemical techniques including fluorescence spectroscopy and microscopy,
              electron microscopy, electrophoresis, flow cytometry, immunoblotting, and
              thin-layer chromatography.  The overall goal is to identify what physical
              properties of biological membranes determine the level of susceptibility of
              those membranes to PLA2. 

Much is known about the mechanisms of action and
              regulation of soluble proteins.  Achieving an equivalent understanding of
              proteins that interact with membrane surfaces is currently an area of emphasis
              in biochemistry.  So far, much of the research into the structure, function,
              and biophysics of such proteins has been limited to the use of artificial
              membranes. However, such studies are sometimes criticized because of concern
              regarding their applicability to biological systems.  Phospholipase A2 is an
              example of an enzyme that binds to cell membranes and is regulated by the
              structure of the membrane which depends on the physiological condition of the
              cell.  The biochemical and biophysical basis of PLA2 action has been
              well-studied previously with artificial membranes.  In this investigation,
              those studies will now be extended to focus on biological membranes from human
              red blood cells.  This work can lead to an understanding of how the physical
              properties of cell membranes regulate the activity of an enzyme bound to their
              surface.



