Title       : Tornado Shelter Options and Shelter-Seeking Behavior of Mobile Home Residents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9904402

Award Number: 9904402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84040              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Schmidlin tschmidl@kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Persons occupying mobile homes are highly susceptible to injury or death if the
              home is struck by a tornado. This study assesses (1) the shelter-seeking
              behavior currently being employed by mobile home residents when they are faced
              with the threat of a tornado, (2) the availability of tornado shelters for
              mobile home residents, and (3) the feasibility of using a nearby vehicle as an
              alternative shelter.  The intent is to improve tornado safety recommendations
              and reduce fatalities among this vulnerable population.  Mobile home residents
              in two regions of the United States (the Midwest and the Deep South) will be
              surveyed, and regional comparisons of both the availability of shelter and the
              shelter-seeking behavior of mobile home residents will be assessed. 
              Non-parametric statistical methods will be used to test several hypotheses
              about differences in shelter-seeking behavior during disasters. Logistic
              regression analysis with these variables will be employed to determine whether
              they can be used to predict shelter-seeking behavior among mobile home
              residents.  In addition, residents will be surveyed about their perceptions of
              available tornado shelter options in comparison to measured distances to
              recommended potential shelters. To investigate the possibility that the vehicle
              parked outside the mobile home may provide alternative shelter during a tornado
              warning, two vehicle models (a sedan and a pick-up) will be tested in a wind
              tunnel to determine the minimum wind speed required to lift and tip the
              vehicles at each of five wind angles: 0o (head-on), 45o, 90o, (side), 135o, and
              180o (rear). These wind tunnel studies will provide baseline knowledge (not
              presently available) of the wind speed required to loft vehicles.  

The
              National Weather Service (NWS) and American Red Cross currently recommend that
              mobile home residents leave the home and seek shelter in a nearby sturdy
              building when a tornado warning is issued.  If no building is available,
              residents are advised to lie in a ditch or depression.  No recommendation is
              made for locations where a ditch is unavailable.  Because approximately 45% of
              all tornado-induced fatalities in the United States during the 1990s occurred
              among mobile home residents, the investigators' primary goal is to reduce the
              number of tornado-induced fatalities among mobile home residents. By
              understanding current shelter-seeking actions taken by mobile home residents,
              problems (such as dangerous  actions taken  during storms) will be identified
              and reported, as well as recommendations for improvements to current tornado
              safety guidelines given by the NWS and other agencies.

