Title       : Income Redistribution in a Federal System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9904103

Award Number: 9904103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory N. Price                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33390              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kangoh Lee klee@towson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Towson University
	      8000 York Road
	      Towson, MD  21252    410/704-2236

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9904103
Project Abstract

This project examines income redistribution in
              a system of jurisdictions. Income redistribution or assisting the poor has
              received a great deal of attention from scholars and policymakers as well.
              While income redistribution in general is understood well due to a large body
              of research, redistribution in a federal system has a prominent feature that a
              general analysis of income redistribution does not address. That is, the poor
              recipients may move in response to the difference in the level of assistance
              between jurisdictions in a federal system. As a result, in making
              redistributive policies, each jurisdiction must take into account the
              consequences of its redistributive policy on the reallocation of the poor among
              jurisdictions. This feature makes the analysis of redistribution in a federal
              system intriguing and complicated. Some of the issues surrounding income
              redistribution in a system of jurisdictions have been explored. However, other
              important issues have yet to be analyzed, and the proposed research project
              will consider three interrelated aspects of income redistribution in a federal
              system.
First, the project investigates how the extent of redistribution in a
              jurisdiction depends on the objectives of redistributive policies. Preliminary
              results have shown that the extent of redistribution varies considerably with
              the goals of policies such as the level of welfare benefits, the number of
              welfare recipients, or total welfare expenditures.
Second, private donations
              have played an important role in assisting the poor, and the analysis
              incorporates private donations into income redistribution in a federal system.
              The government for each jurisdiction must consider how private donors react to
              policies. Such consideration appears to significantly affect the crowding-out
              effect and the efficiency of income redistribution.
Third, the project
              analyzes the effects of mobility of other factors on income redistribution. In
              a federal system, not only the poor recipients but also other resources,
              notably capital, move between jurisdictions. The mobility of other factors may
              turn out to have important implications for redistributive policies.




