Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Identification of Pastoral Neolithic Sites
               in East Africa: A Geoarchaeological Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9904066

Award Number: 9904066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fiona Marshall fmarshal@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Fiona Marshall, MS Ruth Shahack-Gross will collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation. The goal of her research is to detect soil
              patterns which indicate the past presence of domestic animals and to develop
              techniques which will facilitate this. The "Neolithic Revolution", the change
              in subsistence from hunting and gathering to the domestication and subsequent
              dependence on plants and animals, resulted in a fundamental change in human
              lifestyle and provided the base for the rise of village, city and state levels
              of organization. Therefore archaeologists wish to understand the processes
              which led to domestication and trace its development over time. While animal
              bone is well preserved in some archaeological situations it rapidly
              disintegrates and disappears in others and therefore it would be extremely
              useful to have other indicators of livestock presence. This would be
              particularly valuable in earlier stages of the domestication process when
              settlements moved frequently and their visible archaeological imprint on the
              landscape is slight.

MS Shahack-Gross will conduct fieldwork among Maasi
              speaking peoples in East Africa. Many Maasi still follow a traditional pastoral
              lifestyle and herd cattle, sheep and goats. In the first part of her study MS
              Shahack-Gross will examine Maasi herding practices and village spatial
              organization. She will collect soil samples from both within and outside
              penning areas and examine both occupied and abandoned campsites. These
              materials will be analyzed in laboratories in both Israel and the United
              States. It is hypothesized that soils from livestock enclosures will have
              distinctive mineralogy consisting of forms of opaline phytoliths,
              calcium-containing spherulites, calcium oxalates and phosphatic minerals. It is
              also hypothesized that micromorphological thin section analysis will detect
              lamination of soil voids and grains and that textural alterations will also
              indicate penning during wet vs. dry seasons. 

This research is important
              because the methods developed will be applicable in many parts of the world and
              for many time periods. If successful the techniques will be widely employed to
              address a range of questions. This project will also assist in training a
              promising young scientist.

