Title       : Substructure and Communication in Myosin and Actin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2002     
File        : a9904599

Award Number: 9904599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $570000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emil Reisler reisler@mbi.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1108,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9904599 
Reisler  
Myosin and actin, the two major muscle proteins, interact
              with each other in a cyclic fashion and use the chemical fuel of cells,
              adenosine triphosphate (ATP), to power muscle contraction and many motile and
              transport processes in non-muscle cells. The cycle of actomyosin interaction
              involves the formation of weakly and strongly bound complexes of these
              proteins. Force and motion are generated during, or after, transition between
              the weakly and strongly bound actomyosin states. The first goal of this project
              is to determine the role and contribution of specific sites on actin to such a
              transition. To this end, mutations will be engineered in yeast actin, at its
              N-terminus, and loops 21-29 and 92-103, to alter their charge and to introduce
              cysteine residues for attachment of fluorescent probes. The mutant and labeled
              mutant actins will be used in the in vitro motility assays, spectroscopic
              studies, and biochemical assays of actomyosin interactions to clarify the
              structural determinants of the transition between weakly and strongly bound
              actomyosin states. The second goal of this project is to clarify the role of
              structural dynamics of actin filaments in the contractile function of
              actomyosin. This goal will be pursued through specific chemical cross-linking
              reactions between actin monomers in the filament. These reactions will
              immobilize the interface between subdomain 1 and 2 on adjacent actins, and thus
              allow the testing of functional significance of actin dynamics in the in vitro
              motility and other assays. Mutant yeast actins will be prepared with cysteine
              substitutions to enable such cross-linking reactions and to introduce probes
              for monitoring the conformational states of actin. 

The results of this work
              will provide a description of the changes which occur in the areas of contact
              between myosin and actin at different steps of the force generation process by
              actomyosin. This work will also clarify the role of actin and its dynamic
              properties in the biological function of actomyosin.  Such information is
              necessary for a detailed understanding of the basic biological process of
              motion and force generation by this complex of proteins.  General principles of
              actin and myosin interactions and the regulation of their interactions, which
              will be elucidated in this work, should help in the understanding of how other
              protein complexes carry out similar force and motion generation tasks in living
              cells. The work on these projects will provide broad training for postdoctoral,
              graduate, and undergraduate students in the areas of molecular biology,
              biochemistry, and biophysics and their applications in the studies on the
              structure and function of proteins. 




