Title       : Molecular Analysis of Meiotic Recombination in Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9904646

Award Number: 9904646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugo K. Dooner dooner@waksman.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              During the tenure of the previous award, molecular characterization of
              recombination events at and around bz has revealed the following:  (1)
              Recombination within bz is very high, 100 times higher than in the average DNA
              segment in maize.  (2) In the immediate proximal side of bz, consisting mostly
              of repetitive DNA, it is at least 50-fold lower.  (3) Recombination within the
              bz gene is uniform and does not show polarity as it does in yeast.  (4)
              Insertions and clustered single bp heterologies suppress recombination and have
              the effect of making recombination nonuniform across the gene.  (5) Intragenic
              sequence polymorphisms affect resolution of the recombination intermediates,
              leading to an almost exclusive recovery of parentally marked IGRs.  (6) Gene
              conversion, thought to be rarer in plants than in yeast, appears to occur
              frequently in nonpolymorphic heterozygotes.  (7) Meiotic recombination exhibits
              high fidelity and is not mutagenic.  The analysis of meiotic recombination in
              maize will be continued by combining the power of the genetics of the bz locus
              with that of modern molecular techniques.  Specific aims are as follows:
(1)
              Examine the effect of single bp polymorphisms on the distribution of
              recombination junctions in the absence of insertion heterozygosity.
(2) Extend
              the analysis of recombination at bz to the 5' upstream region.
(3) Analyze
              gene conversion tracts in the presence and absence of heterologies.
(4) Test
              whether all "intergenic" recombination between bz and the closely proximal
              marker tac2094 occurs in genes.

Homologous meiotic recombination is
              essential to sexually reproducing organisms:  it creates novel genotypes and
              ensures proper chromosome segregation at the first meiotic division.  From a
              practical standpoint, it allows plant geneticists to construct genetic maps
              that have multiple applications, from marker-assisted selection of desirable
              genotypes to the map-based cloning of valuable genes.  Yet in spite of its
              importance, our knowledge of the process in higher plants remains rudimentary. 
              The bronze locus of maize, a uniquely advantageous system, will be used to
              elucidate the process of meiotic recombination in plants.  

