Title       : Complex Institutions as Information-Processing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2001    
File        : a9904700

Award Number: 9904700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87066              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryan D. Jones bdjones@washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Modern research on complex adaptive systems offers an approach capable of
              providing comparisons among various human institutions - - political, economic,
              and social - -  within a single analytic framework.  This research
              investigation explores the possibility of developing and testing theoretical
              models of formal institutions based on the fundamental assumptions of
              information processing in complex adaptive systems.  The investigator tests
              inferences from viewing human formal institutions - - specifically political
              and economic institutions - - as complex information processing systems. 
              Assuming that formal human institutions are comprised of boundedly rational
              decision-makers and a set of rules that structure the task environment of
              actors, the investigator derives a set of implications and tests these
              implications on outcome distributions from a variety of political and economic
              institutions.

The focus on outcome distributions allows the comparison of
              diverse institutions in a parsimonious manner.  The investigator assembles data
              on markets (the daily returns of the Dow Jones Industrial Average), agenda
              processes (newspaper coverage of political events and the scheduling of
              Congressional hearings), elections (county-level presidential election
              returns), policy outcomes (statutes passed by the U. S. government), and
              budgetary outcomes (U.S. Congressional budgetary outcomes; state and local
              finances).  Funds are requested to acquire additional data, extend existing
              data sets, and conduct comparative distributional analyses of outcome
              distributions.

The data set generated by this research will be of immense
              interest and value to other scholars interested in institutional
              analysis.



