Title       : A Dissection of the Yeast ER Translocation Machine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  2000    
File        : a9904575

Award Number: 9904575
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374343             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Brodsky jbrodsky@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) receives, folds, and sorts proteins that are
              secreted from the eukaryotic cell or that are targeted to other intracellular
              organelles.  To facilitate the import, or translocation, of these proteins into
              the ER, a myriad of cytoplasmic and lumenal factors associated with the ER are
              housed in multi-protein machines.  Included in these machines are molecular
              chaperones, factors that play vital roles during protein folding and
              degradation in the cell and that have been shown to regulate multi-protein
              complexes in vitro. Compromising the activities of molecular chaperones arrests
              the import of some proteins into the ER.  The mechanism by which these factors
              facilitate protein translocation is poorly understood, in part because
              pleiotrophic defects in many cellular processes occur when the activity of a
              single chaperone is compromised in vivo.  To circumvent this problem in order
              to understand the specific effects of chaperones on ER import, reconstituted in
              vitro systems have been developed.  The subsequent isolation of novel chaperone
              mutants from the model yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and their analysis in
              such in vitro assays, permits a molecular detailing of which chaperone
              activities are required to support protein translocation.

Chaperones
              required for protein translocation in yeast include the hsp70 ATPases BiP and
              Ssa1p in the ER lumen and cytoplasm, respectively, and the DnaJ homologues
              Sec63p and Ydj1p in the lumen and cytoplasm, respectively.  Hsp70s and DnaJ
              proteins are known to cooperate and facilitate a number of cellular processes
              in all species in which they have been identified.

A recent analysis of new
              dominant lethal BiP mutants indicates that an ATP-dependent conformational
              change is imperative to support the interaction between BiP and Sec63p and is
              necessary to drive protein import into the ER.  This project includes
              biochemical studies to determine why dominance arises in these mutants.  The
              results of these experiments will indicate which essential role(s) BiP plays
              during protein import, and may either validate or refute existing hypotheses
              describing the action of molecular chaperones during protein translocation. 
              

The mechanism by which the cytosolic chaperones Ssap1 and Ydjp1 facilitate
              translocation and the requirement for ATP hydrolysis by Ssa1p during import
              remains mysterious.  To unravel this mystery, novel ATPase-defective ssa1
              mutants were constructed and the resulting proteins purified during the
              preceding funding period.  In this renewal project, the mutant and wild type
              proteins will be subjected to a battery of established biochemical tests to
              elucidate how Ssa1p ATPase activity is coupled to protein translocation. 
              

Ydj1p plays ill-defined roles during both translocation and protein
              translation on ribosomes; therefore multicopy suppressors of a ydj1p
              temperature sensitive mutants were obtained, one of which was a gene encoding
              an uncharacterized hsp110 chaperon, Sse1p.  The contribution of this chaperone
              to the translocation and translation reactions, both in vivo and in vitro, will
              be determined.  

Because of their vital, diverse roles in cellular
              processes, studies of molecular chaperone function have yielded clues regarding
              the fundamental mechanisms underlying DNA replication, protein degradation and
              phosphorylation, and cell cycle control.  The continued analysis of chaperone
              functions using novel biochemical, cell biological and genetic tools will
              undoubtedly continue to contribute to the understanding of these and other
              cellular functions.

