Title       : Chromosome Aberration Frequencies and Chromatin Geometry: Algorithms and
               Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a9904842

Award Number: 9904842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345984             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn R. Hlatky Lynn_Hlatky@dfci.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dana-Farber Cancer Inst
	      Office of Grants and Contracts
	      Boston, MA  02115    617/632-3940

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9218,9263,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Algorithms for Computing Chromosome Aberration Frequencies.


This project
              will develop computer algorithms for analyzing chromosome aberrations produced
              by ionizing radiation during the G1 phase of the cell cycle. Such aberrations
              are rearrangements of chromosomes, caused by interactions of DNA double strand
              breaks (DSBs).  They are informative about radiation damage pathways as
              modulated by DNA repair and misrepair, and about chromatin structure at large
              scales, up to the full size of a mammalian chromosome. Their importance is in
              fact interdisciplinary, bridging the fields of radiobiology and cytogenetics,
              with information valuable for biodosimetry, risk estimation, chromosome
              structure, and the understanding of radiation-induced cell killing.

A very
              rich, colorful variety of chromosome aberrations can be observed using
              chromosome painting (fluorescent in situ hybridization -- i.e. FISH), which has
              revolutionized aberration work. Often current experimental results are so
              complex. involving dozens of different aberration categories, that mathematical
              analysis and computer calculations are essential for interpreting the data. The
              present project has two aims. The first aim is to analyze quantitatively the
              recombinational repair ("one-hit") molecular model of aberration formation.  In
              contrast to older (breakage-and-rejoining or Revell) models, the
              recombinational repair model considers that radiation-produced DSBs lead to
              additional, enzymatically -produced breaks. If correct, the model has important
              implications for almost all areas of radiobiology.

Preliminary studies by
              the PI  suggest that the model may be contradicted by current FISH data sets
              because the predicted frequency of visibly complex chromosome aberrations
              appears to exceed that observed. To be decisive the analysis needs more
              quantitative detail, obtainable only by Monte Carlo simulations.  The project
              will develop the Monte Carlo algorithms, test the recombinational repair model
              with recent FISH data, and compare it to the breakage-and-rejoining model,
              which has hitherto been found generally consistent with experiments. In
              addition to a plethora of data for human cells, data on other genomes are now
              available and will be included to get a broad spectrum of comparative
              radisosensitivities, taking advantage of the fact that the aberration
              simulation software uses just two adjustable parameters (the number of reactive
              DSBs per unit dose per unit genomic size, and the number of DSB interaction
              sites), which can be compared meaningfully among different genomes.

The
              second project aim is to incorporate recent pulsed-field gel electrophoresis
              data on DSB clustering along chromatin, and related computations, into
              algorithms for estimating the formation probabilities of various intrachanges
              (i.e. 1-chromosome aberrations). Previous studies have indicated that
              radiation-produced intrachanges are unexpectedly frequent and are biologically
              important. Clustering of DSBs along chromatin has a strong influence on
              intrachanges, which can be estimated quantitatively by appropriate equations
              and simulations. Under this aim aberration data, and also published mutation
              data dealing mainly with radiation-produced large deletions, will be compared
              to estimates obtained from the intrachange algorithms developed.

The
              proposed data analysis tools are comparatively inexpensive. They can supply
              much-needed coherence to aberration data, interrelate different empirical
              assays, and will help guide new experiments or critical rexaminations of extant
              data sets in laboratories world-wide.


