Title       : Integrating Marine Ecology Data for Scientific Analysis and Resource Management:
               A Community Database Prototype
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a9904777

Award Number: 9904777
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $882620             (Estimated)
Investigator: Omer J. Reichman reichman@nceas.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew B. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Schildhauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Data integration is increasingly recognized as a difficult but essential
              precursor to synthetic ecological analyses. The inability to easily integrate
              data becomes critical when the data also have major practical implications for
              policy planning or decision-making. In this project, a prototype community
              database repository to accommodate a variety of heterogeneously structured
              marine ecological data sets will be developed. This internet-accessible
              database will provide a valuable data resource for investigators researching
              long-term and large-scale ecological processes in the marine
              environment.

The data will come from a multi-agency consortium of marine
              ecologists, analysts and data managers who will make their data readily
              available in a common framework. These data come from academic, government,
              foundation, and private sources, and deal with the rocky intertidal zone at 61
              sites throughout central and southern California. Aside from their intrinsic
              scientific interest, these data sets are critical in tracking changes in
              biological communities and are invaluable for guiding and informing the
              preservation and development of California's nearshore
              environment.

Structured metadata to support query and access to the contents
              of the database will be used. This will be achieved by implementing an
              XML-based Document Type Definition (DTD) specifically designed for ecological
              data, and called Ecological Metadata Language', EML. This content specification
              is based on recommendations from several committees of ecological researchers
              and technologists. Conversion tools will be deveolped that will enable
              researchers to convert EML to HTML, or transform EML to two other useful
              metadata formats-Dublin Core and the FCDC's Content Standard for Digital
              Geospatial Metadata (CSDGM). Software tools that enable scientists to
              effectively document their own data for contribution to the prototype
              repository will also be developed. 

This database repository will serve as
              the basis for a growing resource that will be invaluable for coastal
              researchers and policy makers. The insights gained from this information
              resource will represent novel theoretical and practical advances for ecology as
              a whole.

URL: http://www.nceas.ucsb.edu

