Title       : Molecular Genetic Studies of Neurogenesis in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a9904411

Award Number: 9904411
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270034             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry Yedvobnick biolby@biology.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Notch cell communication pathway involves cell surface ligands, their
              
receptor, and a group of cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins that transduce
              
signals from the cell surface to the nucleus.  The pathway is an essential
              
regulator of neurogenesis and multiple other processes in Drosophila and
              
elsewhere.

The Drosophila mastermind (mam) gene encodes an essential
              
component of the Notch pathway.  The Mam protein is nuclear and very 
likely
              functions in gene regulation.  However, attempts to demonstrate 
specific DNA
              binding activity in vitro by Mam have been unsuccessful.  To 
better
              understand its function, current studies are directed at screening for 
loci
              that may encode a component of a transcription complex with Mam, 
and
              positioning Mam's role within the pathway.  Overexpression of 
engineered
              mutant versions of Mam in transgenic lines elicits an array of 
dominant
              phenotypes.  These phenotypes have been utilized in deficiency 
screens for
              modifiers, and a number of genomic regions that enhance or 
suppress have been
              identified.  The Mam mutations have also been used 
in epistasis experiments
              to position Mam function provisionally upstream 
of Delta-Notch signaling. 
              Such positioning has led to a new hypothesis 
that Mam acts as a positive
              regulator of Delta transcription.  If this 
hypothesis is correct, Mam may
              play a key role in the activation of the 
Notch pathway, and a full
              characterization of its function should provide 
substantial insight into the
              regulation of this important signaling system.

To further characterize Mam
              three objectives are proposed:  1:  Continue 
an analysis of the effects of
              Mam truncations on embryonic neurogenesis 
and selected imaginal disc tissues;
              2:  Complete the screening of the 
genome for genetic modifiers and begin to
              identify potential loci that 
mediate the effects, and, 3:  Initiate cell
              culture transfection assays to test 
for direct effects of Mam on Delta gene
              promotor activity.




