Title       : Dissertation Research: An Archaeological Investigation of the Kansyore, at a
               Middle Holocene (7000-4000 bp) Hunter-Gatherer Group in Western Kenya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1999      
File        : a9904483

Award Number: 9904483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fiona Marshall fmarshal@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Fiona Marshall MS Darla Dale will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological excavation at the
              site of Ugunja which is located in western Kenya. Based on her own recent
              reconnaissance, as well as examination of the artifacts which include pottery,
              burnt and unburned fish, bird and mammal bone and stone tools, the assemblage
              appears to relate to a cultural group termed "Kansore", named after the site
              where it was first defined. Kansyore is poorly characterized because it tends
              to occur in deeply stratified contexts which, because of overburden, make it
              difficult for archaeologists to clear large exposures. Without sufficient
              material in good spatial context it is impossible to attempt social
              reconstructions. Kansyore, which dates to between 7,000 - 4,000 years before
              the present is of great anthropological interest because while faunal remains
              indicate that these groups followed a hunting and gathering way of life, they
              also  produced abundant pottery with complex decoration and this combination is
              unique. Most hunting and gathering groups lacked pottery and those which
              possessed it most frequently used utilitarian ware which occurs in sparse
              amounts. Use of Kansyore pottery suggests a mode of social organization which
              includes a high degree of sedentization, economic specialization and large
              group size. Such adaptations are extremely rare among tropical hunters and
              gathers and are not easily encompassed within current theoretical models.
              Because the Ugunja site is not too deeply buried, MS Dale will be able to
              conduct extensive excavation and collect the necessary materials and sample
              sizes to gain detailed information on subsistence, settlement pattern and,
              hopefully social organization. She will also provide the first solid dates for
              the Kansyore culture.

This research is important for several reasons. It
              will provide data on a poorly known archaeological culture which will be of
              interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our understanding of human
              adaptation at a simple level of social organization and it will assist in
              training a promising young scientist.

