Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: An Investigation of Natural and Anthropogenic
               Factors Leading to Elevated Particulate Matter and Ozone Levels in Egypt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1999 
File        : a9904792

Award Number: 9904792
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24282              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adel F. Hanna adel@emc.mcnc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MCNC
	      P.O. Box 12889
	      Research Triangle Park, NC  277092889    919/248-1800

NSF Program : X325      AGRICULTURE-US EGYPT S&T PROG
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
Program Ref : 5944,9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9904792
Hanna

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project
              by a US team headed by Dr. Adel Hanna, Environmental Research, MCNC-North
              Carolina Supercomputing Center, Raleigh, North Carolina and an Egyptian team
              headed by Dr. Abou Bakr Ramadan, Radiation and Environmental Monitoring
              Network, National Center for Nuclear Safety and Radiation Control, Cairo,
              Egypt.  They plan to study the air pollution in urban locations of Egypt.  The
              study would compile and analyze in-situ data on aerosols (particulate matter,
              various trace species) and use them in a set of available numerical/statistical
              schemes, tuned to local conditions. They plan to use meteorological data to
              study stagnant high pressure systems and the mixed-layer depth at various
              locations and times of day, and using 3-D regional chemical transport models
              and regulatory models for further understanding of the physical processes
              leading to elevated particulate matter and ozone levels in the
              atmosphere.

Scope:  This project may lead to a better understanding of the
              special regional conditions that contribute to pollutant loading and transport
              in Egypt, especially in the urban corridor around Cairo and Alexandria.  This
              region has a very concentrated population density; a dry environment with
              reduced precipitation scavenging mechanisms, and abundant photochemical
              production processes. The available data and its use in the analyses may yield
              better understanding and knowledge and affect national policy concerning
              pollutant loading due to anthropogenic activity is too ambitious.  Dr. Hanna
              has had extensive experience in atmospheric modeling work, and has worked
              successfully with the Egyptian co-PI before, with resulting joint publication. 
              The collaborators are well placed to access the needed in-situ data as well as
              numerical schemes from US research community.  Postdoctoral scientists from
              both countries will collaborate on the research, and will gain experience in
              international scientific activities.  This proposal meets the INT objective of
              supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual interest.  This project is
              being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
              scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
              activities. 
