Title       : Cataloging and Computerizing Artifact Collections and Related Documentation from
               the Hemenway Southwestern Archaeological Expedition (1886-1889)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1999      
File        : a9904325

Award Number: 9904325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rubie Watson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1395,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support the Peabody Museum at Harvard
              University will complete curation of the Hemenway archaeological collection and
              make it available to scientists in a manner which will maximize research
              efficiency. Because relevant catalogue and storage data are not currently
              available electronic and paper records are hard to sort and use, researchers
              have difficulty studying the materials. The Hemenway Southwestern
              Archaeological Expedition (1886-1889) conducted significant excavations at half
              a dozen pre-Classic and Classic Hohokam sites in the Gila River Valley of
              Arizona and at two late prehistoric Zuni sites in western New Mexico. The team
              also conducted excavation or surface collection at an additional 25 Hohokam
              sites. In total, over 7300 objects were collected including hundreds of whole
              or reconstructed vessels. Ceramic spindle whorls, figurines and ornaments are
              also present. Lithics include projectile points, knives, picks, manos and
              metates, mortars and pestles, palettes, rubbing and abrading stones, reamers
              and rasps. Shell objects include needles and scrapers, marine shell beads and
              ornaments, some inlaid with colored stone and/or painted. Because of excellent
              organic preservation the collection includes wooden handles and tools as well
              as fragments of fabric and basketry. These materials have the potential to shed
              important light on prehistoric adaptation in the Southwestern US region. These
              objects are accompanied by the expedition's written records, drawings and maps.
              However a number of problems limit researcher access. These include the
              presence of uncatalogued and unlabelled items, an incomplete and inconsistent
              electronic database, inadequate correlation of cataloging data and field
              information and inconvenient organization of materials in storage. With
              National Science Foundation support, cataloguing and data entry will be
              completed, record photographs will be taken of approximately 200 selected
              artifacts or groups of artifacts, materials will be reorganized in storage
              draws, documentation accompanying the objects will also be computerized and an
              electronic interface for researchers' use will be developed.

Museums such as
              the Peabody house collections of immense scientific value. The Hemenway
              Collection, if readily available can provide a treasure trove of information
              for researchers interested in the prehistoric Southwest USA and this award
              facilitate access to it.

