Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Structural Evolution and Gold Mineralization of
               the Allaqi Suture, Southern Egypt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9904489

Award Number: 9904489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohamed G. Abdelsalam abdels@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Stern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,5944,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9904489
Abdelsalam

Description:  This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Drs. Mohamed Abdelsalam and Robert Stern, Center for Lithospheric
              Studies, University of Texas, Dallas, Texas and Dr. Abdel-Aziz Hussein,
              National Authority for Remote Sensing and Space Sciences in Cairo, Egypt. 
              These investigators plan to study the structural and tectonic evolution of the
              Neoproterozic Allaqi suture in SE Egypt and to explore the nature and mode of
              gold mineralization along this suture zone.  A combination of detailed field
              studies and remote-sensing techniques will be used.  Remote sensing analysis
              will include processing, development and interpretation of three Landsat
              Thematic Mappers (TM) scenes covering an area of 90,000 km2 and one
              high-resolution Satellite Probatoire pour l'Observation de la Terre (SPOT)
              scene covering an area of 2,000 km2 and centered around areas hydrothermal
              alteration occurs.  The main geological problems associated with the Allaqi
              suture are the changing structural character (strike-slip vs. thrust fault)
              along the suture zone, emplacement direction and mechanism(s) of ophiolites,
              and the spatial and temporal relations between mineralization and formation of
              various structures within and across the shear zone.  These are significant
              questions to better constrain the tectonic evolution of the Arabian-Nubian
              Shield and potentially to obtain critical information on the nature of
              structural, magmatic, and hydrothermal processes during crustal build-up in the
              Neoproterozoic.  

Scope: The PIs have a good track record of conducting
              interdisciplinary geological studies in the Arabian-Nubian Shield and
              publishing the results of their work in a timely fashion. The PIs have access
              to the necessary facilities (Remote Sensing Lab at UTD).  The collaboration
              with the Egyptian colleagues would be quite helpful and would strengthen the
              international link to develop various remote-sensing techniques in search of
              mineralized zones along crustal-scale shear zones, particularly in Precambrian
              environments.  One graduate student from the United States will participate in
              the fieldwork in Egypt, and one junior Egyptian scientist will participate in
              the research at UTD.  This is in addition to the three cooperating scientists. 
              This proposal meets the INT objective of increasing US-foreign collaboration in
              areas of mutual benefit.

