Title       : Learning-Dependent Neurogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9904572

Award Number: 9904572
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol Van Hartesveldt                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309134             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Holtzman holtzman@bcs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The growth of new brain cells after birth (postnatal neurogenesis)
occurs in
              several brain areas of vertebrates.  Although previous studies
have shown that
              experience can influence brain growth, we do not know which
aspects of these
              experiences are involved with postnatal neurogenesis.  It
is unclear whether
              experiences causes, or is caused by, postnatal
neurogenesis and whether the
              mechanisms that regulate this growth are
similar for different brain
              structures.  The objective of this research
proposal is to test whether
              specific learning experiences can
differentially promote neurogenesis in
              different regions of the brain.
Snakes are ideal models for testing this
              hypothesis because they show
continuous neurogenesis throughout their brains
              and can learn spatial tasks
based on different types of cues.  Cell
              proliferation and survival of brain
cells are predicted to occur
              differentially in brain areas associated with
spatial learning or chemosensory
              discrimination, depending on whether
snakes are trained to use spatial or
              chemosensory cues to solve a spatial
escape task, respectively.  The brain
              areas that will be examined in snakes
are also found in mammals and are
              thought to function in similar ways.
	The results of the proposed study will
              determine if postnatal
neurogenesis in specific brain structures is mediated
              by the use of
specific sensory cues to solve the same spatial problem.  These
              results
should give insight into the functionality of postnatal neurogenesis
              and
help to form hypotheses about common mechanisms of spatial learning
              for
vertebrates.  By comparing results from a variety of vertebrate
              species,
the long-term goal of this course of study is to understand
              the
relationship between behavioral plasticity and
              experience-dependent
neurogenesis.  This information could have implications
              for understanding
the mechanisms which regulate brain growth and lead to new
              ways of
stimulating brain growth.




