Title       : Thermodynamics of Photosynthetic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2001     
File        : a9904522

Award Number: 9904522
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Mauzerall mauzera@rockvax.rockefeller.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB9904522
Mauzerall

Photosynthesis is a highly efficient system that
              converts sunlight into the chemical energy that supports life on earth.
              Understanding this system requires a detailed knowledge of both the kinetic and
              thermodynamic properties of its many steps. Although the kinetics of most of
              its steps have been established by the rich variety of spectroscopic techniques
              now available, the thermodynamic parameters of most of its steps remain
              unknown. Kinetics identify the path of the photosynthetic process but it is
              thermodynamics that identifies how the solar energy is stored. The recently
              developed method of pulsed, wide-band, time-resolved photoacoustics allows one
              to uniquely determine the changes of volume and heat or enthalpy in the steps
              of a photochemical reaction. Electrostriction, a major contribution to volume
              change described thermodynamically by Drude and Nernst a century ago, must
              occur in electron transfer reactions where there is a separation of charge.
              Electrostriction in photosynthetic systems provides information on the
              dielectric coefficient and compressibility of the reaction center protein,
              quantities directly related to protein structure and function. The volume
              changes are a remarkably simple measure of the primary quantum yield of
              photosynthesis. The enthalpy is a direct measure of the efficiency of the
              photosynthetic system. Since the free energy of many steps is known from
              equilibrium or redox potential measurements, the entropy can be calculated from
              the measured enthalpy. The change in entropy is a measure of the order of the
              system, reflecting changes in conformation and hydration. These data can now be
              obtained from living cells using a novel analysis of photoacoustic data. This
              by-passes tedious and often damaging manipulations of the photosynthetic
              material necessary to prepare reaction centers. Measurements will be made on
              reaction centers of photosystem I and II and on live cyanobacteria of a single
              species to obtain a set of consistent data.

The primary productivity of the
              oceans is fundamental to life on this planet. The absolute method to determine
              this productivity is based on 14C fixation and is slow and labor intensive. 
              Photoacoustics is unique in directly determining the energetics or efficiency
              of the photosynthetic process. The sensitivity of the photoacoustic method will
              be increased beyond its present point of detecting phytoplankton at levels of
              the open ocean. Different wavelengths of light will be used to determine the
              contribution of each of the three major taxa of phytoplankton in a sample. One
              can determine the useful photosynthetic rate versus light intensity response of
              the phytoplankton, as well as the optical cross-section, which is related to
              the size of the photosynthetic unit, by the photoacoustic method. These data
              are measures of the adaptation of the phytoplankton to changes in the
              environment such as the light regime. A long range goal is to adapt this
              photoacoustic methodology to shipboard or portable apparatus using light
              emitting or laser diodes and compact data acquisition
              systems.





















