Title       : Rapid Dendritic Reorganization in Intact Developing Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a9904724

Award Number: 9904724
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300091             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel O. Wong wongr@thalamus.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    /   -

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 During development the fine processes of nerve cells, or neurons, make
              synaptic contacts to transmit and to receive signals with the proper cellular
              targets, a crucial need for constructing a functional nervous system.  A
              variety of anatomical studies have shown that the receiving structures, called
              dendrites, undergo extensive remodeling over time during normal development. 
              It is not clear how rapidly this remodeling can occur, or how it may be
              regulated by neural activity.  This project uses the isolated retina of the
              embryonic chick eye as a model system.  A newly developed technology allows
              high-resolution, real-time microscopic imaging of dye-filled individual cells
              to provide important new information about these morphogenetic events. 
              Pharmacological tools will be used to enhance or inhibit the effect of
              neurotransmitter compounds on the dendritic terminals.  Observations will be
              made on how rapidly dendrites change length and branching, and how the
              physiological activity of neurotransmitter release at synapses regulates
              dendritic remodeling.
   Results will be important beyond simply neuronal
              development in the eye, because plastic change at nerve synapses also occurs
              throughout the brain, and  during learning.  The project also provides
              excellent postdoctoral training.

