Title       : Dissertation Research: Comparative Micro-CT Analysis of Trabecular Architecture
               in Anthropoids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1999   
File        : a9904925

Award Number: 9904925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1999  
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11919              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brigitte Demes bdemes@mail.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Finding bony correlates of locomotor behavior is an important requisite for
              interpreting the locomotor modes of fossil primates. One region of the body
              that has received much attention in the last fifteen years is the proximal
              femur.  Research suggests that the cortical bone structure of the femoral neck
              reflects the degree of repetitive, stereotypical loading during locomotion.
              Broad comparative studies, however, indicate that more precise associations
              between locomotor behavior and femoral structure can not be made (e.g.,
              distinguish bipedalism from quadrupedalism), a result that impacts
              reconstructions of early hominid evolutionary history. Qualitative comparative
              evidence suggests that the internal architecture, or trabecular bone, as
              opposed to the cortical shell, is a more sensitive reflection of the femoral
              neck's mechanical environment and, hence, an animal's locomotor behaviors.
              Trabecular bone consists of micrometer-sized struts that form complex
              three-dimensional lattices and a high-resolution, three-dimensional X-ray
              imaging method is necessary to adequately study it. This study will be the
              first to incorporate newly introduced micro-computed tomography technology to
              the study of variation in the trabecular architecture of the non-human primate
              proximal femur. Architectural variation will be studied in a sample of six
              anthropoid primates that differ in their locomotor modes. The two primary
              objectives of this study are:  (1) to document quantitatively the variation in
              trabecular architecture of the proximal femur among primates of similar and
              contrasting locomotor behaviors, and, (2) to determine from research on living
              primates whether trabecular architectural studies of the proximal femur can
              contribute to reconstructions of fossil hominid and non-hominid primate
              locomotor behaviors.	
