Title       : Identification of RAR Target Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2001      
File        : a9904764

Award Number: 9904764
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Blumberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goal of the proposed research is to understand the role of
              retinoid signaling during vertebrate development.  These investigations will be
              focused from fertilization through the end of neurulation - a time when
              critical developmental decisions occur but that is mostly inaccessible to
              manipulation in higher vertebrates.  The focus of our research will be identify
              bona fide in vivo targets for signaling through Xenopus retinoic acid receptors
              (xRARs).  The early Xenopus laevis embryo is uniquely suited for experimental
              manipulation and is a rich source of materials for molecular biological
              approaches to development. Dr. Blumberg will exploit these unique
              characteristics of the Xenopus embryo to characterize these newly identified
              RAR target genes and determine where they fit into the developmental
              hierarchies that pattern the early embryo.

Embryos enriched for xRAR target
              genes will be generated by treatment with the RAR panagonist TTNPB while
              embryos depleted for xRAR targets will be produced using the highly specific
              RAR antagonist, AGN193109.  Subtractive hybridization between cDNAs derived
              from these two populations of embryos will be employed to identify cDNAs that
              are unregulated or downregulated by xRAR signaling.  Transcripts from these
              newly identified target genes will be localized by in situ hybridization and
              reverse genetic approaches will be utilized to determine their functions during
              development.  Receptor subtype-selective agonists and antagonists will enable
              us to determine which of the three RARs, alpha, beta or gamma regulates each
              target gene.  Such a study was not feasible before recent improvement in
              retinoid pharmacology.  This is an important issue because our preliminary data
              suggest that RARalpha signaling is more important in anterior patterning where
              as another RAR, likely RARgamma is responsible for posterior patterning.

In
              summary, retinoids have long been known to be important for a variety of
              processes during development.  The proposed research employs new tools to
              elucidate molecular requirements for retinoid signaling in embryonic patterning
              processes.  The results obtained should be widely applicable to the study of
              development in other vertebrate model systems and provide critical evidence
              toward understanding the role of RARs during development. 

