Title       : Analysis of Nucleorhabdovirus Replication in Plant and Yeast Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9904810

Award Number: 9904810
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew O. Jackson andyoj@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB 9904810
PI: -Andrew O. Jackson 
Abstract
This research is designed to
              develop systems that can be applied to genetic dissection of plant rhabdovirus
              infections. Conditions suitable for molecular genetic analyses have recently
              been developed for several negative-strand animal virus families, and these are
              having an enormous impact on our understanding of these viruses. Unfortunately,
              virus recovery using these systems is very inefficient, and their success
              relies on several key elements that are not available for SYNV, including
              visual plaque assays in tissue cultures. Therefore the research will
              investigate two novel alternative strategies, one in tobacco callus tissue and
              one in yeast, that rely on stringent selection for recovery of replicating
              minigenomes suitable for genetic analyses.  
Objective 1 will focus on
              construction of autonomously replicating minigenomes containing the genes
              required for replication plus a herbicide resistance gene to be used for
              selection of plant callus cells supporting the replication of the minigenome.
              This will use co-transformations with the polymerase genes (N, P, and L) that
              are required for replication, plus a cassette for transcription of minigenome
              RNAs encoding the N, P, and L genes and a selectable marker. The expressed
              viral polymerase proteins should interact with the transcribed minigenome RNAs
              to "jump start" replication of the minigenome derivative. This strategy should
              provide selective growth of callus cultures supporting replication of SYNV
              minigenome replicons that expresses a herbicide resistance gene for selection
              in the presence of the herbicide bialaphos. These biologically active
              minigenomes will subsequently be used for genetic analyses to provide
              information on the replicative activities of SYNV, and as platforms to rescue
              more complex biologically active SYNV derivatives containing the five common
              rhabdovirus genes and a selectable antibiotic marker that can be used for
              discrimination of cells infected with the minigenome or the virus. Experiments
              will also be carried out to isolate SYNV derivatives containing all six viral
              genes in order to evaluate the factors necessary for whole plant infections. 
              
Objective 2 will explore use of the genetic analysis capability of yeast to
              study replication of SYNV and to isolate host genes required for replication.
              For this purpose, an existing yeast cell line expressing the N, P, and L
              polymerase core proteins will be transformed with a minigenome capable of
              expressing a selectable marker (URA3) to provide stringent recovery of yeast
              transformants expressing replicating minigenome derivatives. Achievement of
              this objective will constitute a crucial step toward creating biologically
              active recombinant derivatives that can be used to isolate host components
              required for replication of SYNV. If either of these approaches is successful,
              our understanding of plant rhabdoviruses replication and pathogenesis will be
              accelerated enormously and aspects of the yeast selection scheme could have
              considerable applicability to other negative-strand viruses.  
	A large number
              of rhabdoviruses cause serious plant diseases, but sonchus yellow net virus
              (SYNV) is the only well characterized plant rhabdovirus amenable to molecular
              analysis.  SYNV also has several unique attributes that make it attractive for
              comparative analyses of the infection processes of negative-strand RNA animal
              virus counterparts. For example, the negative-strand genome and replication
              strategies of SYNV share many common features with those of animal
              rhabdoviruses and paramyxoviruses that cause significant human, livestock and
              wildlife diseases. However, striking differences are evident among these agents
              with the nuclear phase of SYNV replication being one of the most intriguing
              features. SYNV is also similar in this aspect of its replication to a distantly
              related monopartite minus-strand virus, the neurotrophic borna disease virus.
              Therefore, the infection processes of SYNV have relevance to both plant and
              animal viruses, so, the knowledge obtained with this virus will promote better
              understanding of the diverse factors involved in the replication and pathology
              of a large order of viruses that cause diseases with enormous agricultural and
              human 

