Title       : RUI: Isolation and Characterization of Cell Cycle Mutants from Kluyveromyces
               lactis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9904900

Award Number: 9904900
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120873             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Silveira silveira@uor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Redlands
	      1200 East Colton Avenue
	      Redlands, CA  923743755    714/793-2121

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Linda Silveira
MCB- 9904900
Abstract


Genetic studies in the budding yeast
              S. cerevisiae and the fission yeast S. pombe have been instrumental in
              identifying the mechanisms of cell-cycle control.  This project leverages the
              information from these prior studies by extending the genetic analysis of cell
              division to a third, distantly related yeast species, Kluyveromyces lactis.
              Temperature-sensitive K. lactis mutants with general defects in cell growth
              will be isolated after mutagenesis.  These mutants will be screened via phase
              microscopy to identify those with defects in the cell cycle at 36oC.  The
              precise cell-cycle stage that is blocked in each mutant will then be evaluated
              by a combination of flow cytometry and DAPI-staining of chromosomal DNA. 
              Because regulation of mitosis differs sharply in S. pombe and S. cerevisiae and
              mutants isolated in previous genetic screens for mitotic regulators have only
              partially overlapped, K. lactis mutants may help understand the evolution of
              these differences.  Once mutants are identified, classified, and sorted into
              complementation groups, the corresponding genes will be cloned by
              complementation of the Ts- growth defect using an existing K. lactis genomic
              DNA library.  
The project has the potential to contribute to our
              understanding of cell division in at least five different ways.  First, this
              study should identify new genes involved in cell cycle control.  Second, the
              phenotypes of K. lactis mutants may vary in informative ways from those of the
              corresponding S. pombe or S. cerevisiae mutants.  Third, comparison of
              homologous K. lactis, S. cerevisiae, and S. pombe cell cycle genes should help
              reveal critical features of genes required for this process.  Fourth,
              functional differences between K. lactis and S. cerevisiae homologues can be
              exploited to identify interacting factors.  Fifth, as roles for the same
              regulator can vary from organism to organism, often for reasons that are as yet
              unclear, analysis of a second budding yeast should shed light on the evolution
              of cell cycle regulatory mechanisms and the relationship between these
              mechanisms and the lifestyle of the organism. The project will also provide
              numerous opportunities for undergraduate students to conduct independent
              research.  Such research experience fosters improved scientific writing and
              oral presentation skills, increased technical abilities in genetics and
              molecular biology, and an in-depth understanding of a central field within cell
              biology.

 
  


