Title       : The Components of the CO2 Concentrating Mechanism of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a9904425

Award Number: 9904425
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James V. Moroney btmoro@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Aquatic photosynthetic organisms account for almost 50% of the Earth's CO2
              fixation and O2 evolution.  Due to the slow diffusion of CO2 in water, algae
              have developed methods of facilitating CO2 and HCO3- uptake to enhance
              photosynthesis.  Unicellular algae, including Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, have
              the capacity to concentrate CO2 internally, allowing these organisms to grow
              photoautotrophically at very low external CO2 concentrations.  This CO2
              concentrating mechanism is inducible; it is present only in cells that have
              been grown with limiting CO2 conditions.  A model has been proposed to explain
              how CO2 is concentrated in eukaryotic unicellular algae.  In this model there
              is a mechanism for bicarbonate accumulation, a packaging of Rubisco and a
              generation of CO2 at the location of Rubisco.  This model successfully
              addresses the question of how algae can concentrate CO2, a molecule that can
              readily diffuse through biological membranes.  Essentially, HCO3- which does
              not cross membranes readily is first accumulated in the chloroplast and CO2 is
              generated at or near the enzyme that fixes CO2, ribulose-1, 5-bisphosphate
              carboxylase/oxygenase (Rubisco).  This allows Rubisco to catalyze the
              carboxylation reaction before the CO2 can leak from the cell.  In the past
              three years it has been demonstrated that Rubisco is specifically located in
              the chloroplast pyrenoid.  The carbonic anhydrase that dehydrates HCO3-,
              generating CO2 in the chloroplast has also been identified.  In addition,
              membrane proteins induced by growth on low CO2 have been discovered.  The
              function of these membrane proteins remains to be proven but they might
              function as HCO3- transporters.  In this proposal three approaches have been
              outlined that will identify the physiological role of these membrane proteins. 
              In the first approach, a series of mutations will be generated by insertional
              mutagenesis.  The transformants will then be screened for cells that cannot
              grow on low CO2 levels and are defective in the CO2 concentrating mechanism. 
              In cases where the insertion is located within the gene this approach will
              allow for the cloning of a gene that plays a part in the CO2 concentrating
              mechanism, facilitating the identification of that gene.  The second approach
              will be to constitutively express specific membrane proteins that are normally
              only expressed under low CO2 to see if they enhance CO2 uptake and fixation. 
              In this case, the gene of interest will be fused with a constitutive promoter. 
              The third approach is to knock out specific genes to see if they are required
              for the operation of the CO2 concentrating mechanism.  This approach relies
              upon rare homologous recombination events which have been demonstrated to occur
              in C. reinhardtii.  An approach has been outlined that employs a positive
              selectable marker and a linked negative selectable marker that will allow us to
              identify rare homologous recombinations.  This approach has been successful
              with other eukaryotic organisms.  The characterization of the proteins of the
              CO2 concentrating mechanism will add to our understanding of how algae have
              increased their efficiency of CO2 fixation.  An understanding of this process
              will also help scientists predict how marine organism might respond to
              increasing global CO2 concentrations. 


