Title       : Mechanism Design for Indivisible Goods Allocation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a9904214

Award Number: 9904214
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65769              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yan Chen yanchen@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tayfun Sonmez  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              School choice is one of the hottest topics in education.  It means giving
              parents the opportunity to choose the schools their children will attend. 
              Since it is not possible to assign each student to her top choice school, a
              central issue in school choice is the design of a student assignment mechanism.
               By now several cities including Boston, Cambridge, Little Rock, San Jose, and
              Seattle have adopted school choice plans.  While each of these plans has its
              protocol and guidelines for the assignment of students, none of them has a
              rigorous procedure.  The lack of rigorous procedures offers opportunities to
              manipulation and results in appeals by parents who are unsatisfied by the
              school assignments of their children.  This project introduces a new class of
              indivisible goods allocation problems that model public school choice, proposes
              a mechanism for rigorously assigning students to schools, and analyzes it.  The
              project also studies the allocation of housing with existing tenants.   The
              main application is on-campus housing, although the model has other
              applications such as public housing, office space allocation, and parking space
              allocation.  Existing allocation mechanisms are shown to have serious
              shortcomings including inefficiency.  An alternative mechanism is shown to
              overcome these shortcomings. Additional properties of this mechanism are
              studied and experiments are conducted to test the theoretical results that
              compare the performances of this mechanism and a widely used common real-life
              mechanism.    Both of these projects deal with design and analysis of
              mechanisms for real-life indivisible goods allocation problems.  
