Title       : Sino-Tibetan Etymological Dictionary and Thesaurus (STEDT)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2001   
File        : a9904950

Award Number: 9904950
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Matisoff matisoff@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Lowe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Sino-Tibetan languages, comprising Chinese and Tibeto-Burman (TB),
              constitute one of the great language families of the world, with well over a
              billion speakers. Yet they remain poorly understood; indeed, some branches of
              the TB family are still virtually unstudied. To fill this vacuum in historical
              linguistic research, the STEDT (Sino-Tibetan Etymological Dictionary and
              Thesaurus) project was started in 1987, charged with gathering data from both
              extant published works and the growing body of fieldwork and integrating them
              into a coherent whole. The ultimate goal of the project is the publication of
              an etymological dictionary of the ancestor language, Proto-Sino-Tibetan, spoken
              perhaps 6000 years ago. The Dictionary is organized by semantic fields, so it
              will constitute a 'thesaurus' of PST.

A large computer database of
              etymological and lexicographic information has been created to support the
              research required to publish the Dictionary. At this point about 70,000
              morphemes in the lexical file (ca. 20%) have been etymologized into cognate
              sets.  The first Fascicle of Vol. I (Body-part Terminology) has been approved
              for publication. Preparation of the subsequent Fascicles and Volumes is
              proceeding concurrently.

In the new grant period, a series of phonologically
              organized Historical/Comparative Handbooks will be prepared for the various
              subgroups of the TB family, beginning with Lolo-Burmese.  This will allow the
              rigorous formulation of sound-laws and the refinement of our 'Sound-law
              Data-base', against which future reconstructions may be tested.  In this manner
              the STEDT project will proceed both along semantic and phonological lines. In
              order to provide the linguistic community with access to data and results in a
              timely fashion, the project will move towards publication via CD-ROM and the
              WWW. Along with the fascicles of the Dictionary itself, electronic versions of
              other STEDT publications will quickly be made available, including published
              volumes of the STEDT Monograph Series and back issues of our semiannual journal
              Linguistics of the Tibeto-Burman Area.
