Title       : The Southern Cape MSA Peoject: Early Evidence for the Origins of "Modern" Human
               Behavior in Southern Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1999      
File        : a9904540

Award Number: 9904540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143640             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher S. Henshilwood chris@blomboscave.co.za  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick E. Grine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Christopher Henshilwood and
              Frederick Grine will conduct archaeological research at the site of Blombos
              cave, date its sediments and analyze the materials recovered. The goal of the
              research is to understand the emergence of modern human behavior and, based on
              excavations to date, Blombos can contribute significantly.  Although early
              hominids made stone tools as early as 2.4 million years ago, and thus shared
              significant traits with their modern day counterparts, in many other ways they
              were clearly distinct. By 40,000 years ago however archaeological evidence
              indicates they buried their dead and thus had some form of religion. They
              painted lifelike animal and human figures on cave walls and adorned their own
              bodies. Thus, although their technology was simple they were essentially like
              us. Based on fossil evidence the earliest anatomically modern humans appeared
              ca. 125,000 years ago in sub Saharan Africa and preliminary data indicates that
              the first traces of "modern" behavior are found in that part of the world as
              well. These are associated with Middle Stone Age peoples who practiced a
              culture which extended from ca. 250,000 to 40,000 years ago. However
              archaeologists do not agree on the range of behaviors present in MSA groups and
              given the extensive temporal span, it is quite possible that these
              significantly changed within this interval itself. In this context Blombos Cave
              is extremely important. Located on the southern Cape coast, it contains
              excellently preserved MSA materials which have not previously been found in
              situ in this region. Preliminary excavations in 1997 and 1998 have yielded
              remarkable, yet anomalous, finds that are directly relevant to the modern human
              behavior debate. These include formal bone artifacts, pressure-flaked bifacial
              foliate points, rotary drilled haematite and evidence for modern subsistence
              practices including fishing. In other regions of the world all of these are
              significantly younger and form part of a modern behavioral complex. With NSF
              support these excavations will be expanded to increase sample size and to
              examine lateral variation within the site. The abundant lithics and fauna as
              well as other material remains will be analyzed and an extensive multi-approach
              dating program conducted.

This research is important for several reasons. It
              will provide valuable data from a unique and important site and will increase
              our understanding of the complex of traits which characterize behaviorally
              modern humans.

