Title       : Transition Metal Chemistry in Crossed Molecular Beams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a9904225

Award Number: 9904225
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313500             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Floyd Davis hfd1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              H. Floyd Davis of Cornell University is supported by the Experimental Physical
              Chemistry Program to perform detailed experimental studies of the bimolecular
              reactions of transition metal atoms under well-defined conditions using crossed
              molecular beams.  Studies will focus on reactions that involve ground
              electronic states as well as metastable electronically excited states of
              transition metal atoms prepared by laser excitation.  Chemical reaction
              products and nonreactively scattered transition metal atoms will be detected
              using electronic impact, vacuum ultraviolet photoionization, or 1+1 resonance
              enhanced multiphoton ionization (REMPI).  Angular and velocity distributions of
              these products will be measured as a function of collision energies to gain
              insights into the reaction mechanisms and excess energy disposal into product
              degrees of freedom.  Potential energy barriers for key processes such as C-H
              insertion will be determined.  Results from these experiments will facilitate
              direct tests of state of the art ab initio calculations in the field of
              transition metal quantum chemistry. 

The ability of transition metal centers
              to initiate chemical change in normally unreactive covalent bonds is of major
              importance in homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis, as well as in organic
              and or organometallic chemistry.  The underlying factors controlling the
              insertion of neutral metals into various organic bonds remain poorly understood
              despite interest in achieving this knowledge.  The present studies aim to
              further comprehension of physical and chemical interactions between transition
              metal compounds and smaller hydrocarbon molecules.  The outcomes will provide
              experimental information for useful comparison with theory. 


