Title       : Identity Theory, Justice, and Emotions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2000   
File        : a9904215

Award Number: 9904215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113521             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan E. Stets stets@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9904215
Stets

This project uses recent developments in identity theory to
              examine the relationship between justice and emotions.  In identity theory, a
              person acts in a self-regulatory manner with the goal of matching meanings of
              the self in a situation with the identity meanings in one's standard.  This
              self-regulation is ongoing and continuous, often requiring little attention.  A
              person becomes more attentive when the normal state of continuous congruence
              gets interrupted in a situation.  Then, the person responds with autonomic
              arousal subjectively experienced as negative emotion.  In identity theory, it
              is hypothesized that repeated interruptions in the identity process cause more
              negative emotion than occasional or infrequent interruptions.  This hypothesis
              is applied to the distributive justice process regarding individuals' emotional
              responses to injustice.

Distributive theory has much in common with identity
              theory.  In particular, distributive justice theorists also conceptualize the
              self as acting in a self-regulatory manner with the goal of matching one's
              actual reward in a situation with one's expected reward.  Congruence registers
              the experience of justice and incongruence registers the experience of
              injustice in a situation.  Negative emotion follows from the cognitive
              evaluation of incongruence. 

Two experiments will be conducted to test the
              emotional responses of individuals to unjust situations.  Each experiment
              simulates a work situation and subjects are asked to perform four simple
              clerical tasks.  They are told that their pay (reward) is based on their
              performance on these tasks. In the first experiment, subjects with either be
              given an under-reward, expected reward, or over-reward at prearranged intervals
              throughout their task performance (high persistence), or they will receive
              their reward after task completion (low persistence).  The second experiment
              will be set up like the first with one addition.  Subjects will be made to feel
              that either they are responsible for the reward they receive (self as
              responsible) or the experimenter is responsible for the reward they receive
              (other responsible).  In both experiments, subject's standard of justice while
              in the worker role will be measured.  Additionally, subjects' emotions will be
              measured throughout task performance by 1) videotaping facial expressions and
              bodily responses and applying an emotion coding scheme t the videotapes, and 2)
              obtaining self-reports on subjects current feelings.

In general, this
              research develops identity theory by testing some of its theoretical
              assumptions regarding emotions as well as examining other emotions not yet
              explored in the theory.  It also broadens distributive justice research by
              applying some of the theoretical advances in identity theory to distributive
              justice theory.  Finally, this research advances the area of sociology of
              emotions by examining how a theory of self-regulation that both identity theory
              and distributive justice theory assumes can explain different emotions in
              situations.

