Title       : Biochemical Description of Archaeal Genomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a9904956

Award Number: 9904956
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323365             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ya-Ming Hou Ya-Ming.Hou@mail.tju.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Thomas Jefferson Univ
	      1020 Locust Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19107    215/503-6976

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hou
9904956
1. technical

The sequencing of the genome of Methanococcus
              jannaschii (M. jannaschii) is a necessary start to understand this archaeal
              organism, which is a strict anaerobic hyperthermophile that produces methane by
              using hydrogen to reduce carbon dioxide. The understanding of M. jannaschii
              will provide the basis to address its pathway of methane- production and to
              shed light on its basal machinery of processing genetic information and to
              relate this machinery to those of eubacteria and eucarya. However, while the
              genome of M. jannaschii encodes a full complement of tRNAs for decoding genetic
              information, it encodes only 16 of the 20 aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases that are
              responsible for attaching an amino acid to each tRNA. Missing in the genome are
              enzymes for glutamine, asparagine, lysine and cysteine. The absence of the
              glutamine and asparagine enzymes is explainable because the attachment of
              glutamine and asparagine to their tRNAs can be achieved by an alternative
              pathway. The absence of the lysine enzyme has been resolved by biochemical
              studies, which have elucidated an enzyme that catalyzes aminoacylation of tRNA
              with lysine using a motif distinct from that of the conventional lysine-tRNA
              synthetase. Unresolved at the moment is the enzyme for cysteine. The goal of
              this study is to use biochemical studies to address the missing enzyme in order
              to provide a better description of the archaeal genome. The specific aims are:
              1. Investigate the hypothesis that the genome of M. jannaschii encodes a
              cysteine-tRNA synthetase that catalyzes aminoacylation of tRNA with cysteine.
              Test the hypothesis by purifying the enzyme to homogeneity and by cloning the
              gene for the enzyme and determination of the sequence of the enzyme. This will
              provide insight into the origin of the enzyme, its relationship with other
              cysteine-tRNA synthetases, and  possible errors in the genomic sequence
              analysis. Characterize the enzyme for its mechanism of recognition of tRNA and
              determine if it discriminates against serine by an editing mechanism as the
              basis for an adaptation to extreme environments.  2. Investigate the hypothesis
              that the M. jannaschii cysteine-tRNA synthetase recognizes tRNA modifications
              for aminoacylation. Test the hypothesis by isolating fragments from the native
              tRNA that contain the important modifications to determine if it complements
              aminoacylation of the T7 transcript of the tRNA. Elucidate the identities of
              the important modifications and determine whether they include modifications of
              G37, G34, or G15. Nucleotides at position.


2. non-technical

Life on
              this planet is structured in three primary domains, the eucarya, the
              eubacteria, and the archaea. Among these three, the archaea domain is the least
              understood.  It consists of organisms from diverse and extreme habitats, which
              account for a large fraction of the microbial world. Many archaeal organisms
              have the ability to reproduce themselves from simple molecules, such as
              hydrogen, carbon dioxide, ammonia, sulfate, and sulfur. As such, they are
              essential for the basal workings of our biosphere. The sequencing of the genome
              of Methanococcus jannaschii (M. jannaschii) has opened the door to
              understanding the archaeal domain. This organism is a strict anaerobic
              hyper-thermophile that produces methane by using hydrogen to reduce carbon
              dioxide. The understanding of M. jannaschii will provide a basis to address its
              mechanism of methane-production and to gain insights into its ability to
              process genetic information from DNA to RNA to protein under extreme
              environmental conditions.  Of particular interest is that while this genome
              encodes a full complement of transfers-RNAs ( tRNAs)  forcarrying out protein
              synthesis, it encodes only a subset of the 20 enzymes thought to be required
              for tRNA functions.   The goal of this project is to investigate the basis for
              some of the missing enzymes that are not identified from genomic analysis of M.
              jannaschii. Preliminary studies indicated evidence of these enzymes and raised
              the hypothesis that these enzymes may contain novel sequences such that they
              escape deletion by sequence analysis. Biochemical designs and strategies will
              be used to test the hypothesis and to enhance our understanding of this genome
              by complementing the genomic sequence analysis.  


													





