Title       : Flagellar Glycoprotein Dynamics and Whole Cell Locomotion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a9904916

Award Number: 9904916
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $418998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Bloodgood   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The unicellular alga, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, exhibits two different kinds of
              locomotion.  The best known of these is swimming, in which the wave-like
              beating of the two flagella at one end of the cell causes the cell to move
              through its aqueous environment.  Far less well understood is the ability of
              Chlamydomonas to glide on a solid substratum.  This gliding motility also
              involves the flagella, but the mechanism is very different from swimming.  The
              cell glides at the point of contact between the flagellar membrane outer
              surface and the solid substratum.  Previous work from Dr. Bloodgood's
              laboratory suggests that this gliding is a carefully regulated sequence of
              events that requires the flagellar surface to exhibit both sensory and motor
              functions.   This entails a signaling pathway, involving calcium ion regulation
              and protein phosphorylation and dephosphorylation that couples the sensory and
              motor functions of the flagellar surface.  A variety of circumstantial data
              strongly point to a high molecular weight flagellar membrane glycoprotein,
              FMG-1, as being central to both the sensory (substrate contact initiated
              transmembrane signaling) and motor (coupling of the activity of a motor protein
              complex to substrate adhesion sites) functions of the flagellum.  The long-term
              goal of the project is to use molecular and biochemical approaches to
              understand the function of the FMG-1 flagellar membrane glycoprotein.
              

Screening of a Chlamydomonas cDNA expression library using a peptide
              antibody has yielded cloned inserts that promise to be useful for cloning the
              full-length gene from a Chlamydomonas genomic library.  Degenerate
              oligonucleotides (designed from FMG-1 peptide sequences) will also be used,
              both for RT-PCR based cloning and to screen a Chlamydomonas Bacterial
              Artificial Chromosome (BAC) library.  An existing collection of insertional
              mutants that are defective in gliding motility will be screened to determine if
              any of them possess a defect in the gene for FMG-1; if so, these mutants will
              be used for in vivo functional studies and, if necessary, for cloning the
              tagged FMG-1 gene.  

Once the FMG-1 gene is cloned and sequenced,
              transformation studies will be carried out to overexpress either normal or
              mutant versions of the gene, in order to identify key functional domains and
              assess function.  It is anticipated that some of these gene constructs will
              function as dominant negative mutations to interfere with the normal function
              of endogenous FMG-1.  Another approach is to characterize the interactions of
              FMG-1 with other proteins.  A flagellar phosphoprotein (pp60) was previously
              identified as a binding partner for FMG-1, and a variety of in vivo and in
              vitro approaches will be used to characterize the interaction between pp60 and
              FMG-1.  The FMG-1 binding domain for pp60 will be determined and the role of
              phosphorylation in the interaction will be tested.

These in vivo and in
              vitro approaches are expected to provide useful information about the function
              of the major flagellar membrane glycoprotein and the mechanism of gliding
              motility in a model unicellular organism that offers great experimental
              advantages.  Little is known about why Chlamydomonas cells glide over
              substrata; these studies may reveal interesting information about protistan
              flagellar gliding behavior in general.  These studies may also provide
              unexpected new insights into functions of and functional relationships between
              membrane proteins in general.  



