Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Development of Plant-Microbe Associations for the
               Phytoremediation of Heavy Metal Contaminated Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1999 
File        : a9904790

Award Number: 9904790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25003              (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman Terry nterry@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : X325      AGRICULTURE-US EGYPT S&T PROG
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 5944,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9904790
Terry

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project
              by Dr. Norman Terry, Department of Plant Biology, University of California,
              Berkeley, California and Dr. Ehab R. El-Helow, Botany Department, Alexandria
              University, Alexandria, Egypt.  The PIs are to investigate whether
              plant-microorganism interactions play an important role in making metal ions
              available for uptake by the plant roots. They hope to identify the
              microorganism strains from soils with existing metal contamination, and hope
              that inoculation of such strains into soil in which hyperaccumulator plants are
              growing might increase phytoremediation efficiency.  The proposal hypothesizes
              that the absence of suitable rhizosphere microorganisms might be a limiting
              factor in the uptake of metals by plants.  The specific objectives are: 1. To
              isolate bacterial strains with multiple heavy metal resistance phenotypes,
              considerable bioremediation grades, and abilities to express a variety of
              extracellular digestive enzymes, 2. To determine the effect of plant-microbe
              interactions on metal removal from contaminated substrates when the isolated
              heavy metal-resistant microbes are introduced to plant rhizosphere.  The study
              should also explain whether the efficiency of metal uptake by plants is
              affected by soil mobility, solubility of the metal ions, soil chemistry, and
              the inherent characteristics of the plant chosen for the remediation.

Scope:
               The project addresses the efficiency with which certain plants can take up
              metallic contaminants from soil, particularly where the metals are
              enzymatically reduced into a less toxic form.  Environmental remediation of
              toxic and heavy metals is of high priority for both Egypt and USA. This is an
              important question in the phytoremediation field, and the research might yield
              unexpected insights into phytoremediation processes.  Dr. Terry is a pioneer
              and a leader in phytoremediation research, and is an expert in plant systems
              for the reduction and uptake of selenium, one of the metals chosen for the
              study.  He has expertise with the use of plants for accumulation of other
              metals from the environment. The Egyptian counterpart is an accomplished
              microbiologist.  He has isolated bacterial strains that can tolerate and entrap
              heavy metals from polluted water.  The results might extend a technique now
              used for phytoremediation of organic contaminants for use with metals.  This
              proposal meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative research in areas
              of mutual interest.  This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint
              Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
              countries to carry out these cooperative activities. 

