Title       : Collaborative Research: Developmental Mechanisms Underlying Diversity in
               Arthropod Limbs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a9904391

Award Number: 9904391
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri A. Williams terri.williams@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Their studies compare both the molecular and cellular development of a
              multi-branched limb in  Triops to that of the unbranched limb in Drosophila. 
              These two limbs differ not only in number of branches but also in their
              fundamental structure: Drosophila legs are jointed and rod-shaped, Triops legs
              have an unjointed paddle-shaped limb with eight branches arising around the
              margin.  Thus, their comparison between them should reveal how very different
              limbs arise. Their results suggest that there are three critical features of
              the Drosophila model that vary between species. 1) In Drosophila, the
              intersection of the anteroposterior (A/P) and dorsoventral (D/V) patterning
              axes position the limb primordia.  Their data suggest that variation in D/V
              positioning in Triops results in the specification of a larger limb primordia,
              which they hypothesize is the first step in building a multi-branched limb.  2)
               In Drosophila, the intersection of the secreted signaling factors, wingless
              (wg), decapentaplegic (dpp), and hedgehog (hh) specify a point of proximal/
              distal (P/D) elongation for leg outgrowth.  Cell fates in the distal region of
              the leg are activated and maintained directly by different levels of Wg and Dpp
              signals;  in the proximal region of the leg they are activated by a different
              gene network, regulated at least in part by the extradenticle (exd) gene. Their
              data suggest that the multibranched limb of Triops does indeed have a single
              P/D axis, potentially controlled by homologues of the same signaling genes. 
              However, the patterning of the branches in Triops is not a simple iteration of
              the same gene network involved in patterning the Drosophila limb.  From their
              earliest development at least four different branch types are identifiable by
              distinctive gene expression patterns.  3) Establishment of a single point of
              P/D outgrowth in Drosophila is not directly linked to cell division patterns. 
              However, in Triops, they find a concentration of mitotically active cells in
              the region of the putative Triops limb organizer.  Their model therefore
              suggests that, unlike Drosophila, the P/D organizer in Triops may control
              specific patterns of cell division, in a manner similar to vertebrate limb
              development.
