Title       : Collaborative Research: The Instruments for Political Control of Bureaucracy in
               Parliamentary and Separation of Powers Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9904844

Award Number: 9904844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87116              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Huber jdh39@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Bureaucratic expertise, if harnessed effectively, can play a crucial role in
              helping elected officials to achieve their goals.  The political environment,
              however, can make it difficult for elected officials to influence bureaucratic
              behavior, thereby creating the possibility that this expertise will go to waste
              or be used by bureaucrats against elected officials.  In order to understand
              how the preferences of elected officials get reflected in public policy, it is
              crucial to explore the mechanisms that facilitate or inhibit political control
              of agency policymaking.
	The project begins by developing an explicitly
              comparative theoretical explanation of political control.  The basis for this
              theory is the expectation that politicians respond rationally to their
              political environment when deciding whether and how to control bureaucracies. 
              If there is variation in the relevant features of this political environment
              across time or place, then there should be systematic variation in the
              institutions that politicians adopt to facilitate control.
	The theoretical
              arguments (which are developed as formal models) and the empirical tests focus
              on interactions between factors affecting incentives to control vureaucrats
              (that is, factors affecting the degree of conflict betwseen politicians and
              bureaucrats) and those affecting the costs of ex ante and ex post control
              strategies.  Political and institutional factors that should affect the degree
              of conflict include the specific form of divided government in separation of
              powers systems, the heterogeneity of governing coalitions in parliamentary
              systems, and the institutions that govern the selection and promotion of civil
              servants.  The form of divided government, the nature of the governing
              coalition, and the extent of legislative professionalism should affect the cost
              of ex ante control.  Electoral volatility, cabinet instability, and
              institutional arrangements regarding the choice of judges, the prerogative of
              courts vis-a-vis agencies, and the ability of legislatures or parliaments to
              review or veto agency decisions should influence the cost of ex post
              control.
	The data for the empricial tests consist of instruments for control
              as dependent variables and information about the political and institutional
              environment as explanatory variables.  Data are collected to permit analysis of
              variation in the instruments of control within separation of powers systems
              (through an analysis of control across advanced parliamentary democracies), and
              variation across parliamentary and separation of powers systems (through a
              comparison of control processes in the two types of systems).  For each type of
              system, the project examines how political and institutional variables affect
              conflict of interest, ex ante strategies for control, and ex post strategies
              for control.
	This project promises several benefits.  First, by examining the
              impact of the political environment on strategies for control, the project lays
              the foundation for a broadly comparative understanding of how politicians
              respond to their political environment when making decisions about how to
              delegate authority to bureaucrats.  In so doing, the study refines existing
              debates about not only the logic of delegation, but also the limits and
              possibilities of control over the state in different types of political
              systems.  Second, the study involves the creation of a number of novel datasets
              of use to a wide range of scholars.  Students of state and comparative politics
              benefit from data that systemtically code institutional and political
              differences among states and countries.  Students of institutions and policy
              are able to use data that systematically demonstrate differences in control
              across policies, states, and countries.


