Title       : Molecular Aspects of Selenium Hyperaccumulation and Volatilization in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9904643

Award Number: 9904643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman Terry nterry@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Terry

This research focuses on genetically engineering plants to study the
              mechanisms for selenium (Se) hyperaccumulation, tolerance and volatilization
              with a long-term goal of developing plants suitable for the phytoremediation of
              Se. The objective of the study is to develop Indian mustard (Brassica juncea)
              plants with enhanced capacities to extract Se from soil and volatilize Se to
              the atmosphere as dimethylselenide, a relatively non-toxic form of Se, by
              genetically engineering these plants to express novel genes from a
              Se-accumulating species, Astragalus bisulcatus. This species, which is
              specially adapted to seleniferous soils, accumulates as much as 4000 mg Se per
              kg dry weight, is very tolerant of high concentrations of Se, and is an
              excellent volatilizer of Se. A. bisulcatus is unsuitable for phytoremediation
              because it grows very slowly; Indian mustard on the other hand, is an excellent
              candidate for phytoremediation because of its fast generation time, high
              biomass and relatively high tolerance to Se. Objective 1 is to clone the
              sulfate/selenate transporter from A. bisulcatus, which will then be transformed
              into Indian mustard. This is an especially valuable objective because the
              sulfate/selenate transporter from A. bisulcatus has unique properties; it has a
              very high and selective affinity for selenate, which is absorbed with far
              greater efficiency than by corresponding transporters from other plant species.
              To clone the gene for this transporter, a root cDNA library from A. bisulcatus
              will be made and screened with the available sulfate/selenate transporter gene
              from Stylosanthes hamata. Objective 2 is to transform Indian mustard with the
              gene for the enzyme selenocysteine methyltransferase, which has recently been
              cloned from A. bisulcatus. This enzyme is important because it detoxifies Se
              and allows the accumulation of high levels of Se in plant tissues. Objective 3
              is to determine the extent to which overexpression of the selenocysteine methyl
              transferase gene in Indian mustard diverts the metabolic flow of Se to the
              alternate, rapidly volatilizing pathway found in A. bisulcatus (leading to the
              production of dimethyldiselenide). Objective 4 is to produce transgenic plants
              over-expressing combinations of these two genes as well as the ATP sulfurylase
              gene, which have been shown to increase Se accumulation, tolerance and
              volatilization. 
Because of its potential toxicity, selenium (Se) releases
              into the environment from electric utilities, oil refineries and from
              agriculture throughout the western United States, is a very big problem.
              Phytoremediation is an inexpensive and environment-friendly approach for the
              cleanup of Se from contaminated sites is. The application of biotechnology to
              phytoremediation is a novel and exciting area of research. The expression of
              one or more of the genes from A. bisulcatus has great potential in enhancing Se
              accumulation and volatilization by plants and will greatly increase the
              efficiency with which phytoremediation can be used to treat Se-contaminated
              agricultural soils and water that are often rich in sulfate. In addition, the
              transgenic plants could be used to study the factors affecting Se uptake,
              tolerance and the mechanism of Se sequestration and fate within the plants.
              


