Title       : Mossbauer Spectroscopy of Nitrogenase Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a9904421

Award Number: 9904421
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $685000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eckard Munck em40@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Munck
MCB 9904421


Mossbauer spectroscopy, Electron Paramagnetic Resonance
              (EPR) and magnetochemistry will be used to study the active sites of a variety
              of iron-containing enzymes, electron transfer proteins, and synthetic model
              complexes.  The systems to be studied include nitrogenase, hydrogenases as well
              as 2Fe-2S ferredoxins.  For nitrogenase, the studies will focus on further
              clarifying the electronic structure of the P-clusters and the FeMo cofactor
              centers.  These studies will include the use of isotopic hybrids of MoFe
              protein for which one of the two clusters is selectively enriched with the
              57-Fe Mossbauer isotope.  Studies of the associated Fe-protein will be
              continued with particular emphasis on exploring the biological relevance of the
              newly discovered all-ferrous form. In addition to characterizing the electronic
              structure of the all-ferrous [4Fe-4S] clusters, the all-ferrous states of
              [2Fe-2S] and [3Fe-4S] clusters, hitherto uncharacterized with Mossbauer
              spectroscopy, will be investigated. The studies of hydrogenases will focus on
              the properties of the NiFe site of [NiFe] hydrogenases and on the H-cluster (6
              iron atoms) of Fe-only hydrogenases.  These experimental studies will be
              complemented by theoretical work that addresses the peculiar properties of the
              H-cluster.

Mossbauer spectroscopy used in combination with electron
              paramagnetic resonance is a very powerful tool to study iron-containing
              clusters found in a variety of proteins and enzymes.  The two techniques have
              frequently been used to discover new structures present in biological systems,
              or delineate novel magnetochemical properties.  This project is designed to
              obtain new insight into the electronic properties of clusters which are
              currently at the forefront of bio-inorganic chemistry.  The clusters to be
              studied include two novel structures in the molybdenum and iron containing
              protein of the biological system that fixes atmospheric nitrogen to ammonia. 
              The two techniques will also be applied to study two novel cluster assemblies
              in microbial enzymes involved in the uptake or production of hydrogen.  The
              goal of these studies is to elucidate the catalytic mechanisms of these enzymes
              and to characterize the magnetochemical properties of the metal centers.

