Title       : Tracing Find Sediment Transport in Fluvial Systems Using Fallout Radionuclides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a9904266

Award Number: 9904266
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20522              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Ketterer michael.ketterer@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Despite our understanding of the gross paths taken by sediments and
              sediment-bound pollutants, we have a poor knowledge of the transit time for
              their passage through the drainage network and to receiving bodies.  The goal
              of this project is to develop an innovative but broadly applicable tool to
              investigate the erosion mechanisms of fine sediment from the landscape and the
              transport characteristics of fine suspended particulates in channels. 
              Specifically, we aim to answer questions on the source of the suspended
              sediment (Is it from sheet erosion, rill erosion, bank erosion, or resuspension
              of bottom sediments?); the delivery ratios of fine sediment from the watershed
              (i.e., the proportion of sediment that is eroded from the landscape and
              delivered to the receiving waters or the proportion that is transported only
              part way and resides on the landscape or in the streambed); the proportions of
              suspended sediment that is newly delivered from the soil mantled landscape
              versus resuspended from the bed; the transit distance of fine particulates; the
              residence time of particulates; and the flux of fines from the watershed.  We
              will employ a novel technique we have developed that uses fallout radionuclides
              (7Be, 137Cs, and 210Pb) as tracers of fine sediments suspended by
              streamflow.

The two-year study will be focused in the Yellowstone River
              watershed in Wyoming and Montana.  During the first year we will address the
              kinetics of the tracing and the characterization of the radionuclide signature
              of the snowpack, soils, bottom sediment, and suspended sediment.  During the
              second year we will characterize the sources and transport of fine sediment
              over a distance 900 km during a snowmelt-driven hydrograph.  The experimental
              design includes collection of precipitation, soil cores, floodplain sediment,
              channel bottom sediment, and suspended sediment samples at various locations in
              the drainage networks; gama spectroscopy of samples for naturally occurring
              short-lived (7Be) and lonaer-lived (137Cs 210Pb) fallout radionuclides and
              other important radionuclide tags (214Bi, 40K) that adsorb to sediment
              providing tracers of sediment movement over different time scales; tracing the
              movement of mine tailings that were released from an upland source area in the
              study area in 1950; analyses of particle sizes and concentrations; and wave
              kinematic and mass balance modeling.

