Title       : Molecular Analysis of Chlamydomonas Mating-Type Locus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9904667

Award Number: 9904667
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $427000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ursula W. Goodenough ursula@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Ferris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
It has been established that a single gene, mid, located in the mt-
              locus, is necessary and sufficient to induce minus gametic differentiation and
              to suppress the expression of plus-specific gametic genes. It is further
              postulated that the Mid protein accomplishes these results by acting as a
              transcriptional activator/repressor in collaboration with other proteins. It is
              further postulated that Mid may collaborate with a different set of proteins to
              activate the expression of zygote specific genes following the fusion of plus
              and minus gametes. The first specific aim of this project is to test this "mid
              hypothesis". Antibodies will be raised against recombinant Mid protein and used
              to immunolocalize the protein and to perform immunoprecipitations of Mid plus
              any associated protein in wild type and mutant strains. The antibody will also
              be added to nuclei engaged in nuclear run-on transcription to assess whether it
              blocks or enhances transcription of gametic- and zygote-specific genes. The mid
              gene will be mutagenized in vitro to create temperature-sensitive alleles
              which, when transformed into a mid-deleted strain, should permit the
              identification of mid-regulated transcripts whose expression is up- or
              down-regulated with temperature increases. It has also been established that
              the mt locus is riddled with unusual genetic configurations suggesting that the
              region has been, and perhaps continues to be, a nucleus of evolutionary change.
               The evolutionary history and potential of this locus will be investigated
              using several approaches. The second specific aim is to continue an ongoing
              chromosome walk through the mt locus of a closely related species, C. incerta,
              evaluating the extent to which its organization has been conserved vs
              rearranged with respect to the C. reinhardtii locus during the estimated 1
              million years since the two species diverged. The third specific aim is to
              continue the evaluation of a recent (past 20 years) mt-related anomaly, the
              tandem duplication of the mid gene and flanking sequences and the residency of
              this element in a non-mt location in the genome of the CC-421 strain of C.
              reinhardtii.  The fourth specific aim is to continue to investigate the
              observation that the mid gene has incurred an unusually high level of
              nonsynonymous and synonymous codon changes since the C. reinhardtii/C. incerta
              divergence. 

The long-term goal of this research is to understand the
              genetic basis for life-cycle transitions in the unicellular green alga,
              Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, particularly with regard to the two mating-type loci
              and to analyze the evolutionary dynamics of these genetic systems.

