Title       : Rate-Limiting Steps in the Assembly of a Motile Apparatus During Spermiogenesis
               in Marsilea Vestita
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1999       
File        : a9904435

Award Number: 9904435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Wolniak sw36@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Microtubules (MTs) are long, slender polymers made up  of the protein, tubulin,
              that play critical roles in the life of the cell.  They are the key functional
              components of two extremely important subcellular structures that are involved
              in cellular motility phenomena:  mitotic spindles, which are responsible for
              the orderly movement of chromosomes to the opposite ends of a cell just before
              the cell divides into two daughter cells; and cell surface appendages known as
              cilia or flagella, which beat in an orderly wave-like fashion and thereby move
              the watery environment of the cell across the cell surface, resulting in either
              whole cell movement (swimming) or water turbulence around the surface of the
              cell.  These MT-containing structures are complex, and are generally associated
              with complex MT-containing subcellular structures, termed either centrioles, in
              the case of the spindles, or basal bodies, in the case of cilia or flagella.  
              

This project is focused on increasing our understanding of basal body
              formation. Basal bodies are cylindrical organelles that reside at the base of a
              cilium or flagellum, and are comprised of 9 triplet microtubules held together
              by a series of proteinaceous spokes, links and plates. They are structurally
              similar to centrioles and they usually form in close proximity to centrioles in
              an elaborate assembly process. The details of this basal body assembly and the
              components present in these organelles have been under investigation at various
              times through the last century, but the process is still not well understood. 
              In this project, the unique biological properties of an unconventional model
              organism, the water fern Marsilea vestita, will be exploited to expand our
              understanding of basal body formation.  Specifically, Dr. Wolniak will study
              the role played by two proteins, centrin and Xgrip109, in forming the basal
              body precursor structure, the blepharoplast, in spermatocytes of M. vestita. In
              lower plant spermatocytes, basal bodies arise in the absence of any preexisting
              centrioles, so the synthesis, assembly and maturation processes occur without
              the background presence of related centriolar structures. The synchronous
              activation of male gametophytes of M. vestita permits time course studies on
              blepharoplast formation in large populations of developing spermatocytes or
              spermatids. In preliminary work, Dr. Wolniak has found that the rate and extent
              of spermiogenesis appears to be regulated post-transcriptionally, that is, it
              is dependent on the synthesis of certain new proteins that are translated from
              mRNAs that were stored in the dry microspore. Centrin is one of the proteins
              translated from stored mRNA midway through the developmental process, and its
              abundance increases just as the blepharoplast forms. Immunolocalizations with
              anticentrin antibody show an intense localization in fixed cells at a discrete
              spot at the time that the blepharoplasts assemble. Xgrip109 abundance on
              immunoblots increases in a fashion similar to those observed for centrin. In
              contrast to centrin and Xgrip109, the tubulins are abundant as stored protein
              in the dry spore and there is no change in tubulin abundance until late in
              development. From these preliminary observations, it is hypothesized that some
              of the newly translated proteins appear to control the rate, organization and
              extent of assembly of the blepharoplast. Newly assembled structures containing
              regulatory proteins like centrin and Xgrip109 then serve as cores or templates
              for the addition of the tubulins and other stored proteins that are already
              present in the gametophyte. Thus, the newly-made proteins appear to be
              rate-limiting for spermiogenesis. 

A series of antisense experiments will be
              performed that are aimed at determining whether centrin translation is
              necessary for blepharoplast formation. Preliminary experiments show the
              efficacy of an antisense approach, but reveal that dsRNA and certain sense
              centrin constructs also slow or block development.  An important part of the
              work during the period of funding will be directed toward understanding the
              differences in development that result from each of these treatments. In
              addition, Dr. Wolniak will study the linkage between cell divisions in the
              gametophyte, the activation of translation of stored mRNAs and the formation of
              the blepharoplast. Three ways to block mitosis in this organism have been
              found, and these will be used to study centrin and Xgrip109 protein
              accumulation in the one-celled gametophyte over time after imbibition. 
              Extended time course experiments will be performed to determine whether the
              accumulated centrin and Xgrip109 have the capacity to aggregate into
              blepharoplast-like particles in the absence of cytoplasmic partitioning between
              spermatogenous and sterile cells of the gametophyte.  This work is expected to
              establish the feasibility of using Marsilea vestita as a model for basal body
              development.

