Title       : GLP-1/GLP-1 Receptor Axis and Glucagon/Glucagon Receptor Axis in Teleost Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9904506

Award Number: 9904506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Svetlana Mojsov mojsov@rockvax.rockefeller.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Insulin and glucagon are two major hormones secreted from the pancreas that
              regulate glucose metabolism in mammals.  Insulin actions are exerted at the
              level of the liver, skeletal muscle and adipose tissues, while liver is the
              main target tissue for glucagon action.  In addition to insulin and glucagon,
              other substances of intestinal origin also contribute to the maintenance of
              steady levels of glucose in circulation.  One of these intestinal substances
              called glucagon-like peptide-1, or GLP-1, is one of the key peptides that
              provide a link between the consumption of nutrients and glucose metabolism. 
              The major function of GLP-1 is to integrate the nutritional input with glucose
              homeostasis through its effects on the pancreas and intestine.  In the
              pancreas, GLP-1 stimulates insulin release and inhibits glucagon secretion,
              while in the intestine GLP-1 inhibits the absorption of nutrients, including
              glucose and, therefore, slows down the release of glucose in circulation after
              consumption of a meal.  Thus, insulin, glucagon and GLP-1 regulate glucose
              metabolism through distinct metabolic pathways with an end result that insulin
              and glucose levels are maintained in mammals at near constant levels at all the
              times regardless of the nutritional state.  Disruption of the balance that
              exist between circulating levels of insulin and glucose leads to a metabolic
              state of elevated insulin and elevated glucose, characterized as insulin
              resistance, and manifested in humans as Type 2 (non-insulin dependent) diabetes
              mellitus.
                In contrast to mammals, fish can tolerate large
              fluctuations in circulating insulin and glucose levels without the metabolic
              consequences that develop under the same conditions in humans.  This
              observation provided the initial evidence that glucose metabolism in mammals
              and teleost fish is controlled by different metabolic pathways.  Accumulated
              experimental evidence suggest that in fish insulin is not a gluco-regulatory
              hormone and that GLP-1 and glucagon have similar if not identical effects on
              glucose metabolism in fish liver.
                The main goal of the
              proposed research is to examine the hypothesis that GLP-1 and glucagon are one
              of the key hormones that control glucose metabolism in non-mammalian and
              mammalian vertebrates.
	The experimental approach will focus on the molecular
              and functional characterization of receptors for fish GLP-1 and glucagon, and
              represents the beginning of a systematic analysis of GLP-1 and glucagon
              receptors in fish.  The results of these experiments will provide understanding
              of the mechanism by which different vertebrate species adapt their metabolism
              to the evolutionary changes in diet and will have an impact on comparative and
              evolutionary physiology.  These studies may also lead to the development of new
              "GLP-1-based" therapeutics agents for treatment of patients with Type 2
              diabetes.

