Title       : Characterization of CaM Kinase II Targeting Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2001       
File        : a9904765

Award Number: 9904765
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359378             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Tombes rmtombes@vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMK-II) is a widespread and
              multi-functional protein kinase involved in the regulation of ion channels, the
              cytoskeleton and cell growth.  Over two dozen isozymes are generated from four
              CaMK-II genes through alternative splicing in a central variable region and at
              the C-terminus.  This research project is based on the hypothesis that the
              central variable region is necessary for targeting CaMK-II to specific
              intracellular locations and thus to its proper substrates. Of particular
              interest are isozymes of delta CaMK-II which are down-regulated in transformed
              cells and activated in differentiated cells.  Delta CaMK-II isozymes
              concentrate in the perinuclear region and extend discontinuously along
              cytoskeletal tracks.  Constitutively active mutants of delta CaMK-II arrest
              cell division and induce the formation of cellular extensions in NIH/3T3 cells.
               Isozymes of beta or gamma CaMK-II do not exhibit this effect, have different
              localizations, and lack the delta CaMK-II-specific proline-containing
              sequences.  To test the role of these sequences, this research will define the
              minimum sequence motif necessary to target delta CaMK-II to the cytoskeleton by
              using fluorescence microscopy to visualize the effects of deletion and point
              mutations on proteins tagged with green fluorescent protein. This research will
              ultimately lead to the identification of proteins to which CaMK-II is anchored,
              information which will be critical to understand the substrates and thus
              mechanism of action of this important protein kinase family.  These studies
              have potential implications for many basic biological activities of cells in
              which this enzyme has been implicated.

