Title       : RUI: A Test of How the Timing of Nesting Influences the Genetic Identity of
               Nestlings in a Territorial Songbird
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a9904823

Award Number: 9904823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64810              (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Scott Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian S. Masters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Towson University
	      8000 York Road
	      Towson, MD  21252    410/704-2236

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9229,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
              



Animal Behavior Program

Non-technical Abstract



Title:  RUI: A
              Test of How the Timing of Nesting Influences the Genetic Identity of Nestlings
              in a Territorial Songbird.

PI:  Johnson, L. Scott

Proposal #: 
              9904823

Parental behavior in some bird species involves both male and
              females.  Recent research has found that in some species, females may mate with
              males who are not their mates. Nests can therefore contain young that were not
              fathered by males tending the nest.  Theoretically, males should act to
              minimize their chances of rearing another male's offspring.  Dr. Scott Johnson
              asks if males can reduce their risk of rearing another male's offspring by
              nesting very early in the spring.  Early nesting male territory holders should
              benefit from having relatively few neighbors that might sire the offspring of
              the territory holder's mate.  In contrast, late-arriving males often find
              themselves surrounded by males whose mates are already incubating eggs, freeing
              these males to attempt to sire offspring of females paired with late-arriving
              males.  A DNA based technique for determining the genetic identity of
              individuals will be used to conduct paternity analyses on broods of early and
              late-settling males in a Wyoming population of the House Wren, a small
              songbird, to test the prediction that early nesting males will be rearing more
              of their own offspring and fewer of their neighbors offspring.

This study
              will provide new information on the strategies used by male birds to insure
              that they are rearing their own offspring and so is useful in advancing our
              ideas concerning the evolution of behavior.  Moreover, it could be potentially
              important in explaining the advantage of early breeding in songbirds.  Such an
              understanding could have relevance for songbird conservation. This one-year
              study will train one graduate student and three undergraduate students in
              research.


