Title       : Strength and Stiffness-Based Methods for Reducing Hinging in Columns of
               Reinforced Concrete Frames Subjected to Strong Ground Motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a9904090

Award Number: 9904090
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126515             (Estimated)
Investigator: JoAnn P. Browning jpbrown@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This project carrier out an investigation of strength and stiffness-based
              methods to reduce hinging in columns of reinforced concrete frames subjected to
              strong ground motion.  Current provisions to reduce the likelihood of hinges
              forming in the columns of a frame require that the total flexural capacity of
              the columns framing into a joint exceed that of the girders.  The effectiveness
              of this criterion is limited by the uncertainty of actual member flexural
              capacities under dynamic loads.

The research under this project will develop
              specific strength and stiffness criteria for frame members so as to eliminate
              yielding in columns in critical regions of a frame and provide minimum
              localized distortions during response to strong ground motion.  An analytical
              procedure will be developed to include member stiffness and varied strength and
              stiffness properties over the height of the structure.  Structures with soft
              stories will also be considered in the study.  Criteria will be identified for
              two situations those that would eliminate yielding of any column, and those
              that would limit yielding to a specified "optimum" level of building height. 
              The selected criteria will be evaluated using a series of proportioned frames
              with nonlinear static and dynamic analyses.  In addition, several existing
              frames that were instrumented during the Northridge earthquake will be analyzed
              based on the existing properties and properties modified to satisfy the
              proposed criteria.  This study is expected to provide new strength and
              stiffness criteria for building frames that will reduce the probability of
              columns yielding in critical locations of the building frame.  

