Title       : Banks, Securities Markets, and the Provision of Liquidity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a9904986

Award Number: 9904986
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137632             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy C. Stein stein2@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project continues to pursue a very productive line of theoretical and
              empirical research on the role of banks in the economy.  This work is extremely
              important, as it is relevant for monetary and central banking policy, for
              banking and financial regulation, and for work that attempts to maintain the
              stability of the financial system.  The project takes up the question what
              fundamentally makes a bank a bank. The traditional definition is that a
              commercial bank is an institution that simultaneously engages in two distinct
              activities: deposit-taking and lending. But why are these two activities
              necessarily conducted under the roof of a single entity? What is the underlying
              economic synergy?   The answer is rooted in the same sort of credit-market
              imperfections that play a key role in the earlier work. In particular, banks
              are all about providing liquidity to agents on demand. This is true of both
              their customers on the liability side-their depositors-as well as their
              customers on the asset side-who are often borrowing via credit lines that can
              also be taken down on demand. In a world where external finance is not easily
              raised on short notice, the capacity to service these kinds of customers will
              turn on the bank's ability to hold a buffer stock of highly liquid assets in a
              cost-effective fashion. Our basic argument is that by engaging in both
              deposit-taking and commitment-based lending at the same time, a bank can spread
              any deadweight costs associated with its securities holdings over multiple
              businesses, and can thus be a more efficient provider of liquidity. 
              

Another project that involves a similar theme asks why liquidity premia in
              the Treasury bond market-defined, e.g., as the difference in price or yield
              between "on-the-run" and "off-the-run" bonds with the same cashflows-vary quite
              dramatically over time. To understand variations in the market price of
              liquidity, one has to look to the demand side of the equation, which is
              embodied by those financial intermediaries who are most concerned with holding
              very marketable securities. Banks are one obvious example of such a class of
              intermediary, for the reasons outlined above, but so are open-ended mutual
              funds, who face large and unpredictable redemptions and hence must also hold
              liquid assets for similar reasons. The project's long-run goal is to build and
              empirically test corporate-finance-based models of such intermediaries that can
              speak to the whole issue of time-variation in the general equilibrium price of
              liquidity.

