Title       : The Role of XMAP215 in Regulating Microtubule Assembly In Vivo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9904504

Award Number: 9904504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Gard gard@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Microtubules (MTs) are one of the major classes of cytoskeletal elements in
              eukaryotic cells.  They are characterized by their ability to elongate or
              rapidly disassemble in a regulated fashion.  They play important roles in
              maintenance or change of cellular shape, they serve as tracks along which
              subcellular organelles travel from one place in the cell to another, and they
              are critical to the partitioning of chromosomes during cell division.  They
              also play critical roles in cytoplasmic partitioning during embryonic
              development.  This project focuses on the roles played by MTs in the
              specification and/or maintenance of both the animal-vegetal axis of oocytes and
              the dorsal-ventral (D-V) axis of developing vertebrate embryos, using the
              African frog, Xenopus laevis, as the model system.  The rapid conversion
              between stable and dynamic MT's during oogenesis and the rapid assembly of the
              sperm aster and cortical MTs required for D-V axis specification place unique
              constraints on mechanisms regulating MT assembly.  Three microtubule-associated
              proteins, termed XMAP215, XMAP230, and XMAP310, have been isolated from Xenopus
              oocytes and eggs, where they are thought to play key roles in regulating MT
              assembly.  Of these XMAPs, XMAP 215 exhibits the unique property of promoting
              both the assembly and dynamics of MT plus-ends in vitro.  Results from these
              studies suggest that XMAP215 is responsible for the assembly and dynamics of
              MTs during oogenesis and early development.  

The proposed research
              addresses the function of XMAP215 in vivo in regulating MT assembly during frog
              oogenesis and development.  Specific questions to be addressed include:
1, is
              XMAP215 associated with MTs during Xenopus oogenesis and early development? The
              protein will be localized by confocal immunofluorescence microscopy and/or by
              expression of GFP-tagged or epitope-tagged XMAP215 mRNA microinjected into
              oocytes and embryos; specific MT arrays that occur during various stages of
              oocyte and embryo development will be examined. 2, is XMAP215 required for the
              assembly of specific microtubule arrays in vivo?  XMAP215 will be depleted by
              microinjection of antibodies or anti-sense oligodeoxyribonucleotides into
              living oocytes and embryos, and the effect of such depletion on MT organization
              and development will be examined by confocal microscopy using anti-tubulin
              antibodies. 3, Are XMAP215-M and XMAP215-Z functionally distinct? This question
              is based on the finding that there are two forms of XMAP215 mRNA in Xenopus
              eggs and embryos, a maternal form (-M) present in oocytes and pre-gastrula
              embryos, and a zygotic form (-Z) present in post-gastrula embryos.  These
              differ in that there is a 36-amino acid insert (Ins2) present only in the
              maternal form.  The developmental regulation of the expression of these two
              isoforms suggests that they may differ in their function and/or regulation.  As
              a first step in defining the functional distinction between the two isoforms,
              the proteins will be expressed in vitro, and their ability to bind to MTs and
              promote MT assembly in vitro will be examined.  In addition, epitope- and/or
              GFP-tagged versions of the zygotic form will be heterochronically expressed in
              oocytes and early embryos, to examine the function of this protein in vivo. 
              

The results of these studies will further our understanding of the role of
              XMAP215 in the spatial and temporal regulation of MT assembly and organization
              during oogenesis and early development in Xenopus, and will provide new
              insights into the role(s) that XMAP215 and/or its human homologues play more
              generally in the life of a cell or an organism.

