Title       : Factors Mediating Bacteria-induced, Postembryonic Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a9904601

Award Number: 9904601
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret J. McFall-Ngai mcfallng@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret J. McFall-Ngai mcfallng@hawaii.edu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Research on the developmental biology of animals has provided a rich data
base
              focused principally on how the interactions among the genes of an
individual
              orchestrate a program that  results in the ultimate form and
function
              characteristic of particular species.  In contrast, despite the
fact that all
              animals have, and perhaps require, the establishment and
maintenance of stable
              associations with bacteria, an understanding of how
these relationships
              integrate into the developmental programs of the host
animals remains
              rudimentary .  Broad questions include:  how does the
embryonic period prepare
              the tissues destined to interact with
environmental bacteria so that they
              successfully establish a relationship
with only the specific subset of
              bacteria that associate with a given
animal species?   What processes
              characterize the progression of the
interaction from the initiation phase to
              the mature, stable association?
And, what genes are co-opted from other
              developmental processes to mediate
these interactions, and what genes are
              unique?

The cooperative association between the sepiolid squid Euprymna
              scolopes
and its luminous bacterial partner Vibrio fischeri has proven to be
              an
effective model system with which to examine the 'dialogue' between the
              two
disparate genomes.  As with most animal species, there is no
              direct
interplay between the host squid and bacteria during
              embryogenesis.
Nonetheless, during this period a complex set of tissues arises
              in the
developing squid that readies the animal, upon hatching, to interact
              with
environmental V. fischeri cells.  Within minutes to hours
              following
hatching, the juvenile host is colonized, and this benign
              infection
triggers a dramatic morphogenesis of the host light organ.  Most
              notably,
an extensive, bacteria-induced program of cell death ensues that
              targets
specific host epithelial cells.  Most notably, bacteria-induced cell
              death
results in the loss of superficial epithelial structures that appear
              to
ensure a rapid, successful colonization of the nascent light
              organ.
Subsequently, the bacterial light organ forms those tissues essential
              for
the mature, functional symbiosis; i.e., tissues that will function
              to
modify the bacteria-produced light are elaborated that allow the host
              to
use the luminescence in its behavior.  These three morphological stages
              in
host organ development, i.e., embryogenesis, infection and maturation,
              are
coordinated with changes in gene expression of the bacterial
              symbiont.
During the infection, the host light organ environment induces the
              bacteria
to luminesce, lose their flagella, and decrease in size.

Taken
              together these complex developmental changes in both host and
symbiont suggest
              the presence of a coordinated, reciprocal interaction
similar to that
              described for the development of the leguminous plant
symbioses with
              nitrogen-fixing bacteria.  The work proposed herein will be
among the first
              studies that will examine the signals underlying such
reciprocal interactions
              in an animal-bacterial association.  The specific
objectives of the current
              project are to :  1) determine the identities of
the bacterial signals that
              induce cell death and inhibit further cell
proliferation of the host's
              superficial epithelium; 2) define the factors
that mediate bacterial
              attachment to crypt cells that are responsible for
crypt cell development;
              and, 3) identify the bacteria-induced host genes
that are differentially
              expressed during the early developmental stages of
the symbiosis.
