Title       : Mechanical Effects of Induced Changes in the Extracellular Matrix of Visceral
               Smooth Muscle Tissues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  2001   
File        : a9904610

Award Number: 9904610
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245475             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Meiss   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ramana M. Pidaparti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              IBN 9904610
Meiss
The solid tissues that make up the body of an animal consist
              of cells held together by connective tissue called the extracellular matrix. 
              This matrix allows tissues to hold their shape and prevents them from being
              damaged by external forces such as stretching or tearing. 
 
The
              extracellular matrix is especially important in smooth muscle tissue.  This
              type of muscle is responsible for moving food through the digestive tract, for
              delivering a baby, for controlling the flow of air in the lungs, and a host of
              other vital processes.  In smooth muscle tissues, the connections from cell to
              cell and throughout the tissue (the extracellular matrix) carry the force
              exerted by billions of muscle cells.  When individual cells contract, the
              matrix combines their forces into an overall muscle response which lets it
              carry out its function in the body.

Despite their importance relatively
              little is known about the details of these connections and how they influence
              the way a tissue works.  When the integrity of the matrix is disturbed, changes
              in function can result.  In this study, the matrix of smooth muscle tissues
              from the windpipe and uterus (of dogs and rats) will be subjected to the action
              of enzymes or natural processes that change its physical structure.  Precise
              mechanical measurements will be made of these changes, and electron microscopy
              will be used to examine the fine details.  Mathematical analysis of the
              experimental data will be used to provide an overall picture of smooth muscle
              function.

Learning more about the links between cells and overall muscle
              function will allow better understanding of vital processes such as labor and
              delivery, control of breathing, and other important functions, and it will give
              added insight into the many muscle-based processes that are necessary for daily
              life.

