Title       : The Internationalization of Economic Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9904480

Award Number: 9904480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265764             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene M. Grossman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Elhanan Helpman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An increasingly complex pattern of cross-border activities and transactions
              characterizes the international economic system, distinguishing it from the
              earlier predominance of arms length trade in raw materials and finished goods. 
              Over time, technological changes have enabled producers to divide their
              operations into ever finer segments, allowing greater specialization and
              efficiencies in each one. As the activities of production are further
              distinguished and segmented, it becomes increasingly possible to separate them
              geographically.   "Globalization" may be defined as the process by which
              segments of the production process are carried out in several or many different
              countries.  Globalization encompasses a variety of different organizational
              arrangements, including the 'outsourcing' of various components in arms-length
              relations with unrelated producers (trade), the establishment of foreign
              subsidiaries to undertake activities such as assembly and marketing (direct
              foreign investment), the entry into long-term and possibly exclusive
              contractual agreements with foreign entities who might produce under license or
              distribute a firms' products, and the establishment of joint ventures for R&D
              and/or production. Research is needed to bring these organizational choices
              into the corpus of international trade and investment theory.  This project
              develops models of international trade and foreign investment that are
              underpinned by a richer and more complete theory of the firm. Such models allow
              them to investigate when firms will decide to undertake activities 'in-house'
              and when they will 'outsource,' when the in-house activities will be performed
              locally versus in foreign locations, and when the outsourcing will be domestic
              and when through foreign trade. A model of trade with a more complete theory of
              the firm will also allow exploration of other organizational forms, such as
              long-term contracts, keiretsu  relationships, licensing arrangements, and joint
              ventures.  The investigators intend to draw heavily on recent advances in
              contract theory. By investigating the trade-off between the greater efficiency
              that arises when each party maintains control of its own special assets and the
              loss of efficiency that can result from dulled investment incentives in the
              face of imperfect contracting, contract theorists have developed a framework
              for investigating the determinants of the boundaries of the firm. Rarely,
              however, have these tools been applied to study vertical relations in the
              context of market equilibrium.

After introducing a richer theory of the firm
              into the corpus of general-equilibrium trade theory, the investigators will
              address a number of important questions. First, why has trade grown so much
              faster than income in the post-war period, and why has trade in components and
              producer services grown especially fast? Second, has globalization contributed
              to the declining relative wage of unskilled workers in the United States and
              elsewhere? Third, does the internationalization of economic activity hamper
              governments' ability to regulate industry? Finally, what are the economic
              motivations for the long-term supplier relationships seen in Japan, and to what
              extent do these relationships act as an implicit barrier to trade?

