Title       : Structure-Function Studies on the Sulfate Activating Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2002     
File        : a9904003

Award Number: 9904003
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irwin H. Segel ihsegel@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew J. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9904003
Segel, Fisher			
This research examines the structural features
              underlying the catalytic
and regulatory properties of the "sulfate activating
              enzymes", ATP
sulfurylase and APS kinase. These enzymes catalyze, in order,
              the first two
reactions in the assimilation of inorganic sulfate. The
              investigation focuses 
on the homo-hexameric ATP sulfurylase of Penicillium
              chrysogenum,
which is allosterically inhibited by PAPS. This feedback process
              is unique
to filamentous fungi, very likely reflecting the fact that PAPS is a
              major
branch point metabolite in fungi, but not in other organisms.
              The
allosteric domain of fungal ATP sulfurylase is located in the
              C-terminal
region of the polypeptide chain and has a high degree of homology
              with APS
kinase.  Experiments are designed to determine (a) the
              relationship
between the three dimensional structure of the allosteric domain
              and that
of true APS kinase and (b) the structural nature of the transition
              induced
by the allosteric effector.  P. chrysogenum APS kinase, a homodimer,
              is
also be studied in order to establish the structural basis of (a) the
              high
specificity for sulfonucleotides, (b) the compulsory ordered binding
              of
substrates (is it kinetic or structurally-based?), and (c) the
              relationship
between  subunit association and formation of the active
              site.

Sulfur is one of the six major elements that compose living cells.
              Key
biological molecules that contain sulfur include the protein amino
              acids,
cysteine and methionine, and the vitamins pantothenic acid, biotin,
              and
thiamin. Most of the sulfur on the Earth's surface (in the soil and
              oceans,
etc.) is present as inorganic sulfate. This project focuses on the
              structures 
and functions of ATP sulfurylase and APS kinase, enzymes that
              catalyze 
the first two reactions in the incorporation of inorganic sulfate
              into biomolecules. The enzymes will be purified from the filamentous fungus,
              Penicillium chrysogenum (which produces another important sulfur compound,
              penicillin.)



