Title       : Mechanics of Fine Branch Locomotion in Primates and Opossums An Experimental
               Ananlysis of Ecological Convergence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1999       
File        : a9904401

Award Number: 9904401
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55055              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Schmitt daniel_schmitt@baa.mc.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pierre Lemelin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              For over 100 years, it has been recognized that primates, including humans, show
              unusual gait patterns and force distribution compared to those of most other
              mammals.  Throughout this century, it has been assumed that these distinctive
              characteristics of primate movement as well as anatomical features such as
              grasping clawless hands, are the result of an initial adaptation of primates to
              moving and feeding on thin branches. Despite the intuitive appeal of this
              scenario, the mechanical relationships between primate features and arboreal
              lifestyle remain uncertain. This research project, to be carried out at the
              Duke University Vertebrate Movement Laboratory, is designed to test the link
              between primate anatomical and gait characteristics and thin branch locomotion.
               The researchers will compare hand and foot use, footfall patterns, and forces
              in small primates and opossums while they move and feed on arboreal supports. 
              These two groups were chosen because their natural habitat is made up of thin
              branches. As a result, they represent a way to verify if specific morphological
              and behavioral traits are necessary for such a lifestyle.  Data from this study
              will not only help us to understand early primate adaptations, but will also
              shed light on the evolution of specialized primate movement patterns, such as
              brachiation and striding bipedalism.
