Title       : Crystallography and Solute Effects in Fe-C-X Austenite Decomposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2001     
File        : a9904034

Award Number: 9904034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307340             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Shiflet gjs@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9904034
Shiflet

The project is an analytical and experimental examination of
              substitutional alloying element effects on austenite decomposition in Fe-C-X
              steels.  Two important transformations are examined.  The first is a study of
              pearlite, which is a lamellar product of eutectoid decomposition and probably
              the most familiar of all metal microstructures.  It forms in steels and also in
              a large number of non-ferrous alloys during transformation under isothermal,
              continuous cooling and forced-velocity growth conditions.  This work extends
              previous crystallographic considerations to encompass specific interactions
              with substitutional alloying elements, such as Mn.  Key questions that are
              addressed include whether the alloying element atomic diffusion path is indeed
              at the pearlite: austenite (mother phase) interphase boundary, as many
              researchers suggest, or is volume diffusion controlling the transformation
              kinetics.  One goal is to account for the inability of growth models to account
              for experimental kinetics over a range of temperatures.  The second area of
              investigation is the ferrite plus carbide transformation at intermediate
              temperatures where growth kinetics are severely slowed when X = Cr, Mo or W. 
              In these alloys there is a temperatures range from about 550 to 600 C where an
              extremely potent effect on growth kinetics occurs.  Indeed, all ferrite growth
              and nucleation can be halted for days. The same crystallographic and solute
              considerations of diffusion paths are applied to this transformation as for
              pearlite.  For both of these transformations extensive thermodynamic
              calculations are performed and correlated with experimental observations as to
              element partitioning and microstructure development.  The primary experimental
              approach includes making all ternary steels in house and performing heat
              treatments isothermally in lead baths.  Examination of the structure is with
              conventional tilting and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy
              (TEM).  Chemical partitioning studies are facilitated using a Focused Ion Beam
              milling machine recently acquired that allows any interphase boundary to be
              selected for preparation into an electron transparent foil for TEM.  Chemical
              measurements are collected in a Field Emission Gun TEM that is able to obtain
              data from areas less than one nanometer in diameter.  
%%%
Substitutional
              alloying elements are important in steel production because they can greatly
              increase the hardenablity of the alloy by delaying the formation of pearlite
              and ferrite at intermediate temperatures.  These elements can be strong carbide
              formers and can lead to strengthening in low and medium alloy steels.  Their
              behavior at the growing interphase boundary is important to understand and
              model.  The understanding of thermodynamics of the ferrite:austenite interface
              in Fe-C-X steels is essential in this very active research area.  Given the
              extensive advances in thermodynamic data bases and high resolution
              instrumentation, it is timely from both a scientific and industrial position,
              to pursue this important area of research.  
***

