Title       : Deterritorialized Ethnography: Gender Violence and the Anthropology of
               Globalization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9904441

Award Number: 9904441
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136191             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally E. Merry smerry@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      106 Central Street
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    781/283-1000

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9904441
Merry
	This project studies the global movement of violence against
              women as it has developed within the international human rights community as an
              instance of a deterritorialized community.  The researcher, a cultural
              anthropologist from Wellesley College, focuses on competing discourses about
              gender violence, including discrimination, inequality, or patriarchy as these
              have been debated among domestic and international activists, governmental
              organizations and UN agencies and conferences.  The study explores new ways of
              doing ethnography in a globalizing postcolonial world, where much of the
              phenomena of interest is "placeless" and information flows rapidly.  The
              distinctive contribution of ethnography has always been its focus on
              small-scale social units and the cultural meanings and practices which
              constitute them.  This project adopts this methodology to explore the new
              political and cultural configurations produced by globalization.  By examining
              both a local site embedded in global discourse and a deterritorialized global
              network of meetings and forms of communication, it takes an ethnographic
              approach to the intersections and overlaps of local and global places.  The
              investigator will study the discourse about gender violence in Hawaii and Fiji
              and in the deterritorialized space of UN deliberations and transnational NGOs. 
              The Hawaii research is already done, this project now goes further with a brief
              comparative study in Fiji, a setting similar to Hawaii, and participant
              observation at the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against
              Women, and the UN Commission on the Status of Women as well as other NGOs
              focused on gender violence.  This project will produce valuable information
              about a relatively new phenomenon, transnational cultural-political movements,
              as well as advance our understanding ofthe developing global reaction against
              gender violence.

