Title       : The Dynamics of Drug Policy Activism in the United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9904984

Award Number: 9904984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61678              (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert H. Haines haines@cortland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Cortland
	      P O BOX 2000
	      Cortland, NY  13045    607/753-2201

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will analyze organized efforts to reform drug control policy in the
              United States. Numerous critiques of current and past anti-drug policies have
              been published, as have critiques of specific alternative policy paradigms
              (e.g., interdiction, decriminalization, legalization, treatment and
              prevention). Thus far, however, no investigator has approached drug policy
              reform as a social movement and examined its organizational, strategic and
              rhetorical properties in a relatively dispassionate manner. The first objective
              of this project is to trace the emergence of drug policy reform movement (DPRM)
              organizations in the United States since 1970. A further objective is to
              measure their successes and failures in mobilizing human and material resources
              and to assess the degree of political legitimacy they have attained. Finally,
              this study will examine several features of political contention over drug
              policy which, based upon preliminary work by the principle investigator, appear
              to be potentially important for its outcome. One of these is the "structure" of
              drug issues, i.e., the degree to which positions on drug abuse and drug policy
              cross conventional political and social boundaries. Another is the coexistence
              of multiple and contradictory factions within drug policy groups. A third
              specific analytic focus of the investigation is the role of "wild card units"
              in the DPR movement, i.e., groups whose participation is solicited because it
              might serve to neutralize derogatory stereotypes and caricatures of reformers
              by their opponents.
