Title       : Molecular Mechanisms of Cell Volume Signal Transduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2001     
File        : a9904605

Award Number: 9904605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338840             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christian Y. Lytle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Animal cells must counteract osmotic stresses which continually threaten their
              volume and integrity.  A major goal is to understand how animal cells sense
              perturbations in their fluid volume and then activate membrane transporters
              that restore cell solute and water content.  Volume appears to be detected by a
              mechanism that transmits information on intracellular macromolecular crowding
              and ionic strength to separate shrinkage-activated and swelling-activated
              transporters via protein phosphorylation.  One prominent mechanism for volume
              recovery after cell shrinkage is Na-K-2Cl cotransport (NKCC).  The NKCC-1
              membrane transporter mediates salt and water uptake when phosphorylated by a
              poorly characterized Ser/Thr protein kinase called CT-kinase.  Seconds after
              cell shrinkage, CT-kinase is activated, apparently when phosphorylated by
              another kinase of unknown identity. As a first step towards understanding this
              signaling system, CT-kinase will be isolated, and probes based on its peptide
              sequence will be used to identify cDNA clones from mouse 3T3 cells. Fusion
              proteins and antibodies will then be generated to facilitate studies on the
              requirements for activation of CT-kinase in intact cells.  The role of
              CT-kinase in cell volume perception and regulation will be evaluated in cells
              overexpressing active or inactive forms of the enzyme.  The effect of
              macromolecular crowding agents, ionic strength, and chloride concentration on
              CT-kinase activity and phosphorylation will be tested using in vivo and in
              vitro experimental systems.  A central aim is to evaluate the unifying theory
              that CT-kinase coordinately regulates both shrinkage-activated and
              swelling-activated ion transporters.  While the focus of this project will be
              CT-kinase and its regulation of NKCC1, the findings are likely to prove
              applicable to other protein kinases important in cellular responses to osmotic
              stress.
 

