Title       : Juvenile Hormone and the Evolution of Limb Patterning in Insect Metamorphosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1999      
File        : a9904959

Award Number: 9904959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Truman jwt@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn M. Riddiford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The project examines the role of  juvenile hormone (JH) in the evolution
              of
metamorphosis and of the larval stage in insects.   A key finding is
              that
in embryos of basal insect groups,  JH suppresses the growth of
              embryonic
primordia and induces their precocious maturation.   In insects
              with
complete metamorphosis, by contrast, JH treatment has little effect
              on
embryonic development but later application can suppress the resumption
              of
"embryonic" growth that is the prelude to metamorphosis.   An
              advancement
in JH secretion during embryogenesis of the latter insects may
              have
provided a mechanism by which a late embryonic instar, the pronymph,
              was
modified to become an active, feeding larval stage characteristic
              of
insects with complete metamorphosis.
The proposal examines the effects of
              JH on the expression of  three genes
involved in proximal-distal (P-D)
              patterning of the leg: Distal-less (Dll),
dachshund (dac), and rotund (rn). 
              The objectives are: 1) to determine if
the spatial and temporal expression of
              P-D patterning genes seen in
developing leg imaginal discs in Drosophila  also
              occurs during the
patterning of the embryonic leg in a more basal insect such
              as the
grasshoppers, Schistocerca americana;   2)  test whether  JH treatment
              to
these embryos during limb formation  results in a truncation or
              alteration
in P-D gene expression?   3) examine P-D gene expression in embryos
              of the
moth, Manduca sexta, to determine if the novel leg of the caterpiller
              is
associated with a novel (truncated?) program of P-D gene expression;
              4)
examine the transition in P-D gene expression during metamorphosis and
              its
sensitivity to juvenile hormone treatment.

