Title       : Investigation of Mechanisms of Surfactant-Induced Hydraulic Conductivity Changes
               in Soil Flushing Operations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1999 
File        : a9904056

Award Number: 9904056
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131683             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin H. Gardner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to learn the fundamental mechanisms that
              produce a change of hydraulic conductivity in soil when treated with
              surfactants and to develop a mathematical model that can be used by scientists
              and engineers to predict the magnitude and direction of hydraulic conductivity
              change upon treatment of a particular soil with a specific surfactant and dose.
               The roles of clay content and type,  of surfactant type and concentration and
              of soil structure will be investigated in order to advance fundamental
              understanding and predictive capabilities applicable for any soil-surfactant
              system.  Two nonionic and one anionic surfactants will be examined in each of
              three phases.  The first two phases will focus on understanding the four
              identified mechanisms by which hydraulic conductivity is altered.  The first
              phase will investigate direct physical effects on fluid or soil media and
              induced secondary chemical reactions; the second phase will investigate the
              destruction of soil aggregate and production of fines, and surfactant-clay
              interactions.  The third phase is designed to examine combinations of variables
              in artificial soils to understand the interrelationships among the individual
              mechanisms and to assess the predictive abilities developed in the first two
              phases.  In addition, a primary goal of the third phase will be the development
              of a mathematical tool capable of describing the observations of the
              experimental work, from which predictive capabilities will be developed.  The
              proposed project has the potential of making significant contributions to the
              basic science and understanding of soil-surfactant interaction and to the
              application of that knowledge to real-world remediation projects.
