Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Study of Factors Affecting Chemical Composition
               of Groundwater in the Nile Delta
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9904791

Award Number: 9904791
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Sharp jmsharp@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
Program Ref : 1325,5944,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9904791
Sharp

Description:  This award is for support of a joint research
              project by Dr. John M. Sharp, and Dr. Philip Bennett, Department of Geological
              Sciences, the University of Texas, Austin, Texas and Dr. Abdel Hamid Noweir and
              Dr. Ahmed El-Shishtawy, Geology Department, Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt. 
              These scientists will conduct geological and geochemical studies to assess the
              influence of superficial deposits on groundwater quality in the central area of
              the Nile Delta.  They plan to evaluate the levels and distribution of trace
              elements in the groundwater.  Specific attention will be paid to trace elements
              which affect the quality of water for human consumption.   Among the elements
              to be studied are Eh and Fe2+  The hypothesis is that water quality
              characteristics are related to specific minerals, organic matter, and the
              geochemical environment in strategraphic units or zones, that mapping of
              hydrostrategraphic units by wells and geophysics can delineate these zones, and
              that a program can be developed to provide potable water.  In the first part of
              the project the Egyptian team will conduct sampling and analysis of collected
              samples of groundwater from areas of specific geological formations.  In the
              second part of the project detailed analysis of the samples will characterize
              the hydrogeological properties of the surficial deposits.  The analysis will
              include grain size distribution, permeability, transmissivity, Attenberg Limits
              of fine-grained cuttings, SEM, X-ray diffraction and other petrographic
              analyses.  

Scope:  This award will allow US scientists to collaborate with
              Egyptian scientists in a project that deals with an important problem.  Water
              use in many developing, and also in developed, countries is increasingly
              dependent on the availability of potable groundwater.  This in turn is
              dependent on the geological conditions, namely mineralogy of the region as well
              as the water movement.  The importance of the study to the people living within
              the Nile Delta is clear.  The topic is important as it involves looking at
              rocks and at water chemistry together.  Sharp is considered a leading
              hydrogeologist, and Bennett is a well-known geochemist.  The knowledge-base
              generated will be very important to the people of Egypt, as growing populations
              put increasing pressure on water supplies, and rising sea levels cause
              salt-water intrusion into the freshwater zone.  It is expected that articles
              suitable for publication in international science journals will be forthcoming.
               This proposal meets the INT objective of supporting US-foreign scientific
              collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.

