Title       : "Does Egg Viability Constrain the Onset of Incubation in Birds? An Experimental
               Analysis using a Tropical Climate Gradient"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a9904754

Award Number: 9904754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270127             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Beissinger beis@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Birds are unique among vertebrates because they can control the hatching
              intervals of their eggs by determining when to start incubating them.  However,
              many avian parents choose an incubation strategy that causes their eggs to
              hatch asynchronously, which often leads to the death of younger chicks. 
              Researchers have rarely considered how air temperature affects the survival of
              eggs before they are incubated (the Egg Viability Hypothesis).  Eggs do not
              develop below 24 degrees C and must be warmed by a parent to 36 degrees to
              ensure proper development.  Abnormal development of embryos leading to death is
              caused by prolonged exposure of eggs to intermediate temperatures (27
              degrees-35 degreesC).

This 3-year study employs a natural climate gradient
              along the slope of a tropical mountain in Puerto Rico to test the Egg Viability
              Hypothesis using eggs of the Pearly-eyed Thrasher (Margarops fuscatus), a
              species that nests in cavities (and nest boxes) throughout the mountain.  The
              PI will move unincubated eggs up and down the mountain to expose them to
              different temperature regimes, and measure their subsequent hatching success. 
              The PI will also place thrasher eggs in incubators to expose them to controlled
              changes in temperature that parallel temperature changes along the mountain. 
              Finally, the PI will use video cameras and temperature recorders to examine
              whether thrashers vary the onset of incubation across this gradient.  

This
              will be the first study to examine the factors that affect the hatching success
              of bird eggs by experimentally exposing them to a critical set of temperatures
              using a natural thermal regime.  A decline in the hatching success of
              unincubated eggs may have implications for understanding why tropical birds lay
              few eggs than temperate counterparts and what might happen to the hatching
              success of their eggs from global warming.


