Title       : GOALI: Microstructure and Ultrastructure of Ceramic-substrate and
               Ceramic-apposed Bone Interfaces in Coated Prosthetic Implants for Joint
               Arthroplasty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a9904046

Award Number: 9904046
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278696             (Estimated)
Investigator: L. W. Hobbs   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon Hunter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Myron Spector  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1504,5342,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9904046
Hobbs
This program is a group research effort, involving investigators
              at three institutions (Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Brigham & Women's
              Hospital, Boston, and Smith & Nephew, Inc. Orthopaedics Division, Memphis, TN),
              which aims to improve fundamental understanding of the process bio-integration
              of coated orthopaedic devices, such as hip and knee replacement prostheses
              which are implanted into some 250,000 patients yearly in the U.S. alone, and
              the adherence of coatings to the underlying metal alloy of the prosthesis. 
              Coatings such as the calcium phosphate compound hydroxyapatite encourage the
              bonding of bone to such osteo-implants, while deliberately grown oxidation
              scales such as zirconium oxide provide superior wear properties in joint
              locations.  Mechanical failure of such coatings can occur at the coating/bone
              interface or at the coating/alloy interface (or nearby within the coating
              itself), either loosening the implant or contributing irritating wear
              particles.  

The program comprises an investigation of the integrity of both
              interfaces, in the first case focusing on bone-bonding to bioactive
              hydroxyapatite coatings deposited by both plasma spraying and ion-beam assisted
              deposition methods, with primary application to cementless hip-replacement
              prostheses, and in the second on the adhesion of hard-wearing zirconia
              oxidation scales to Zr-Nb alloy components, of primary interest in total knee
              replacements.  Both in vivo  (live) implantations into dog femurs and tibiae
              for times between 3 hours to 10 days and in vitro  (test tube) experiments in
              appropriate simulated culture fluid are being pursued.

The primary
              investigative tool is high-resolution electron microscopy, providing
              high-resolution structural and chemical information about the coatings and
              interfaces and the progress of bone mineralization at coating surfaces. 
              Labeling techniques are being employed on the same specimens to identify
              various proteins which serve as precursors to bone formation  These techniques
              are being supplemented by X-ray determinations of coating stress states and
              measurement of coating surface roughnesses.



