Title       : Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Sex Determination in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9904565

Award Number: 9904565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen K. Salz hks@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long term goal of this work is to understand the molecular mechanisms that
              regulate alternative RNA splicing in a multicellular organism. The question of
              how splicing is regulated is particularly important because alternative
              splicing has proven to be a common means of regulating gene expression. Here
              the sex-specific splicing regulation of the Drosophila sex determination gene
              Sex-lethal (Sxl) is used as a model system. In this award, the focus is on the
              role of the sans-fille (snf) gene in promoting female-specific splicing of the
              Sxl pre-mRNA. Genetic studies have established that the non-sex specific snf
              gene product functions with the female-specific SXL RNA binding protein to
              direct splicing of the Sxl pre-mRNA. Remarkably, cloning of the snf gene
              identified it as the homolog of two well studied human spliceosomal proteins,
              UlA and U2B". Like UlA, SNF is a Ul snRNP protein. And, like U2B", SNF is a U2
              snRNP protein.s.  This provides the first example of an snRNP protein that
              plays a role in regulating RNA splicing.  The specific aims are:  1.  Determine
              if SNF's presence in the U2 snRNP is both necessary & sufficient for Sxl
              splicing regulation.  We have established that the snf5MER  allele, encodes a
              mutant protein that preferentially incorporates in the Ul snRNP and is not
              detected in the U2 snRNP in vivo. Our characterization of this mutant phenotype
              is consistent with the hypothesis that SNF's role Sxl splicing regulation
              requires that it be a component of the U2 snRNP. Here we propose to: a)
              Continue our biochemical characterization of the snf5MER allele to establish
              which properties of the protein are necessary for its function in Sxl splicing
              regulation.b) Test the hypothesis that SNF's presence in the U2 snRNP is
              sufficient for Sxl splicing regulation by making directed snf mutations that
              are predicted to preferentially incorporates into the U2 snRNP's and be left
              out of U1 snRNPs. If U2 snRNP incorporation is sufficient then we expect that
              these new mutant snf alleles will not be defective in Sxl splicing regulation. 
              2. Identify the protein domains of SNF necessary for Sxl splicing regulation.
              We have established that the C-terminal RRM, while not essential for snf+
              function can compensate for mutations in the N-termin`us. Preliminary studies,
              however, suggest that the N-terminal RRM alone is not sufficient for snf+
              function. Here we propose to: Identify critical functional domains of the
              protein by making transgenic animals that express the minimum N-terminal
              sequences sufficient for both snf's vital function and its sex determination
              function. As part of this characterization, we will need to generate antibodies
              that recognize the N-terminal end of the protein and use these antibodies to
              determine whether the new SNF mutant proteins are incorporated into Ul and/or
              U2 snRNPs.  3. Identify and analyze other gene products that function in Sxl
              splicing autoregulation. To continue to elucidate the mechanism by which Sxl
              splicing is regulated, we propose to identify other critical gene products that
              function with SNF in regulating Sxl splicing. To accomplish this: a) we have
              used a dosage-sensitive modifier assay to survey known splicing factors and we
              have identified U2AF35 and hel (the UAP56 homolog) as likely players in Sxl
              splicing regulation. In mammalian cells, both of these gene products are
              required for the recruitment of the U2 snRNP to the pre-mRNA, suggesting that
              the genetic interaction is due to a direct effect on Sxl splicing. Here we
              propose to test this hypothesis by determining if either or both these proteins
              interact with SNF, either directly or indirectly, as a member of the SXL
              containing complex. b) we are using the yeast two-hybrid system to identify
              proteins that interact with SNF. We will confirm the in vivo relevance of these
              interactions by both biochemical assays and genetic interaction tests.

The
              studies described in this award exploit the power of Drosophila genetics to
              gained from the experiments in this award will provide critical information on
              two understand the function of this conserved snRNP protein in vivo. The
              information fronts. First, we will add to our understanding of how a general
              splicing factor (SNF) and a tissue-specific splicing factor (SXL) function
              together to control RNA splicing. Second, we will contribute to our overall
              understanding of how the different protein components of the spliceosome
              contribute to the accuracy of splicing. Given the evolutionary conservation of
              the components of the RNA splicing machinery, the information gained from our
              studies will be directy applicable to mammalian systems and will be a
              significant advance in our understanding of regulated pre-mRNA splicing.

