Title       : Computational Intelligence: Adaptive Critics for Controller Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1999      
File        : a9904378

Award Number: 9904378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300205             (Estimated)
Investigator: George G. Lendaris lendaris@sysc.pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9904378
Lendaris

	The overall objective of this work is to make substantive
              contribution to advancing the art and
practice of applying Adaptive Critic
              (AC) methods to the designing of neural network controllers.
Attention is
              given to considerations for both, off-line and on line controller's design;
              most significant to potential engineering applications is the case of on-line
              learning, wherein the controller's design is modified while serving its role as
              a controller. Such on-line capability is useful
in at least two situations: 1)
               When a controller designed off-line is only approximately correct, and the
              controller's design is refined while it is functioning on-line; and 2) even
              when a high-quality controller is designed off-line to start with, substantive
              changes occur in the plant or environment during operation, thus requiring a
              refinement to the controller design (so it can "adapt").  One focus of the
              research is to characterize aspects of the control problem from the perspective
              of learnability-- that is, are certain situations more or less learnable than
              others; is there a definable sequence of sub-tasks that makes the learning
              process more likely achievable; in what way do the system dynamics enter into
              the accomplishment of the learning task; etc.
	Another research focus is to
              explore the roles played by models in the various aspects of the controller
              design process. The issues here include a) qualitative requirements on model(s)
              used for simulating the plant during off-line training of the (initial)
              controller, and b) qualitative requirements on model(s) used for obtaining the
              partial derivatives required during the controller and critic training
              procedure.
	The above and a number of other research questions are explored
              and results brought together in studying and developing methods to facilitate
              the on-line application of the Adaptive Critic methods of "learning" to
              accomplish (approximately) optimal controller design.  
	This research methods
              are mostly based on mathematical modeling and theorizing of the under-lying
              ideas, mostly based on dynamical systems formalisms, and experimental
              explorations are carried out on high-speed computers that simulate the
              situations being explored.
	The research is carried out in the context of a
              new Computational Intelligence Laboratory being
established at Portland State
              University. This Laboratory formalizes research that has been con-
ducted over
              the past 10 years in the interdisciplinary Systems Science Ph.D. Program, and
              is
intended to foster increased collaboration among researchers from other
              disciplines and immersion of graduate students in such an interdisciplinary
              research context.
***

