Title       : Catalytic and Conformational Stability Improvement of Organophosphorus Hydrolase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a9904635

Award Number: 9904635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379692             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Wild   (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet K. Grimsley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Agricul Exp Sta
	      The Agriculture Program
	      College Station, TX  778432147    979/845-4761

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1108,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9904635  
Wild

 The widespread use of organophosphorus (OP) neurotoxins
              poses an environmental challenge for remediation.  The organophosphate
              degrading gene of Pseudomonas diminuta encodes the metalloenzyme
              organophosphorus hydrolase (OPH) which catalyzes the breakdown of OP
              neurotoxins including the phosphorus-fluorine bond of Soman and Sarin, and the
              phosphothioates such as VX, although at very low rates.  The ability to improve
              the rate of  P-S bond hydrolysis will have implications in bioremediation of
              extremely toxic neurotoxins.  The broad substrate specificity and hydrolytic
              efficiency (108-109 s-1M-1 for paraoxon) make OPH suitable for bioremediation
              technologies. The rate of phosphothioate bond hydrolysis has been improved up
              to thirty-fold using site-directed mutagenesis.  However, these enzymes show
              significant reductions in conformational stability.  This research has three
              goals:  1) Further enhancement of enzyme activity and specificity.  2)
              Determination of the three-dimensional structure of these enzymes.  3)
              Investigation of the thermodynamic stability of catalytically important
              variants and modification of enzyme properties for enhanced stability.
              Site-specific mutagenesis, protein crystallography and equilibrium and thermal
              denaturation studies are the basic techniques used.  The requirement for new
              remediation technologies and the remarkable characteristics of OPH combine to
              form a biochemical framework for the design of new and improved OPH
              enzymes.

Federal, state, and local authorities are concerned about the use
              of nerve agents in acts of domestic terrorism and are desperately searching for
              useful countermeasures.  A remarkable enzyme isolated from a common soil
              bacterium, Pseudomonas diminuta, can detoxify some of the most deadly chemical
              warfare agents, including VX and Sarin, the nerve agent used in the Tokyo
              subway incident.  However, the enzyme is not very efficient in degrading these
              compounds.  This research is tailored to significantly enhance the catalytic
              capability of OPH for organophosphorus neurotoxins suitable for bioremediation
              technologies.


