Title       : Molecular Basis of Substrate Specificity, Conformational Changes, and Catalytic
               Efficiency in Medium Chain Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a9904416

Award Number: 9904416
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: D. K. Srivastava dk.srivastava@ndsu.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9904416
Srivastava
The long term goal of this research is to investigate the
              molecular basis of substrate specificity, conformational changes, and catalysis
              in recombinant human liver medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD). The
              specific aims are: (A) To determine the roles of fatty acid and coenzyme-A
              fragments of acyl-CoAs in modulating the catalytic efficiency and substrate
              specificity of the enzyme, and (B) To establish a detailed mechanistic
              description of the roles of  dynamics of the protein conformational transitions
              on the electronic structures of the enzyme-bound ligands, and the enzyme
              catalysis. Medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (MCAD) is a flavoenzyme, which
              catalyzes the a-b dehydrogenation of acyl-CoA substrates during the
              mitochondrial b-oxidative pathway. Preliminary spectroscopic, kinetic,
              thermodynamic, and model building studies have led to the following hypotheses:
              (i) The fatty acid and coenzyme-A fragments of acyl-CoAs coordinate in
              stabilizing the ground and transition state structures during the enzyme
              catalysis, and (ii) The enzyme-ligand interactions and the enzyme catalysis
              proceed via obligatory changes in the protein conformation. These hypotheses
              will be tested via the use of  uv/visible spectroscopy, steady-state and rapid
              kinetics, isothermal titration microcalorimetry, and computergraphic model
              building techniques, involving the wild-type and selected site-specific
              mutations of  MCAD.  This award provides research facilities and training to 3
              graduate students, who are currently working in the PI's laboratory toward
              obtaining their Ph.D./M.S. degrees. 

This research will unravel several
              intrinsic features of the role of the protein structures in modulating
              functions. Despite the availability of the 3-dimensional structures of several
              proteins, the role of the molecular forces responsible for steering and
              immobilizing different types of ligands at their cognate protein sites during
              the course of binding and catalysis is not clearly understood. Such properties
              are of utmost importance in modern biotechnology, particularly from the point
              of view of designing novel enzymes, pesticides, and other commercially valuable
              products.  Preliminary data from the principal investigator's laboratory have
              led to the suggestion that medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (an enzyme
              responsible for the breakdown of fatty acids to generate energy) is one of a
              class of unique enzymes, which exhibit a fairly broad range of substrate
              specificity and coordinate among different regions of the substrate structures.
              These features provide an opportunity to use medium chain acyl-CoA
              dehydrogenase as a model system for delineating the sequence of events involved
              during the course of ligand binding and catalysis among enzymes in general.
              


