Title       : Characterization of Salicylic Acid-Binding Proteins in Plant Defense Responses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2000     
File        : a9904660

Award Number: 9904660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103309             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel F. Klessig   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1114,1132,1136,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plant disease has a major negative impact on food and fiber production. 
              Currently, worldwide crop losses due to disease alone are estimated to exceed
              $100 billion annually, despite the extensive use of potentially toxic
              fungicides and pesticides.  A variety of alternative strategies are being
              developed to protect plants against disease.  One approach is to induce the
              plant's own natural defenses.  This strategy is attractive since it can provide
              protection against a broad spectrum of pathogens.  Broad-spectrum resistance to
              a wide array of pathogens, known as systemic acquired resistance (SAR), can be
              activated by infection with a given pathogen or treatment with SAR-inducing
              chemicals such as salicylic acid (SA) and its synthetic functional analogues,
              INA or BTH.  In addition, while the initial perception and first few steps of
              the resistance signaling pathway(s) are probably distinct for each
              pathogen-plant interaction, these signals are thought to converge on a limited
              set of defense pathways.  Thus, identification and characterization of the
              components involved in these common pathways should provide an opportunity to
              manipulate resistance to a broad spectrum of pathogens.  Furthermore, the
              development of strategies that control disease by manipulating endogenous plant
              defense responses will be very important for sustaining agricultural production
              and improving our environment and health.

It is now well established that SA
              plays a key role(s) in the development of resistance in many, but not all,
              plant-pathogen systems.  While our understanding of SA function(s) in disease
              resistance is far from complete, it is becoming increasingly clear that its
              role(s) is complex.  Initially, SA was shown to activate a subset of defense
              genes (such as the PR-1, PR-2, and PR-5) and enhance disease resistance.  More
              recently, it has been shown to potentiate activation of a variety of defense
              responses by a second stimulus.  Furthermore, there is mounting evidence for a
              self-amplification loop involving H2O2 accumulation, SA synthesis, and host
              cell death.  This increase in the complexity of SA function(s) in defense is
              matched by the discovery in tobacco of multiple proteins with which SA
              interacts.  An understanding of SA function(s) in defense against microbial
              pathogens will require the identification and characterization of these
              proteins.

Characterization of SA effector proteins is likely to have
              implications beyond plant disease resistance.  For example, it recently has
              been demonstrated that several plant genes controlling resistance to nematodes
              and insects share motifs, such as leucine rich repeats and nucleotide binding
              sites, with resistance genes for viral, bacterial and fungal pathogens.  Thus,
              deciphering the SA-mediated signal transduction pathway(s) initiated by
              microbial pathogens is likely to impact studies on plant responses to nematodes
              and insects.  Furthermore, there is increasing evidence that SAR shares many
              similarities to innate immunity in vertebrates and invertebrates and, thus,
              probably evolved from a primordial defense system present in the common
              ancestor to plants and animals.  Elucidating the molecular mechanism(s) of
              disease resistance in plants therefore is likely to impact veterinary and human
              medicine.

The major objective of this project is to complete purification of
              the chloroplastic SABP3 and the mitochondrial SABP4 and clone their
              corresponding genes.  Characterization of these two proteins and their encoding
              genes will also be initiated.  The properties and functions of these two SABPs
              will also be compared to those of SABP2, which is a lower abundance protein
              with high affinity for SA.  These comparative analyses should enhance our
              understanding of how different SA effector proteins mediate SA's complex role
              in disease resistance.

Standard biochemical, molecular and genetic
              approaches will be used.  Protein purification will involve conventional ion
              exchange, reverse-phase and gel filtration chromatography as well as affinity
              chromatography with a SA analogue.  Cloning will be based on peptide sequences
              of the purified proteins and will utilize degenerate oligonucleotide primers
              for PCR amplification.  The copy number, distribution and expression pattern of
              genes for SABP3 and SABP4 will be determined as well as their subcellular
              location.  A key aim is to determine function of the SABPs.  The PVX-based gene
              silencing method pioneered by David Baulcombe's group will be employed for
              functional studies of both proteins.  In addition, sense and antisense SABP3
              and SABP4 transgenic tobacco will be constructed.  Once the Arabidopsis SABP3
              (or SABP4) ortholog has been obtained, it will be used not only to generate
              SABP3 (or SABP4) over- and underexpressing transgenic Arabidopsis but also to
              screen for SABP3 (or SABP4) mutants in libraries of insertion mutants of
              Arabidopsis using a PCR-based approach.

