Title       : The Role of Eag in Motor Pattern Generation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a9904017

Award Number: 9904017
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276191             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah J. Baro   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Baro Abstract
#99-04017

Walking, chewing, breathing, and scratching are
              motor behaviors that require no thought.  From the individual's point of view,
              these processes are automatic.  However, something is planning these very
              precise movements, and that something is a central pattern generator (CPG).	A
              CPG is a neural circuit that drives a set of muscles to perform a motor task. 
              The output o the neural circuit is adaptively reconfigured to meet the needs of
              the situation at hand.  For example, depending upon the circumstances, a walk
              can change to a run, chewing can be modified to blowing bubbles, slow deep
              breaths may turn into gasps.  CPGs vary in size and complexity depending upon
              the motor behavior.  One CPG, the pyloric network, is a leading model system
              for understanding how neural components of the circuits generate rhythmic
              behaviors.  The motor task, the motor output, the neuronal components of the
              circuits, their interaction, and their modulation have been extremely well
              characterized in this system.  Previous work indicates that each of the neurons
              in the changing the phenotypes of these neurons.  The purpose of this grant is
              to examine the molecular mechanisms that establish and modulate the unique
              phenotypes; the idea being that this understanding will elucidate how the
              neurons can continuously adapt their properties to a changing environment. 
              Specifically this grant is concerned with defining the mechanisms responsible
              for the diversity and modulation of a single property found in all cells, the
              transient potassium current (A-current).  Each cell type has a unique
              A-current, despite the fact that the shal gene encodes the A-channels that
              mediate the A-current in every cell.  One mechanism that cold account for
              A-current diversity is differential, cell-specific protein interactions with
              the A-channel.  One protein that is known to interact with A-channels is eag. 
              In this grant the role of eag subunit interactions in creating A-current
              diversity is explored.

