Title       : Dissertation Research: Food Consumption Patterns of Urban Poor Households in the
               Dominican Republic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9904222

Award Number: 9904222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmen A. Ferradas ferrada@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9904222
Ferradas  /  Rosing
	This project supports the dissertation research
              of an anthropology student from the State University of New York, Binghamton.  
              The project will examine how neo-liberal policies and changes in global
              agro-food systems are affecting food procurement and consumption practices
              among low income residents of Santiago, Dominican Republic.  Changing wage
              labor opportunities have fostered the growth of new residential communities in
              the urban region, far from the traditional markets. The student will study how
              residents of these neighborhoods  procure and consume nutritionally and
              culturally important foods.  Changes in the use of credit for food and in the
              degree of dependence on non-market foods will be analyzed.  Research will
              combine study of intra- and inter-household social relations with analysis of
              the larger processes that structure the flow of staple foods.  The project
              includes household surveys, in-depth household case studies, and tracking
              staple foods through consumption, distribution, to their source of production. 
              This research is important because it will advance our understanding of how
              changing global/national food systems impact local food procurement and
              consumption. The study will contribute important empirical data for
              policy-makers, urban planners, and social workers concerned about the urban
              poor in a global economy.  In addition the project supports the training of a
              young social scientist, and advances our knowledge of this important area of
              the world. 

