Title       : 1999 NSF Information and Data Management Workshop: Research Agenda for the 21st
               Century -- IDM99
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1999      
File        : a9904998

Award Number: 9904998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45614              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfonso F. Cardenas cardenas@cs.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The IDM99 Workshop is supported by the interinstitutional grants IIS-9904998,
              Alfonso Cardenas, UCLA and IIS-9905026, Edward Fox, Virginia Polytechnic
              Institute. The workshop is held March 7-9, 1999 at the University of
              California, Los Angeles. The recent advances in computer and network
              technologies and storage, the explosion of publishing, and the vast increase in
              data availability from such sources as satellites, that have enabled the
              emergence of an unprecedented number of new computer applications, present a
              new challenge to the ways data and information are used and managed. This
              challenge will shape both the research agenda as well as the technology to be
              developed for the 21st century. The objective of the workshop is to bring
              together the PIs and Co-PIs currently funded by the Information and Data
              Management Program (IDM) of the National Science Foundation as representatives
              of two communities, that is, information management (often referred to as
              information retrieval) and data management (often referred to as database
              management), along with selected industry and government invitees, to: (1)
              cooperatively (a) identify the problems that are fundamental in making progress
              toward this new challenge; (b) specify areas where major breakthroughs appear
              possible; (c) identify needed collaborations (e.g., inter-disciplinary,
              academic-industry); and (d) identify research initiatives and facilities needed
              to meet this and future challenges; (2) share, provide demonstrations and
              interact with each other on the objectives, contributions and challenges of
              major research activities funded by the IDM and explore fruitful collaboration
              and synergism; and (3) provide an opportunity to NSF, other funding agencies,
              and industry representatives to learn more about the current research efforts
              and successes of projects funded by IDM, and as well as to share their
              highlights and concerns. The workshop will generate proceedings, that include
              reports on all projects currently funded by IDM, which will be widely
              disseminated in both hard copy and electronic form on the Web. The project
              reports are searchable by different criteria and provide information relevant
              to NSF's GPRA Performance Plan Outcome Goals (e.g., connections between
              discoveries and their use in service to society). Further, the findings of the
              workshop will be presented in a report that will help in formulating future
              directions of research in information and data management and will suggest
              promising modalities of research in academia and industry with an aim to foster
              innovation as well as technology transfer. The workshop Web site
              (http://www.cs.ucla.edu/csd/IDM99) will also include links to other relevant
              material. 
