Title       : NMR Structures of Peptides Bound to Large Proteins: Transferred-NOESY Test Beds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9904009

Award Number: 9904009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Dratz dratz@chemistry.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dratz
MCB 9904009

Title: NMR Structures of Peptides Bound to Large Proteins:
              Transferred
NOESY Test Beds

1. Technical 

The objectives of this study
              are to improve and validate
transferred-NOESY (Tr-NOESY) NMR methods to
              determine the 3D structures
and mobilities of peptides bound to large proteins
              and to determine
protein surface structures, using antibody imprints for cases
               where the
proteins of interest are available in small amounts or cannot be
              purified
for structural studies.  The Tr-NOESY approach appears to be a
              rather
general method for studying the structures of protein-bound ligands if
              the
complexes are not excessively strong. However,  the level of accuracy
              of
the structures obtainable from Tr-NOESY is not clear. 
              Peptide-protein
complexes, whose structures are known (biotin-mimetic peptides
              bound to
streptavidin), and protein surfaces that are known from x-ray
              diffraction
(actin surface and peptide epitopes bound to anti-actin
              antibodies), are
used as test beds to assess Tr-NOESY methods.  Improvements
              will
include: (1) Increasing the accuracy of protein-bound peptide
              structures
by removing interferences from protein-peptide cross relaxation
              and
increasing the number of distance constraints with improved
              resolution,
using (uniform biosynthetic) 13C and 15N labeling of peptides
              and
magnetization exchange network edited transferred-NOESY
              (MENE-Tr-NOESY).
(2) Assessing local motion in the bound peptides
              qualitatively by
measurement of  transferred-NOESY as a function of the NMR
              frequency.  (3)
Obtaining more accurate distance constraints, corrected for
              differences in
local motion of the bound peptides, using heteronuclear
              relaxation data.
(4) Employing 3D Tr-NOESY/Tr-NOESY and magnetization exchange
              network
edited MENE-Tr-NOESY/MENE-Tr-NOESY to obtain more numerous and
              accurate
constraints on protein-bound structures.  These methods are expected
              to have the
capability to provide structures as accurately as high quality
              x-ray
diffraction analysis.


2. Non-technical 

	Biological signaling
              and specific adhesion are crucial for
regulation of cells and organisms and
              for guiding proper growth and
development of multicellular organisms.  Such
              mechanisms are carried out
by coupling between proteins in webs of
              protein-protein interactions, that
provide amplification and control points. 
              Revealing the structures of the
interacting proteins can tremendously enhance
              understanding of biological
mechanisms.  However, most of the interacting
              proteins have not been
crystallized for structure determination by x-ray
              diffraction and are too
large for effective structure determination by nuclear
              magnetic resonance
(NMR).  Protein-protein interactions that are responsible
              for biological
control mechanisms are reversible and typically occur using a
              small
fraction of the protein surfaces.  Peptides which bind to one of
              the
intact proteins and block the protein-protein interactions of interest
              are
selected.  The conformation of protein-bound peptides can be studied
              by
the transferred-NOESY (Tr-NOESY) NMR method, if the bioactive peptide
              is
in relatively fast exchange with the bounding site.  The bound
              peptide
conformation reflects features of the structure of the interface
              between
the proteins of interest.  The Tr-NOESY approach appears to be a
              rather
general method for studying the structures of interacting
              protein
interfaces,  however,  the level of accuracy of the structures
              obtainable
from Tr-NOESY is uncertain.  Therefore, the objectives of this
              study
are to test systems with known structures to improve and
              validate
Tr-NOESY NMR methods to determine the 3D structures and mobilities
              of
peptides bound to proteins and to determine protein surface
              structures
using monoclonal antibody epitope imprints of the protein surface,
              for
cases where the proteins of interest are available in small amounts
              or
cannot be purified for structural studies.



Department of Chemistry
              and Biochemistry
Montana State University
Bozeman, MT
              59717
Phone/Voice-mail: 406-994-4041
Fax: 406-994-5407
E-mail:
              dratz@chemistry.montana.edu


