Title       : Dynamics of Emerging Businesses in the U.S. -- Pilot Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a9904945

Award Number: 9904945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian C. MacMillan macmilli@wharton.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raphael Amit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation's Innovation and
              Organizational Change Program, this research is the first phase of a larger
              effort to understand the dynamics of firm entry, survival, growth, and exit in
              the US economy. Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) have been the focus
              of considerable policy attention in the United States and other western
              nations. A substantial amount of resources are devoted annually to a range of
              programs aimed at nurturing and supporting the creation and growth of SMEs.
              
The objective for the pilot phase of proposed research is to determine: (1)
              How easy is it for firms to grow? and (2) Is small size at entry a trap?  
The
              pilot study examines the employment history of a single cohort of firms from
              birth to maturity. Firms are classified into size categories at birth and, if
              they have survived, at subsequent age intervals. A matrix for different classes
              of firms is constructed and the dynamic properties of small firms' importance
              to the economy evaluated to provide a more insightful basis for more informed
              public policy decisions. 
The primary source of data is a US Longitudinal
              Database, analogous to the Longitudinal Database for Canada that contains
              employment information on first that operate in the US during the period 1989
              to 1995. the development of this database will allow american and Canadian
              researchers to do comparative studies that will be of interest to policy makers
              on both sides of the border. The US findings will be compared to the results of
              recent research on Canadian data which has refuted the "engine of growth"
              hypothesis regarding small firms. The pilot study is co-sponsored by the Ewing
              Marion Kauffman Foundation.

