Title       : Quorum Sensing in E. Coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2001     
File        : a9904766

Award Number: 9904766
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Rather pxr17@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Regulation of gene expression in bacteria by the accumulation of extracellular
              chemical signals has been termed quorum sensing or autoinduction.  Quorum
              sensing regulates a number of metabolic processes including differentiation,
              competence, conjugation, virulence, and biofilm formation.  The chemical
              signals mediating this response include peptides, proteins and N-acyl
              derivatives of homoserine lactone.  In Escherichia coli, the role of quorum
              sensing in the regulation of gene expression is largely unknown.  The focus of
              these studies is to identify the genes regulated by quorum sensing in E. coli
              and to use biochemical and genetic approaches to dissect the pathways mediating
              the quorum sensing responses.  To identify genes regulated by quorum sensing,
              gene fusions with a reporter transposon will be analyzed to identify those
              fusions activated at high density or by conditioned medium from stationary
              phase cells.  Genes so identified will then be sequenced.  Biochemical
              approaches will be employed to purify the extracellular factors mediating the
              quorum sensing response. Structural characterizations will be carried out by
              mass spectrometry, nuclear magnetic resonance, and peptide sequencing.  To
              identify genes involved in the production and responses to the extracellular
              factors, genetic approaches will be used to identify mutants with altered
              expression of the signaling components.  An additional focus of the project is
              to define the relationship between quorum sensing and stationary phase
              physiology of E. coli. The project will contribute significantly to our basic
              understanding of quorum sensing and stationary phase physiology in E. coli and
              many other species of bacteria.
