Title       : FASEB Conference: Phylogenetic Perspectives on the Vertebrate Immune System to
               be held July 11-16, 1999 in Copper Mountain, CO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9904628

Award Number: 9904628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Beck   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin L. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Manickam Sugumaran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The award is to support a conference on comparative immunology to be held July
              11-16, 1999 at Copper Mountain, Colorado under the auspices of the Federation
              of American Societies for Experimental Biology. Primitive species as well as
              higher vertebrates are capable of self/non-self recognition and defense, and
              thus can provide a basis for understanding the strategies adopted by higher
              organisms during the evolution of the immune system. In particular, recent
              advances using the techniques of molecular biology and protein chemistry have
              led to rapid identification of the many specialized genes and their encoded
              proteins that comprise the immune systems of different species.  This
              information has led to important new insights into how these molecules have
              evolved.  This meeting is designed to attract a multidisciplinary group of U.S.
              and foreign scientists, including immunologists, evolutionary biologists,
              biochemists, molecular biologists, geneticists and cell biologists interested
              in this area. The topics to be covered at the meeting include evolution of
              recognition molecules, protease cascades, antibacterial peptides, cellular and
              humoral responses, and insect immunity.  Two poster sessions will allow
              attendees to present and discuss their work.  Plans include publication of the
              proceedings to educate the larger immunological and more general scientific
              communities.

