Title       : SGER: Learnable Evolution: Speeding up Evolutionary Computation by Inductive
               Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1999   
File        : a9904078

Award Number: 9904078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49751              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ryszard S. Michalski michalski@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              IIS-9904078
Ryszard Michalski, George Mason University
$49,751 - 12
              mos
		

SGER:  Learnable Evolution - Speeding up Evolutionary Computation
              by
Inductive Learning


In this exploratory research the PI will continue
              work on a new approach to evolutionary computation that he calls Learnable
              Evolution Model (LEM). In contrast to the Darwinian evolution model that
              underlies current methods of evolutionary computation, LEM involves an
              inductive learning process that seeks "reasons" why certain individuals in a
              population are superior to others in performing a designated class of tasks.
              These reasons, expressed as inductive hypotheses, are used to create a new
              generation of individuals at each step of an evolutionary learning process.
              
In an already completed pilot study, LEM has been compared to two standard
              genetic algorithms in solving different kinds of optimization problems. These
              problems have been widely used by the evolutionary computation community for
              testing genetic algorithms. In these experiments, LEM outperformed the genetic
              algorithms by a wide margin, frequently achieving a speed-up of two or three
              orders of magnitude. In some cases, LEM found the optimal solution, while
              genetic algorithms used in the study were still far away from it. 
Under this
              award, the PI will conduct theoretical and experimental studies of the LEM
              approach, testing it on different types of problems, in particular, on very
              high dimensionality and noisy optimization problems, and system design
              problems. He will study its limitations, and determine ways of enhancing it by
              ideas and methods related to his prior work on constructive induction
              (developed under  NSF support). The proposed research may potentially lead to
              major advances in the fields evolutionary computation and machine learning,
              which can be applied to a variety of areas including ultra-complex optimization
              problems, design of engineering systems, knowledge discovery in very large
              databases, and self-improving intelligent agents.
