Title       : Novel Mechanisms of Motility Induction in the Sperm of a Teleost Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2001      
File        : a9904711

Award Number: 9904711
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary N. Cherr gncherr@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick J. Griffin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the initiation of sperm motility in the Pacific herring
              (Clupea pallasi). The overall goal is to define the series of extracellular and
              intracellular events that lead to the initiation of sperm motility and to
              determine the biologically relevant functions of the two molecules, SMIF (sperm
              motility initiation factor) and HSAP (herring sperm activating peptide), that
              induce sperm motility in this teleost fish.  SMIF and HSAP are chorion-derived
              molecules that initiate different sperm motility trajectories, and do so via
              different sperm surface receptors that may involve independent signaling
              mechanisms.  It has also been suggested that the two motility initiating
              systems have different functions in fertilization, that is, they are more than
              redundant or backup means of achieving sperm motility.  The proposed research
              is a U.S.-Japan collaboration which brings researchers from two laboratories
              that have identified different herring sperm motility initiators.  The proposal
              seeks to determine the targets, mechanisms of action and biological functions
              of both motility inducing molecules.
The study proposes to: 1),
              Immunologically and biochemically identify and characterize the sperm surface
              receptors for the two motility initiators, SMIF and HSAP.  2)  Determine the
              role(s) of the receptors in effecting different sperm trajectories and
              eliciting a chemotactic through specific receptor activation and inhibition
              studies.  3)  Elucidate the ionic events and signaling mechanisms associated
              with HSAP and SMIF motility initiation by determining the interdependence of
              Ca2+ and Na+ fluxes, the role of a membrane Na+-Ca2+ exchanger, the involvement
              of phospohorylation by  Protein Kinase C, and by delineating the ionic fluxes
              associated with the different sperm motility patterns and sperm receptor
              activation.  4) Investigate the role for each inducer in situ, with respect to
              sperm motility induction and fertilization,  through the use of antibodies,
              signal transduction and ion channel blockers, and selective removal and
              addition of each molecule. 

