Title       : Collaborative Research: Patterns of Variation in Newt Tetrodotoxin Levels --
               Evaluating the Potential for Predator-Prey Coevolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9904070

Award Number: 9904070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150242             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund D. Brodie, Jr. brodie@biology.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Patterns of Variation in Newt Tetrodotoxin Levels: Evaluating the Potential for
              Predator-Prey Coevolution

Evidence for arms race coevolution between
              predator and prey will be evaluated in a unique natural interaction between
              toxic newts and their resistant snake predators. Newts possess the potent
              neurotoxin tetrodotoxin (TTX), which blocks sodium channels in nerves and
              muscles. No known predator can ingest TTX and survive except for a single
              species of garter snake, Thamnophis sirtalis. Previous work has demonstrated
              that populations of this predator vary in their resistance to TTX, and that the
              potential to evolve increased resistance is present.  To determine if newt
              defenses matched patterns of predator exploitative ability as predicted by
              coevolutionary theory, High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) will be
              used to assay levels of toxin within and among populations of newts.  This
              approach will determine if the requisite individual, genetic and population
              variation exists for newts to evolve in response to predators, and will also
              evaluate whether observed patterns of matching are consistent with an arms race
              view of coevolution.
Understanding the interactions between species that drive
              coevolution is a major goal of evolutionary biology. Coevolution, in which one
              species evolves in response to another species, is thought to be one of the
              major engines of biodiversity.  Although coevolution is thought to be a common
              outcome of many ecological interactions, there are strong theoretical and
              empirical reasons to suspect that predator-prey interaction may be different.
              The current study will represent one of the first and most complete studies of
              coevolution among predator and prey.  Additionally, this research will shed
              important light on natural variation in an important neurotoxin, TTX, which is
              used widely in studies of nerve function and development, by identifying the
              sources of TTX in prey and the mechanism of TTX resistance in predators.


