Title       : Effects of Shape and Surface Physical and Chemical Heterogeneities on
               Condensation/Evaporation of Aerosol Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a9904139

Award Number: 9904139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sudarshan K. Loyalka loyalkaS@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tushar K. Ghosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert V. Tompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9904139
S. Loyalka
U. of  Missouri @ Columbia

A comprehensive
              three-year theoretical study is proposed to investigate the role of variable
              surface conditions in the condensation/evaporation and reaction of vapors and
              gases on arbitrarily shaped, heterogeneous aerosol particles that may or may
              not be wetted.  We will consider one or more particles of arbitrary shape and
              size situated in an infinite expanse of a gas-vapor mixture in which diffusing
              vapor molecules are present in small amounts.  The particle surface conditions
              will be allowed to be compositionally and/or chemically heterogeneous to
              correspond to various natural and anthropogenic particles.  Also to be
              considered and particles that are wetted, e.g. Hygroscopic particles that
              ultimately acquire shapes dictated by surface tension effects.  For the
              continuum and jump regimes, we will use a Green's function technique to convert
              the Laplace equation together with its boundary conditions into a boundary
              integral equation.  This allows the reduction of the 3-D Laplace equation to a
              2-D integral equation and thus easier handling of the surface morphology and
              adsorption properties.  The integral equation will then be discretized, and a
              generalized computer program will be developed to obtain local and global
              condensation (or evaporation) rates.  For the transition regime, in which some
              particle dimension is comparable to the vapor molecular mean free path, we will
              obtain solutions of the linear Boltzmann equation.   We will explore
              applications of boundary fitted coordinate techniques as well as multigrid
              methods in conjunction with our previous work on spherical particles.  The
              shapes of complex wetted agglomerates will be obtained by solving the
              Young-Laplace equation with the associated free boundary conditions that
              involve the wetting angles at the contact points.  We will use differential
              geometry to characterize arbitrary surfaces, and a combination of finite
              differencing and Newton's method to solve for the shapes of liquid surfaces. 
              This research will result in the development of general and versatile
              mathematical and numerical frameworks for the determination of local and global
              condensation rates.  Specifically, new understanding of the dependence of rate
              expressions for the growth of wetted particles, chain-like agglomerates, and
              bio-aerosols on surface heterogeneities will become available.  These rate
              expressions will find use in computer codes for the modeling of various natural
              and engineered processes (e.g., programs for assessing or predicting air
              quality, global warming trends, optimal catalyst surfaces, etc.).  Fine
              particles are a high priority issue in the area of air quality risk assessment
              as well as with respect to global warming issues.  The present research will
              permit more realistic estimations of  these risks and will aid in improving
              particle synthesis and manufacturing techniques.



  




