Title       : RUI: Ionic Conductances Underlying Serotonergic Modulation of Rhythmic Motor
               Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1999    
File        : a9904431

Award Number: 9904431
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133189             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Angstadt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Siena College
	      515 Loudon Road
	      Loudonville, NY  12211    518/783-2300

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9178,9183,9229,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              JAMES D. ANGSTADT - PROJECT SUMMARY

Ionic Conductances Underlying
              Serotonergic Modulation of Rhythmic Motor
Behavior

     One of the most
              important functions of the nervous system is to control movement.  Walking,
              swimming and flying are examples of rhythmic motor behaviors that consist of a
              relatively stereotyped pattern of muscle contractions.  To survive, an animal
              must also be able to modify its motor and other behaviors to meet the demands
              of a changing environment.  In response to increasing hunger, for example, an
              animal may increase the probability that a given sensory stimulus, such as
              detection of potential prey, will lead to activation of motor behaviors that
              move the animal toward the prey.  Thus, an important goal in neurobiology is to
              understand how the neural circuits underlying motor behavior are modified over
              time.  One way that changes in circuit function are achieved in both
              invertebrate and vertebrate animals is to alter the electrical and synaptic
              properties of neurons with chemicals called neuromodulators.  One of the most
              well studied neuromodulators of motor behavior is a chemical called serotonin. 
              In this project, the effects of serotonin on motor neurons controlling swimming
              behavior in the medicinal leech will be examined.  Because of its relative
              simplicity, the leech is one of only a handful of organisms in which it has
              been possible to trace a continuous pathway from sensory input to the
              rhythm-generating circuit and then out to the muscles that generate the actual
              movements.  Hungry leeches have higher levels of serotonin in the blood
              surrounding their neurons and, as a result, are more likely to swim.  Moreover,
              serotonin affects the electrical properties of several types of neurons found
              in the swim behavior pathway.  However, it is not yet understood exactly how
              serotonin affects these neurons to cause the increased probability of swimming.
               This information will be obtained by measuring directly, under controlled
              conditions, the ionic currents in swim motor neurons of the leech before and
              after exposure to serotonin. 
After identifying those ionic currents modified
              by serotonin, the specific changes induced by this neuromodulator will be
              identified.   Comparison of the resulting data with research on modulation of
              motor behaviors in a variety of invertebrate and vertebrate species will
              contribute to the elucidation of general principles underlying the control of
              motor behavior in all animals, including humans.

