Title       : Gas Hydrates and Challenges for the Future - 3rd International Conference on Gas
               Hydrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1999        
File        : a9904399

Award Number: 9904399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5230               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald D. Holder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : United Engr Trustees, Inc.
	      
	      New York, NY  10017    /   -

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9814399
G. Holder/U. Delaware

It is proposed to use, electron
              microscopy, light, X-ray and neutron scattering, and other measurements to
              discover and characterize a menagerie of novel microstructures in synthetic and
              biological mixed surfactant systems.  These structures offer excellent
              opportunities to: (1) enlarge the realm of surfactant solution microstructure
              from the limits of simple micelles and lamellar phases to include equilibrium
              vesicles and gels, (2) quantitiatively test theories of surfactant
              self-assembly, and (3) allow the development of new materials with important
              scientific and technological applications.  This to date has led to the
              hypothesis that mixing micelle forming, single-tailed anionic and cationic
              surfactants lead to mixed bilayers with low bending constants; these low
              bilayer bending constants are then responsible for the observed structures and
              phase behavior.  The work under this proposal is designed to (1) directly test
              this hypothesis by measuring elastic constants as a function of composition and
              (2) develop new materials based on low ending modulus bilayers such as
              polymer-surfactant gels.  The idea that novel properties emerge from the
              exchange of fluorocarbon for hydrocarbon surfactant in catanionic mixtures will
              be explored.  These assemblies will be used to guide synthesis of higher order
              structures.  Work in this area will explore synthesis of controlled
              permeability vesicles by polymerization of catanionic vesicles.



