Title       : RegA, Chloroplast Biogenesis, and Germ-Soma Differentiation in Volvox
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9904739

Award Number: 9904739
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Kirk kirk@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dr Kirk seeks to understand how a complete program for cellular differentiation
              is 
encoded in a genome, and how it is executed at the cellular and molecular
              
levels.  The model system being studied is Volvox carteri, a simple spherical
              
green alga with a division of labor between 2,000 terminally differentiated
              
somatic cells that undergo programmed cell death (after having provided
              
motility), and 16 germ cells that are potentially immortal.  A key gene
              
regulating this germ-soma division of labor is regA , which acts in somatic
              
cells to block reproductive development.  The RegA protein has features of a
              
transcription factor, and many of its putative targets have been cloned,
              
sequenced and shown to be nuclear genes encoding chloroplast proteins
              
("NGECPs").  He will test the hypothesis that RegA plays its key role in
              
germ-soma differentiation by acting in somatic cells as an active repressor
              of 
NGECPs, thereby preventing chloroplast biogenesis, growth, and
              reproduction.  He
will test the effects of inducible regA transgenes on
              transcription of these 
NGECPs in both Volvox gonidia and Chlamydomonas cells.
               Then recombinant RegA 
and anti-RegA antibodies will be used to test for
              binding of RegA to upstream 
regulatory regions of its cloned putative target
              genes, and to immunoprecipitate
(and subsequently clone DNA of) chromatin
              fragments that bind RegA.  The 
significance of such binding sites will be
              tested with reporter constructs.  
Proteins interacting with RegA will also be
              sought via a suppresser screen and a
yeast two-hybrid analysis.


