Title       : Conditioning-Dependent Gene Expression in the Amygdala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a9904623

Award Number: 9904623
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288619             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey B. Rosen jrosen@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Although neural circuits of fear that include the amygdala have been delineated
              in the last decade, very little is known about the molecular mechanisms within
              the amygdala that are important for fear.  The goal of this project is to
              investigate in rats whether a class of regulatory factors for DNA transcription
              (4 genes of the early-growth-response family) plays a role in learning and
              memory of fear within the amygdala.  Several molecular biology techniques will
              be used to determine if the expression of these factors is increased in the
              amygdala with fear conditioning, suggesting that they have a functional role in
              fear learning.  To determine the role these factors play, learning and memory
              of fear will be investigated in genetically altered mice that lack these
              factors.  In addition, fear conditioning in normal rats in which compounds that
              block the genetic translation of these factors are injected into the amygdala
              will be investigated.  Blockade of fear
conditioning will indicate that these
              factors play critical regulatory roles in learning and memory of fear.
The
              results from this project will increase knowledge of molecular processes
              important for learning and memory of fear.   Because fear is a primary emotion
              that has profound positive and negative consequences for human behavior, the
              scientific investigation of the biological underpinnings of fear will have
              broad significance for understanding emotional behavior.
 

