Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Language Ideology, Linguistic Variation, and Social
               Identity in a Northern Italian Town
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9904041

Award Number: 9904041
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8309               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bambi B. Schieffelin bs4@is.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9904041
Schieffelin & Cavanaugh
Abstract

This is an ethnographic and
              linguistic study in the northern Italian town of Bergamo of how speakers
              display and shift their different identities through their use of local,
              regional, and national languages, and how they evaluate and respond to similar
              activities in others. This project will focus on several sites where
              ideological processes are evident and play a role in different types of
              language choice. It will examine connections between institutional, state, and
              popular discourses about language and social difference and more micro-level
              interactions such as everyday conversation, and patterns of speakers'
              code-switching and register choices (e.g., between the standard and the local
              language). In order to collect data to analyze language varieties used in
              Bergamo (local 'dialects', regional varieties such as 'Lombardo', national
              'standards') and to reveal how these are systematically associated with
              different context-specific registers and topic-specific genres, this study will
              integrate participant-observation, social network analysis, open-ended
              interviews, and tape-recording, transcription, and analysis of speech
              activities across a range of settings.
This project will yield understandings
              of how speakers in Bergamo use language as a resource with which to enact,
              comment upon, and construct their sociocultural landscape. More broadly, it
              will contribute to the growing literature on language ideology, and to
              understandings of the ideological dimensions of language use. It will also
              offer new insights on the complex sociolinguistic processes of code switching,
              as well as into how these microlevel interactions articulate with macrolevel
              sociopolitical discourses.




