Title       : Nonspiking and Spiking Information in a Sensorimotor System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a9904633

Award Number: 9904633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225493             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph A. DiCaprio rdicaprio1@ ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1271,9183,9263,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT ABSTRACT  (IBN-9904633)

	This study will make a direct comparison of
              the information processing capabilities of nonspiking and spiking neurons in a
              sensorimotor system. Nonspiking neurons play an important role in neuronal
              integration and provide a distinct mechanism for information processing in the
              central nervous system.  These neurons transmit information using graded (or
              analog) changes in their membrane potential in contrast with the discrete
              action potentials that encode information in a digital manner in spiking
              neurons. Although nonspiking transmission has been investigated in various
              systems, the assessment of the functional advantages of nonspiking transmission
              has been hampered by the absence of an appropriate context for the evaluation
              of these systems. This project will determine the transfer functions of
              nonspiking and spiking proprioceptors in the first two joints of the crab leg
              and for the synapses and motor reflexes associated with these receptors. The
              basal leg joint in the crab is monitored by a single proprioceptor, the TCMRO,
              that contains two nonspiking and one spiking neuron. The position, velocity and
              acceleration of the next most distal joint is monitored by a single spiking
              receptor, the CB chordotonal organ, and two nonspiking elastic strand
              receptors.  One therefore has a system that permits a direct comparison of
              these two distinct modes of information transmission, although the
              physiological functions of the receptors are very similar as are the motor
              behaviors that they mediate. The experimental approach will employ standard
              electrophysiological techniques and linear and nonlinear (Wiener kernel)
              systems analysis methods in order to characterize the transfer function of
              these proprioceptors.  The Wiener approach utilizes Gaussian white noise as a
              test stimulus to the system under study and determines a series of filters or
              kernels that describe both the linear and nonlinear characteristics of the
              system. As the experimental preparation permits access to the reflex pathways
              mediated by these receptors, the systems analysis approach will be extended to
              investigate overall transfer properties of the synapses and motor reflexes in
              response to sensory input from nonspiking and spiking receptors.  An additional
              goal will be to determine the extent and fidelity of the information
              transmission in nonspiking and spiking afferents using information theoretic
              methods that have recently been applied to neuronal systems.  We will thus be
              able to make a direct comparison between, and contrast the functions of,
              nonspiking and spiking neurons and the motor reflexes mediated by these
              cells.


