Title       : Factor-Dependent Splicing of Chloroplast Group II Introns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9904666

Award Number: 9904666
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice Barkan abarkan@molbio.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Barkan

Many essential biological processes involve large,
              intricately
structured RNA molecules whose folding is likely to be
              problematic.  In the
cell, structured RNAs are complexed with proteins or
              require transient
interactions with proteins to function efficiently.  Such
              interactions may
serve to enhance the formation or stability of the correctly
              folded RNA.
"Self-splicing" group I and group II introns are highly
              structured
catalytic molecules that require proteins to function efficiently
              in vivo.
Because proteins that facilitate intron function can be
              identified
genetically and then studied in vitro, these provide convenient
              models for
probing the role of proteins in RNA catalyzed reactions and RNA
              folding.
Two factors that facilitate the splicing of group I introns in
              fungal
mitochondria have been examined in great detail.  However, the study
              of
group II splicing factors has lagged behind.  This project concerns
              two
nuclear genes in maize that are required in vivo  for the splicing
              of
specific chloroplast group II introns.  These genes provide unique
              tools
for addressing the roles of proteins in facilitating group II
              intron
splicing.  The crs1 gene is required specifically for the splicing of
              the
atpF intron; the crs2  gene is required specifically for the splicing
              of
nine of the ten subgroup IIB introns in the chloroplast.  The current
              goal
of this project is to define the role played by each protein in
              the
splicing process.  The crs1 and crs2 genes were recently cloned
              by
transposon tagging.  CRS1 is a novel,  hydrophilic protein.  CRS2
              is
related to peptidyl-tRNA hydrolases, which function to
              recycle
peptidyl-tRNAs that are released as abortive translation products. 
              In
vitro and "in E. coli "  RNA binding and splicing assays will now be
              used
to distinguish between several models for the roles of these proteins
              in
the splicing process.  Only a handful of proteins have been shown
              to
enhance the function of catalytic RNAs in vitro  or in vivo.  It is
              too
soon to know how large the repertoire of mechanisms will be for
              such
interactions.  Therefore, the results of these experiments are likely
              to
lead to fundamental insights into the RNA folding problem and the role
              of
proteins in RNA catalyzed reactions.  The results will also elucidate
              the
nature of the regulatory interactions between the nuclear and
              chloroplast
genome in a higher plant.

Lay summary:
	The chemical reactions
              that occur inside cells are catalyzed by
molecules called enzymes that
              facilitate the breaking and forming of
chemical bonds under physiological
              conditions.  Most enzymes are composed
of protein but some are composed of
              RNA, which is similar to DNA, the
carrier of genetic information.  Regardless
              of its chemical makeup, the
folding of the enzyme into its correct three
              dimensional shape is critical
for its function.  Mechanisms by which proteins
              fold have been studied for
many years.  One fundamental concept to arise from
              this work is that most
proteins cannot fold spontaneously into their correct
              shape, but rather
require help from other protein molecules, dubbed
              "chaperones".  Much less
is known about how catalytic RNA molecules assume
              their correct structure.
This project concerns two proteins, CRS1 and CRS2,
              that are required for
the function of certain catalytic RNA molecules.  The
              goal of this project
is to come to an understanding of the role these proteins
              play in
facilitating the RNA-catalyzed reactions.  In particular, this
              project
explores how these proteins modulate the folding or stability of
              the
catalytic RNA molecules.  Only a handful of proteins have been shown
              to
enhance the function of catalytic RNAs.  Therefore, the results of
              these
experiments are likely to lead to fundamental insights into the RNA
              folding
 problem and the role of proteins in RNA catalyzed reactions.


