Title       : Nodulation and Root Development in the Model Legume Lotus Japonicus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2000   
File        : a9904908

Award Number: 9904908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth G. Keegstra Keegstra@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frans J. deBruijn  (Principal Investigator former)
              Krzysztof Szczyglowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The nitrogen fixing symbiosis between members of the legume family (Fabaceae)
              and diverse Gram- negative soil bacteria, commonly known as rhizobia, is an
              agriculturally important phenomenon.  Moreover, the process of nodule formation
              and intracellular reduction of di-nitrogen by the bacteria represents a very
              interesting developmental process for basic studies on plants. Nodule ontogeny,
              as well as the number of nitrogen fixing nodules formed on legume plant roots
              in response to rhizobial infection is predominantly controlled by a plant
              genetic program. The underlying molecular mechanism is not well understood and
              forms the topic of investigation in this proposal. Using genetic approach, the
              PIs laboratory identified a gene (Har1), from the diploid model legume Lotus
              japonicus, that is required for normal interaction with symbiotic bacteria. In
              the presence of rhizobia, the mutant plants show an altered symbiotic
              phenotype, characterized by the formation of excessive numbers of nodules which
              cover almost the entire root length.  The latter coincides with nearly total
              inhibition of root- and stem growth and rapid deterioration of mutant plant
              vitality. Interestingly, the same mutation was found also to significant modify
              the root developmental program of uninoculated plants. Thus, it is likely that
              the Har1 gene product functions in both root morphogenesis and the mechanism by
              which the host plant regulates symbiotic development. The experiments proposed
              will utilize molecular genetic approaches to (1) clone and characterize the L.
              japonicus Har1 gene, and (2) identify additional genes in a pathway(s) for root
              and symbiotic development by genetic suppressor analysis.  It is hoped that the
              results of these analyses will result in a better understanding of the
              molecular basis of symbiotic plant-microbe interactions and may eventually
              contribute to the pool of basic scientific knowledge that will be required for
              the extension of symbiotic nitrogen fixation to presently non-nodulated
              agronomicall important plants, such as cereals.
