Title       : SGER: Functional Analysis of Signalling, Trafficking and Secretion in the Mouse
               Renin System: A Didactic Tool for the Integration of Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9904557

Award Number: 9904557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: THOMAS QUARLES                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93025              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. S. Fray John.Fray@umassmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack L. Leonard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Med Sch Worceste
	      55 Lake Avenue North
	      Worcester, MA  016550002    508/856-0011

NSF Program : 1101      SPECIAL PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9218,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The overall goal of this project is to provide three integrative
              approaches as didactic tools to the science and education communities for the
              integration of biologic research and elementary education. These approaches
              will model the training of graduate students but will focus on K-9 teachers in
              learning novel leading-edge technologies, in applying these technologies to the
              solution of physiologic problems, and in attending courses and participating in
              laboratory meetings. The first approach will be to adopt and develop
              technologies for examination of gene function in mouse kidney. The initial
              technology will be to develop and standardize an isolated kidney perfusion
              system for the mouse. Since there is currently no such system for the mouse
              coupled with the availability of several knock-outs, renin expression and
              regulation under a variety of physiologic conditions can be investigated to
              provide novel insights. The next will be to develop an isolated renin-secreting
              cell preparation in the mouse following perfusion of the kidney. This isolated
              cell system will allow direct investigation of genes involved in signalling,
              trafficking and secretion at the cellular level in the mouse, a desirable goal
              which has been difficult to achieve before now. The final phase of the mouse
              kidney work will be to isolate and standardize the subcellular components of
              the renin secretory pathway in the mouse following perfusion of the kidney and
              isolation of the renin-secreting cells. In addition, this project will attempt
              to assemble DNA microarrays of the genes of the mouse renin-secreting cells. By
              hybridizing these arrays with probes corresponding at first to signalling,
              trafficking and secretion genes in yeast, global gene expression patterns under
              a wide variety of experimental conditions can be investigated. All four
              technologies are intricately linked and will be developed and coordinated
              during the first year of the project. The second approach will be to conduct a
              number of physiologic application of the technologies in mouse. The third will
              be to offer a formal molecular cell physiology course focusing on the
              physiologic application and hold regular weekly laboratory meetings. K-9
              teachers will be trained to master these technologies in an ongoing long-term
              apprentice-like mentoring relationship. But the development and coordination of
              these four technologies will be most fully realized within the biological
              application and service components of this project. These components will focus
              on enhancing our understanding of signalling, trafficking and secretion genes
              in the mouse renin system, but they will also focus on enriching and empowering
              the K-9 teachers who would have gained hands-on physiological research
              experiences to share with their students as they conduct their own classroom
              science activities. This approach will provide data to members of the community
              with which to formulate hypotheses about renin expression and its regulation,
              particularly since renin regulation has been shown to be different from most
              other secretory proteins. The biological application component will allow the
              K-9 teachers to participate in hands-on physiologic research on a significant
              biological problem This project will make maximal use of the synergism among
              the three approaches in creating a scientific learning environment where the
              K-9 teachers can acquire the habits of mind gained from the communal excitement
              in leading-edge scientific research that will be hands-on and sustained. The
              central hypothesis is that elementary school teachers trained in such an
              environment over the long term are more likely to become life-long learners of
              science and therefore better able to communicate the excitement of science to
              their students in their classrooms. The project will be executed by a team of
              collaborators from four institutions: University of Massachusetts (John Fray,
              PI, Jack Leonard, Co-PI), Goddard School of Science and Technology (Joan
              Merrill, Co-Investigator), and Sullivan Middle School and University Park
              School, all in Worcester, Massachusetts. Goddard (K-6), Sullivan (7-9), and
              University Park (7-9) schools are situated in the same urban high crime
              underrepresented minority neighborhoods plagued by drugs, prostitution, and
              random shootings

