Title       : Dissertation Research: Alternative Caregivers Among the White Mountain Apache
               and Their Impact on Child Health
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9904385

Award Number: 9904385
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Nichter mnichter@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9904385
Nichter / Sparks
	This project supports the dissertation research of
              an anthropology student from the University of Arizona, studying the role and
              impact of alternative caregivers (not the child's parents) on the health and
              well-being of the child.  The site of the research is the White Mountain
              Apache, a society that has epidemiological patterns typical of the developing
              world.  The project will explore the roles of and attitudes towards alternative
              caregivers in one Apache community, and examine how different levels of
              knowledge, experience, power and resource to resources influence care
              provision.
This research is important because most studies of caregivers focus
              on parents, yet others commonly provide child care in most societies in the
              world.  This research is important because most studies of caregivers focus on
              parents, yet others commonly provide child care in most societies in the world.
               This project will provide information on who is actually caring for young
              children, both when they are healthy ad sick, and also will examine the reasons
              for and attitudes towards the use of different caregivers.  It will assess how
              effective various alternative caregivers are (or are not) at protecting and
              promoting children's health.  The new knowledge to be created about the 
              positive and negative aspects of care by different caregivers will help policy
              makers design programs of health education.  In addition the project supports
              the training of a young social scientist. 

