Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1999      
File        : a9458339

Award Number: 9458339
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dare A. Baldwin baldwin@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,9297,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9458339  Baldwin  This award provides support to Dr. Dare Baldwin under the 
              National Science Foundation's Young Investigator Awards program.   The
              objective of this program is to recognize outstanding young  faculty in science
              and engineering, to enhance the academic  career of recent PhD recipients by
              providing flexible support for  research and educational activities, and to
              foster contact and  cooperation between academia, industry, and institutions
              that  support research and education.  Dr. Baldwin has already made 
              significant research contributions to the field of cognitive  psychology, and
              she has the potential to become a leader in  academic research and education.  
               This award will allow the investigator to build on her existing  research on
              the interpretive and information-gathering abilities  children possess that
              support the rapid expansion of world  knowledge.  During the next few years she
              will study the language  learning and information-gathering abilities of
              infants and young  children.  Through analysis of what enables children to
              resolve  the inductive difficulties intrinsic to word learning and  language
              comprehension, she will try to ascertain if the  mechanisms of interpersonal
              inference that we have found to  figure so importantly in language acquisition
              likewise expedite  knowledge acquisition in other domains.  Through analysis of
               children's abilities to seek new information through direct  investigation,
              she hopes to determine if it may be possible to  point to the involvement of a
              relatively open and versatile  inductive capacity which promotes knowledge
              acquisition from a  very early age.  From analysis of children's abilities to
              elicit  new information through indirect, social channels, her goal is to 
              discover whether the human ability to appreciate others as  repositories of
              information plays a critical role in the  efficient transmission of knowledge
              between individuals.    The findings from this research program have the
              potential to  provide major new insight s into complex interrelations between 
              neurological change, social cognition, and knowledge acquisition  in human
              development.
