Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1997      
File        : a9458004

Award Number: 9458004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Pappas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9146,9161,9297,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                  Technical  abstract:  A study of the magnetic properties of ultra-thin 
              rare-earth  films and sandwiches will be conducted. The  issues  which  will be
              addressed will be the surface magnetic reconstructions and the  indirect
              exchange coupling across non-magnetic spacer layers  such  as  ytterbium. The
              films will be grown in an ultra high vacuum chamber and  characterized  in-situ
               with  low energy electron  diffraction,  Auger  electron diffraction, angle
              resolved photoemission, spatially resolved  spin polarized secondary electron
              spectroscopy, and magneto-optic Kerr  effect.  Ex-situ characterization of the
              samples will include extended  x-ray  absorption fine structure, vibrating
              sample magnetometry, x-ray  diffraction,  and  magneto-resistance 
              measurements.  The  change   of  structural,   magnetic,   and   transport  
              properties   for   various  thicknesses, preparation temperatures, substrates,
              and cap layers will  be  investigated.  A more complete understanding of  the 
              surface  and  interfacial magnetic properties of the rare-earths is sought in 
              order  to  find  applications  for  their unique properties  in  non-volatile 
              magnetic storage applications and magnetic sensor technology.    Non-technical
              abstract:  Magnetic films are presently the mainstay  of  modern data storage
              devices such as hard disk drives and tape back  up  system. The films are used
              both as the active storage media as well as  in  the  heads  which read the
              data. Two main examples are  read-write  rnagneto-optic  disk  dnves, which use
              an alloy of  transition  metals  (iron  and  cobalt) together with a rare earth
              (ytterbium) to  form  a  film   with  magnetic  domains  which  represent  the 
              data)  pointing  perpendicular to the surface and layered pickup-heads made of
              magnetic  transition metals which have a large resistance change when they 
              pass  over  the various magnetic patterns on a storage tape. In the  present 
              study,   the  magnetic  domain  properties  of  very  thin  rare-earth 
              materials and lay ered structures will be investigated to determine the 
              suitability  of  these  materials for future generations  of  magnetic  storage
              media.
