Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9458329

Award Number: 9458329
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Rogers Brubaker Brubaker@soc.sscnet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,9297,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9458329  Brubaker  This award provides support to Dr. Rogers Brubaker under the 
              National Science Foundation's Young Investigator Awards program.   The
              objective of this program is to recognize outstanding young  faculty in science
              and engineering, to enhance the academic  career of recent PhD recipients by
              providing flexible support for  research and educational activities, and to
              foster contact and  cooperation between academia, industry, and institutions
              that  support research and education.  Dr. Brubaker has already made 
              significant research contributions to the field of sociology, and  she has the
              potential to become a leader in academic research and  education.    This award
              will allow the investigator to build on his existing  research on comparative
              historical sociology and political and  cultural analyses of nation states. 
              His research interests are  in the areas of international migration,
              citizenship, nationhood,  and nationality.  During the next few years he will
              extend his  initial work in this area which focussed on Western Europe to 
              resurgent nationalisms in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet  Union.  He will
              focus on the dynamic, and potentially explosive,  triangular interplay between
              national minorities, the  nationalizing states in which they live, and the
              external  national "homelands" to which the minorities belong by ethnic 
              nationality though not by legal citizenship.  The project will be  a sustained
              effort to try to understand the dynamics of  nationalism before the Soviet
              Revolution relate to those that  have emerged in the wake of the collapse of
              the USSR.  This will  include the long-standing histories and geopolitical
              patterns of  conflict, and the impact of Soviet nationalities policy and other 
              intervening events and variables.    This research promises enlightenment about
              both politicized  ethnicity and fundamental social theory.  Through sustained 
              comparative analysis of the closely interlocking political fields  of national
              minorities, nationalizing state s and external  national homelands, it seeks to
              grasp the interactive processes  through which nationalist claims and
              counterclaims arise,  intensify, and subside.
