Title       : Studies in Atmospheric Gas-to-Particle Conversion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1999     
File        : a9614105

Award Number: 9614105
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $623339             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Seinfeld seinfeld@its.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard C. Flagan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9614105  Seinfeld     The goal of this project is to develop a fundamental
              understanding of atmospheric nucleation and gas-to-particle conversion
              processes via an integrated program of laboratory experiments, field
              measurements, nucleation theory, and atmospheric modeling.   Smog chamber
              experiments will be performed to study the yields of aerosols from the
              gas-phase photooxidation of hydrocarbons containing roughly seven or more
              carbon atoms. Some of the oxidation products have sufficiently low vapor
              pressures to partition between the gas and the condensed phase, forming
              secondary organic aerosols. Earlier experiments  addressed the oxidation of
              single hydrocarbons in the presence of nitrogen oxides; in this project,
              complex hydrocarbon mixtures will be investigated. These will be chosen to be
              representative of the strongly anthropogenically-influenced continental
              atmosphere as well as the remote, largely biogenically-dominated, continental
              atmosphere.    Experiments and modeling work will be performed in order to
              better understand binary nucleation of the sulfuric acid/water system, which is
              regarded as the most important source of new particles in the marine boundary
              layer, the free troposphere, and the polluted continental atmosphere. The
              experiments will be conducted in a photochemical reactor with the goal of
              measuring the rate of nucleation over a range of atmospherically relevant
              relative humidities. In addition, Monte Carlo simulations of a simple model for
              ion-induced nucleation will be carried out.   A Differential Mobility Analyzer
              (DMA) for measuring the size distribution of small aerosol particles will be
              developed whose charging system will be based on a new concept: it will
              optimize the charging by varying the ion density as the particle size range is
              scanned by the DMA. It will be possible to apply larger charges for the smaller
              particles and therefore enhance the counting efficiency for ultrafine
              particles, allowing detection of particles whose diameter is below 1 nm.  
              Another  component of this project is the participation in the North Atlantic
              Regional Aerosol Characterization Experiment (ACE-2) which will be conducted in
              June and July, 1997, over the subtropical Northeastern Atlantic Ocean as an
              international collaborative effort. The main objectives of ACE-2 are to study
              the properties of atmospheric aerosols relevant to radiative forcing and
              climate using aircraft, ship-board, and ground-based measurements. Through this
              grant, the new research aircraft Pelican will be deployed to investigate
              aerosol properties and their evolution in time. Measurements of aerosol size
              distributions and other parameters will provide information on possible new
              particle production and entrainment, processing of anthropogenic aerosol by
              clouds over the ocean, and the behavior of cloud condensation nuclei in
              different air masses.
