Title       : Spheres of Influence: Shaping the Future of Earth Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9614954

Award Number: 9614954
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93551              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Frank W. Ireton fireton@agu.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Geophysical Union
	      2000 Florida Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  200091231    202/462-6900

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PI:  Frank W. Ireton  Instititution:  American Geophysical Union  Title: 
              Spheres of Influence:  Shaping the Future of Earth  Systems Sciences Education 
                ABSTRACT:    The American Geophysical Union will convene a  workshop  called,
              "Spheres of Influence: Shaping the Future of Earth  System Sciences Education".
               This project is an outgrowth of  the 1994 Chapman Conference sponsored by the
              American  Geophysical Union on  "Scrutiny of Geoscience Education".  The former
              workshop was an exploration of common issues and  problems;  this workshop is a
              call to action.    This is a  timely project because of the recent attention
              focused on  the earth sciences due to questions of environmental  degradation,
              natural hazard reduction, and thematic topics  such as global change. National
              studies such as Geosciences  and Society (NRC), National Science Education
              Standards  (NRC), Project 2061 and Benchmarks for Science Literacy  (AAAS) also
              call attention to the need for improved  education in the geosciences.    A
              steering committee, composed of  participants from  geology, atmospheric
              sciences, and oceanography,  will meet  to refine the agenda for the meeting,
              and to  identify  qualified participants.  The central themes that will be 
              addressed at the workshop include:  earth sciences for all  students,
              curricular issues, training of future teachers  (and implementation of K-12
              science standards),  use of new  technologies in the classroom, integration
              research and  education,  recruitment and retention of diverse  populations in
              the earth sciences, changing the culture of  instruction in the earth sciences,
              and  collaborations and  other partnerships.  Participants will be selected  to
               provide the broadest representation  based on sub-  discipline, type of home
              institution, geographic  distribution,  professional experience, race, and
              gender.    This will be a writing workshop, with participants selected  to
              write recommendations and action plans for topics  identified above.
              Participants will be assig ned to a given  topic, will engage in  an electronic
              exchange of ideas  prior to coming to the workshop, and will come prepared to 
              write their recommendations.  The outcome of this workshop  will be a document
              similar to NSF 94-19 "Innovation and  Change in the Chemistry Curriculum". 
              This document will be  published by AGU; it will be broadly disseminated to
              earth  science departments across the country, and will be  accessible through
              the AGU homepage.  A special session at  the  AGU annual meeting will be
              dedicated to the  presentation of the results of the workshop, and  summaries 
              of each of the working groups will also be published in EOS.    The outcome of
              this workshop will be a document in which the  common  themes of earth science
              education will be  articulated, common goals for students and faculty will be 
              defined, and  specific recommendations will be made about  how  faculty,
              departments, and the earth science community  in general  can reach these
              goals.  This is an important  step towards developing a stronger presence of
              the earth  sciences in the overall educational mission of the National  Science
              Foundation.
