Title       : Reproductive Tactics in a Mixed Mating System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1999     
File        : a9614226

Award Number: 9614226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Weeks scweeks@UAKRON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/375-7111

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                        ABSTRACT    PI: 
              ZUCKER and WEEKS  PROPOSAL NUMBERS:  9631042/9614226      Reproductive tactics
              in a mixed mating system.  The widespread presence of males in most populations
              has  been intriguing evolutionary biologists for decades, since  there are many
              potential disadvantages in requiring two  individuals to come together in order
              to reproduce.  First  there is the time and energy needed to locate and
              identify  an individual of the same species but opposite sex.  Also,  natural
              selection favors any activity that results in more  of an individual s genes
              getting into the next generation.  Thus, if an individual develops a means of
              producing  offspring without having to share half of its genes with a  partner,
              that individual immediately adds twice as many of  its own genes to the next
              generation.  Some plants and  animals have, in fact, evolved means to reproduce
              with a  single parent, either by parthenogenesis (direct development  of
              offspring from an unfertilized egg) or by producing both  eggs and sperm within
              a single individual (called a  hermaphrodite) and fertilizing their eggs with
              their own  sperm.  Why, evolutionary biologists have asked, do the 
              overwhelming number of organisms still reproduce with two  parents?  Several
              possible mathematical solutions (called   models ) have been suggested by
              theoreticians, but few of  them have been experimentally tested, especially in
              animal  systems.  We will test one of the proposed models by utilizing an 
              animal species with a recently discovered unusual mating  system in which some
              individuals are hermaphrodites and  others are males.  No females are found. 
              Hermaphrodites can  fertilize their eggs with their own sperm or have their
              eggs  fertilized by males.  That is, they can reproduce with or  without a
              partner.  Hermaphrodites can not, however,  fertilize the eggs of other
              hermaphrodites.  This unusual  animal is the clam shrimp,  Eulimnadia texana ,
              a small  crustacean found in te mporary pools throughout the  southwestern U.S.
               Males are found in lower proportions than  hermaphrodites but appear to be
              present in almost all  populations.  This is called a  mixed mating system 
              since  reproduction can occur by the typical means of two  individuals mating
              (male with a hermaphrodite) or by a  single individual (a hermaphrodite)
              fertilizing its own  eggs.  Early models of mating system evolution, however, 
              predicted that only one or the other type of mating system  would evolve and be
              maintained over long periods of time,  not both.  Nevertheless, more recent
              models have suggested  that a mixed system, in which both forms of reproduction
              are  present, could, under appropriate conditions, be stable over  long periods
              of time.  It is our goal to experimentally test  these more recent models to
              document whether these  conditions hold in these shrimp.  By studying an animal
              with  a mixed mating system we can learn what the advantages and  the
              disadvantages are for individuals that reproduce by  themselves and for those
              that reproduce with a partner.  Recently, Otto, et al. (1993) developed a
              mathematical model  aimed at explaining why the mixed mating system of  E. 
              texana  appears to be stable over a long period of time.  In  order to test the
              validity of the model, it is necessary to  learn more about the natural history
              and genetics of this  species.  In particular we need to collect data on four 
              aspects of the biology of clam shrimp that are required by  the model.  We have
              thus decided to begin our exploration of  the stable mixed mating system of 
              Eulimnadia texana  by  quantifying those four aspects of the biology of clam 
              shrimp.  A combination of behavioral observations/manipulations and  genetic
              crossings will be used to learn about these four  aspects of the biology of
              clam shrimp under a range of semi-  natural and controlled environmental
              conditions.  These  behavioral and genetic data can then be used to determine 
              how accurate the Otto, et al.(1993) model is and/o r how it  will be necessary
              to modify the model to produce a truer  picture of the evolution of this mixed
              mating system.  By studying the life history, genetics and reproductive 
              biology of an animal with a mixed mating system, we will  gain a better
              understanding of how a few species have  managed to persist in the absence of
              males and, more  importantly, why most species have maintained a reproductive 
              system requiring two parents, in spite of the costs of doing  so.
