Title       : Systematic Analysis of Climatic and Topographic Controls on Long-Term Erosion
               Rates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2001    
File        : a9614442

Award Number: 9614442
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260942             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Kirchner kirchner@seismo.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9614442  Kirchner     Understanding how topography and climate affect bedrock
              weathering and erosion remains an important problem, one with implications for
              geomorphology, tectonics, paleoclimatology, paleohydrology, and environmental
              impact assessment.  To date, most erosion and denudation studies have been
              confined to sites where long-term measurements of river sediment flux or
              reservoir sedimentation rates happen to be available.  This makes them
              vulnerable to variations in lithology and land use, which alter erosion rates
              and thus obscure the effects of topography and climate.  However, cosmogenic
              nuclide techniques now permit us to measure long-term erosion rates, without
              requiring decades of sediment yield data.  This dramatically broadens the range
              of sites where erosion rates can be measured.  Sites can now be chosen to
              isolate specific factors of interest (such as climate and topography), and to
              minimize the influence of other variables (such as lithology).   This project
              combines new cosmogenic nuclide techniques for measuring erosion rates, and an
              efficient experimental design, to systematically explore how climate and
              topography affect weathering and erosion rates in unglaciated granitic terrain.
               To minimize the effects of lithologic variation, this study will focus on
              dirites and granodiorites of the Sierra Nevada.  Nine localities have been
              chosen, across which annual precipitation varies ten-fold and annual average
              temperatures vary by over 10oC.  Within each locality, a series of small
              subcatchments will be selected, encompassing at least a five-fold range of
              average hillslope gradients.  The site selection protocol is specifically
              designed to encompass the widest possible ranges of precipitation, temperature,
              weathering rates, and topography, in nearly all possible combinations.  With
              this experimental design, one can explore how weathering and erosion rates vary
              with topography under several different climatic conditions; conversely, one
              can also explore how climate affects we athering and erosion in a range of
              topographic situations.   At each subcatchment, long-term erosion rates will be
              measured from the concentration of cosmogenic nuclides in sediment draining
              from streams or gullies in each subcatchment.  A recently-completed pilot study
              shows that cosmogenic nuclide concentrations in alluvial sediments record the
              spatially averaged erosion ate of the contributing area (to within+% or
              1cm/ka), averaged over 2-15 ka.  This method of measuring erosion rates is
              useful for several reasons:  (a) it reflects a spatially averaged erosion rate,
              rather than the erosion rate of an individual--and possibly anomalous--point,
              (b) it reflects long-term erosion rates rather than recent land-use disturbance
              (a major confounding factor in previous studies), (c) it averages over
              short-term fluctuations in climate and sediment yield, but predominantly
              reflects the Holocene climate, and (d) it averages erosion over timescales that
              are relevant to hillslope processes, but still short enough that the underlying
              topography has not changed.  At several sites, chemical weathering rates will
              be inferred from stream solute fluxes, and the regolith profile will be sampled
              to determine the degree of chemical alteration.   This research is designed to
              quantify, for the first time, how weathering and erosion rates depend on
              climate and topography in a single well-defined lithology.  It should
              contribute to our understanding of feedbacks between tectonic forcing, erosion,
              and climate, and should help us to model landform evolution more realistically.
               It should help in interpreting river sediment fluxes and chemical denudation
              rates in continental-scale geochemical studies, and should provide an extensive
              new data set for process-oriented studies of weathering and erosion.  Finally,
              this study should aid in estimating long term "background" erosion rates, as a
              benchmark for measuring the erosional consequences of human land use.
