Title       : In-Situ Reversed Deformation Experiments in the High-Voltage Transmission
               Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1997   
File        : a9614562

Award Number: 9614562
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Kassner kassner@engr.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1037,1771,9161,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9614562  Kassner    The metal fatigue phenomenon is poorly understood, in part 
              because the dislocation dynamics of reversed deformation is  not well
              characterized.  The direct observation of  dislocations during cyclic
              deformation (such as with in-situ  cyclic or reversed plastic deformation tests
              in the high  voltage transmission electron microscope) is hindered by the 
              buckling of thin foils when the applied tensile or shear  stress is reversed. 
              Recent experiments show that buckling  of the foil can be avoided and
              dislocation movement can be  reversed by tensile stressing in alternating
              perpendicular  directions.  A new specimen stage was designed to facilitate 
              this loading and tested in the high voltage transmission  electron microscope
              under an NSF small grant for exploratory  research (SGER).  A series of
              reversed deformation and  fatigue experiments were successfully performed in
              the  microscope on aluminum single crystals pre-cyclically  deformed to
              presaturation, forming dense edge-dislocation  dipole bundles with screw
              dislocations that span the  channel.  It was found that screw dislocations move
              early  during reversal although edges and screws contribute equally  to the
              strain amplitude.  Dislocation loop expansion from  the dipole veins appears to
              be a major source of plastic  strain amplitude.  Dipole flipping does not
              appear to  contribute significantly to  reversible strain.  In this  project
              these preliminary conclusions are examined using the  new techniques.  These
              experiments are extended by improving  the quality of the  microscopy images. 
              The important case  where persistent slip bands form is included in the
              approach  because the slip bands create extrusions and intrusions  which may be
              sites for fatigue crack  nucleation.  %%%  Fatigue failure is a major failure
              mechanism in metal alloy  components used in applications that see alternating
              loads.  This project provides insights into the fatigue mechanism in  reversed
              loading situations.   ***  _
