Title       : Integrated Sequence and Chemostratigraphy of the Neoproterozoic Krol Platform,
               Lesser Himalaya, India
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1998       
File        : a9614070

Award Number: 9614070
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas Christie-Blick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614070  Christie-Blick       We propose an integrated sequence and
              chemostratigraphic study of the Neoproterozoic (and possibly lower Cambrian)
              Krol platform in the Lesser Himalaya of northern India.  The Krol is part of a
              succession more than 6 km thick that includes glacial-marine stata of probable
              Varanger age at the base (Blaini Formation) and terrigenous rocks of early
              Cambrain age (Tommotian to Botomian) at the top (Tal Group).   The
              Neoproterozoic and early Cambrian interval is characterized globally by marked
              excursions in (13C, ranging from +12 to -5 for carbonate carbon.  These have
              been taken to reflect secular variations in the isotopic composition of sea
              water, and that the excursions can be used for global correlation.  However,
              excursions in carbonate (13C as low as -5 are difficult to explain in terms of
              whole-ocean chemistry, and may indicate a) a surface to seafloor isotopic
              gradient that was larger than the ~2 per mil of the modern ocean and b) that
              stratigraphic trends may be due in part to changes in the paleoenvironment of
              deposition (water depth).   The Krol platform can be used to address two
              questions of importance to Neoproterozoic chemostratigraphy and our
              understanding of the origin of the isotopic excursions: 1) What are the lateral
              variations in (13C as a function of facies (and paleowater depth)? 2) Are
              differences between published (13C measurements for the Krol and data from
              potentially correlative strata in Siberia, southern China, Namibia and the
              Mackenzie Mountains (Canada) due to inadequate attention to diagenesis in the
              Krol in previous studies, miscorrelation or the fact that the Krol represents
              an unusually complete and thick succession of carbonate (2km) from which to
              obtain samples?  Preliminary work shows that the Krol may be particularly
              amenable to sequence stratigraphy because available outcrop appears to
              encompass the transition from shallow to deep ramp settings, as well as
              "interfingering" of the carbonate rocks with nearshore sandstones.  The co
              mbination of chemostratigraphy with sequence stratigraphy will allow us to
              establish an independent time-stratigraphic framework with which to look at
              both "vertical" and "lateral" variations in (13C, and to investigate the role
              of diagenesis in different parts of the platform.  The study should also
              resolve whether the Precambrian-Cambrian boundary is located at the top of the
              Krill (as suggested by published carbon isotopic data); and it may allow us to
              "fingerprint" several sequence boundaries with respect to (13C, and hence to
              compare the timing of these surfaces and sequence boundaries interpreted in
              other carbonate-rich successions of broadly the same age.
