Title       : Microanalytical Studies of Extraterrestrial and Terrestrial Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1998   
File        : a9614212

Award Number: 9614212
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ghislaine Crozaz gcw@howdy.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ernst Zinner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Bernatowicz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614212  Crozaz  The research proposed will have two main thrusts:  1) the
              detailed study of circumstellar grains isolated from primitive meteorites and
              2) trace element studies relevant to the origins of two types of meteorites
              (ureilites and aubrites) and of terrestrial mantle nodules.  Both goals will be
              achieved with state-of-the-art analytical instrumentation.  Isotopic
              compositions of circumstellar grains will be used to set constraints on
              nucleosynthetic processes in individual stars and provide information on the
              multiplicity of stellar sources that contributed materials to the solar system,
              while mineralogical and elemental data will be used to infer chemical and
              physical conditions in the stellar atmosphere and ejecta in which these grains
              formed.  Trace element (mainly REE) ion microprobe studies of evolved
              meteorites and terrestrial samples will help to delineate planetary processes. 
              Ion imaging will be used in an effort to identify the controversial
              (terrestrial contamination or indigenous) LREE carrier phase in ureilites. 
              Analyses of experimental charges of aubritic compositions doped with lower
              levels of REE will be done in order to check if partition coefficients inferred
              from natural systems can be obtained under those conditions.  Trace element
              concentrations of mantle eclogite and peridotite nodules will be done in order
              to provide insights into the formation of mantle materials, the structure and
              evolution of old cratons, and the differentiation of the early earth.
