Title       : Latitudinal Variations of Particle Fluxes in the Southern Ocean: A Bottom
               Tethered Sediment Trap Array Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1998        
File        : a9614028

Award Number: 9614028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $647703             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack R. Dymond jdymond@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Collier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              96-14028  Dymond         This research project is part of the US Joint Global
              Ocean  Flux Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better 
              understanding of the fluxes of carbon, both organic and  inorganic, in the
              Southern Ocean, (2) identifying the physical,  ecological and biogeochemical
              factors and processes which  regulate the magnitude and variability of these
              fluxes, and (3)  placing these fluxes into the context of the contemporary
              global  carbon cycle.       This work is one of forty-four projects that are 
              collaborating in the Southern Ocean Experiment, a three-year  effort south of
              the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to track the  flow of carbon through its
              organic and inorganic pathways from  the air-ocean interface through the entire
              water column into the  bottom sediment.   The experiment will make use of the
              RVIB  Nathaniel B. Palmer and the R/V Thompson.       This component, a
              collaborative study by scientists from the  Woods Hole Oceanographic
              Institution, Oregon State University,  and the New Zealand Oceanographic
              Institution, concerns the  export of particulate forms of carbon downward from
              the upper  ocean.  The observations will be obtained from an array of time- 
              series sediment traps, and will be analyzed to quantify export  fluxes from the
              Subtropical Front to the Ross Sea, over an 18-  months period beginning the
              early austral summer of 1996.  The  measurement program will two annual
              phytoplankton blooms.  The  southern ocean provides a unique opportunity to
              investigate the  processes controlling export flux in contrasting
              biogeochemical  ocean zones demarcated by oceanic fronts.  The temperature 
              changes at the fronts coincide with gradients in nutrient  concentrations and
              plankton ecology, resulting in a large  latitudinal change in the ratio of
              calcium to silica taken up by  the phytoplankton communities.  This experiment
              will provide data  on how the biological pump operates in the Southern Ocean
              and how  it could potentially impact the level of atmospheric c arbon  dioxide.
               The observed export fluxes of organic carbon, nitrogen,  inorganic carbon,
              biogenic silica and alumina are central to the  goals of the JGOFS program.
