Title       : GOALI: New Dielectrics for Development of Metal to Metal Antifuse for FPGA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9614593

Award Number: 9614593
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302853             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shubhra Gangopadhyay shubhra.gangopadhyay@ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,9102,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614593  Gangopadhyay   mm1 This proposal presents a plan for the development of
              new metal to metal antifuse structures for the field programmable gate arrays
              (FPGAs) using a-Six,C1-x:H, a-C:H, and a-C:H,N,F dielectrics, technology of
              which will be transferred to Actel Corporation for process integration.  Grant
              Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) is an appropriate
              program for the proposed work, because this program promotes an
              interdisciplinary university-industry collaboration in high-risk/high gain
              research areas which would not have been undertaken by industry.    The
              applications of FPGAs are numerous. Wherever a device design uses a substantial
              amount of small and medium scale ICs, there exists the potential for an FPGA to
              provide a faster, more compact and more reliable solution.    The basic
              antifuse is a thin insulating layer sandwiched between conductors that gets
              altered (programmed) by the application of a high voltage.  At present, two
              types of antifuses are commercially produced: the n+ Si/ONO/poly Si antifuse
              (where ONO stands for Oxide/Nitride/Oxide) and the metal/amorphous
              silicon/metal antifuse.  Although the applications of n+ Si/ONO/poly Si are
              quite promising, the ONO shows strong time dependent dielectric breakdown
              (TDDB) behavior.  The biggest problem with a-Si antifuses is that a programmed
              antifuse sometimes reverts to a high impedance state, when it is stressed with
              a high current pulse.    In collaboration with Texas Instruments, the PI has
              been very successful in developing amorphous carbon (a-C:H) and amorphous
              silicon carbide (a-SiC:H) antifuses with extremely promising properties.  The
              metal to metal a-C:H and a-C:H,N,F  antifuses showed three orders of magnitude
              lower leakage current, factor of two lower breakdown voltage, similar On-state
              resistance, and superior On-state stability compared to currently used
              amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) metal to metal antifuses.  Actel Corporation, our
              industrial collaborator is extremely interested in the deve lopment of
              a-C:H,N,F antifuse structures at Texas Tech, which can be transferred and
              integrated into their 0.6 micron CMOS process within 1999 time frame.  It is
              difficult for Actel to study such materials without the help of Texas Tech
              because of the constraints of limited equipment and engineering resources.   
              We propose to change the processing conditions, such as CH4/NF3 flow rates, rf
              power, bias voltage, pressure and to deposit a-C:H,N,F films with various
              concentrations of hydrogen, nitrogen and fluorine in our PECVD system.  The
              relationship between the antifuse characteristics and the N, F, H content of
              the films will be studied extensively for the optimization of the devices.  We
              will also deposit a-SixC1-x, :H using diethysilane and methane.  The most
              promising antifuse structures at Texas Tech will be further tested for
              reliability at Actel Corporation.  Selected structures will be transferred to
              Actel Corp. for further development and inclusion into the 0.6 micron CMOS
              process flow.  Contingent upon NSF support, Actel Corp. will provide $204,730
              matching, which will include $60,000 funding and $144,730 in-kind support,
              including samples and sample analysis, processing, investigator time and
              donated equipment.  Texas Tech has provided $58,200 as matching funds by
              granting the PI a sabbatical leave to work at Actel Corporation and by waiving
              the indirect cost for the $60,000 funding from Actel.  ***                     
               mm1
