Title       : Early Mesozoic Reef Evolution and Recoveries from Mass Extinctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a9614501

Award Number: 9614501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250025             (Estimated)
Investigator: George D. Stanley fossil@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614501  Stanley       The principal focus and goal of this project is to study
              the evolution of Triassic and Jurassic reefs and the evolution of reef faunas
              in displaced terranes of western North America.  A secondary goal concerns
              holdover faunas and possible roles of terrane faunas in reef recoveries in the
              Tethys.  Corals, sponges and problematica are the principal reef organisms
              which evolved after major mass extinctions now widely recognized in the Tethys.
               Most reef deposits of the Cordillera have been destroyed by dynamic tectonic
              processes of terrane formation and accretion.  However new research has
              uncovered a dozen key sites where preservation is sufficient to permit detailed
              study.  This three-year project will concentrate on faunas from these sites. 
              The terrane faunas to be investigated occur in volcanic sequences interpreted
              to have been ancient volcanic islands geographically remote from the Tethys.  
              Extensive studies of early Mesozoic reef faunas of the Tethys have failed to
              confirm the presence of holdover taxa.  However the situation in the Americas
              has not been fully examined.  The project combines field, laboratory and museum
              studies of early Mesozoic sites in western North America and comparisons with
              Tethyan reefs to assess the idea that reef taxa in terranes played an important
              role in reef evolution.  Documentation of biostratigraphically important
              microfossils, particularly conodonts, is an important element of the project. 
              This topic will be investigated with a post-doctoral research associate who
              will retrieve and study conodonts and other microfossils from reef sites and
              use the resulting biostratigraphic data to improve the accuracy of dating and
              time-stratigraphic comparisons with the Tethys.   Preliminary collections of
              reef fossils made by field geologists in Canada have revealed reef faunas
              containing possible Permian and Triassic holdover taxa--genera and species
              previously thought extinct in the Tethys following the devastating mass
              extinctions affecting th at region.  In addition to confirming the "Lazarus
              effect", these discoveries, confined exclusively to western Pacific terranes,
              hint at the idea that terranes functioned as refuges for preferential survival
              of Permian and Triassic Tethyan reef taxa.   The idea of volcanic islands as
              refuges is firmly implanted in the literature, but it is mostly speculative and
              largely without solid field and taxonomic base.  This project therefore seeks
              to gather new data which, when combined with a voluminous Tethyan database now
              available, offers a concrete basis to assess ideas of survival and the
              recoveries of reef ecosystems outside the Tethys.  It is possible that early
              Mesozoic reef faunas from volcanic terranes contain a paleontoligical record
              not represented in the Tethys.  Careful taxonomic and field study of Triassic
              and Jurassic reef faunas from specific horizons, combined with graphic plotting
              of age and paleogeographic distributions of Tethyan and non-Tethyan taxa, will
              be important in confirming or refuting the idea.  The resulting new data is
              certain to expand knowledge of reef evolution outside the Tethys, adding a
              stronger basis for comparisons with Tethyan faunas.
