Title       : Collaborative Research: Structure of the Crust and Upper Mantle Beneath the
               Tibet Plateau Interior (INDEPTH III)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9614853

Award Number: 9614853
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303071             (Estimated)
Investigator: K D. Nelson kdnelson@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott D. Samson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614853  Nelson    This project is the third phase of Project INDEPTH
              (INternational  DEep Profiling of Tibet and the Himalaya), a collaborateve, 
              multinational, multidisciplinary program to investigate the  lithosphere
              beneath the Himalaya/Tibet  Plateau collision zone.   Support is provided by
              NSF (Continental Dynamics Program), the  Chinese National Natural Science
              Foundation, the Chinese Ministry  of Geology and the DeutschesForschungs
              Gemneinshaft (Germany).   Project INDEPTH has completed two field Programs in
              southern Tibet  aimed at elucidating the structure of the lithosphere beneath
              this  key region.  The first, undertaken in 1992, was a feasibility study  of
              deep reflection profiling on the high Tibetan Plateau that had  the additional
              scientific goal of tracking the top of the Indian  plate underthrusting the
              Himalaya (INDEPTH I).  The second,  undertaken in 1993-94, was a much more
              substantial program  involving the acquisition of complementary CMP reflection,
              wide-  angle reflection, broadband earthquake, magnetotelluric, and  surface
              geological data along a transect (including INDEPTH I)  extending approximately
              300 km north of the crest of the Himalaya  (INDEPTH II).    The combined
              INDEPTH I-II results yeild a refined and exciting new  view of the lithosphere
              beneath southern Tibet.  They support some  previous hypotheses while
              necessarily contradicting others.  Among  other things, the INDEPTH data imply
              that: 1)Indian continental  crust does not extend as a coherent unit in the
              footwall of the  India-Asia decollement for a significan distance north of the 
              Tsangpo suture (and may not extend that far); 2) in contrast,  Indian mantle
              lithosphere in contact with the overlying crust  apparently does extend at
              least 150 km north of the suture; 3) the  Tsangpo suture is not currently a
              lithosphere-penetrating  structure, but rather is cut off in the mikkle crust
              by a younger  feature, and finally, perhaps of greatest global significance; 4)
               the new data strongly imply the existence  of a widespread mid-  crustal
              partial melt layer beneath southern Tibet.  Taken together  the data lead to a
              model for the current behavior of the southern  Tibetan Plateau lithosphere
              wherein the Indian continental crust  underthrusting the southern margin of the
              Plateau partially melts  in the vicinity of the North Himalayan domes, thereby
              contributing  to a partially molten effectively fluid, mid-crustal layer that 
              underlies the Plateau to the north.  These results have important  implications
              for how the Himalaya/Tibetan Plateau as a whole has  evolved, and for our
              concepts of lithosphere formation and  modification during continent-continent
              collisions in general.    The purpose of INDEPTH III is to address three
              fundamental,  interrelated issues about the nature and evolution of the 
              lithosphere beneath the region.  These are: 1) What is the  magnitude and
              mechanism(s) of accommodation of Neogene/Quaternary  deformation within the
              Tibetan Plateau? 2)Is there an areally  extensive mid-crustal partial melt
              layer within the Tibetan crust  that has exerted a primary control on the
              Neogene/Quaternary  structural evolution and present morphology of the Plateau?
              and 3)  What is the nature and cause of the reported first-order south to 
              north change in the character of the mantle lithosphere beneath the  Plateau? 
              The program includes magnetotelluric profiling and  broadband earthquake
              recording to assess the bulk electrical  resistivity and velocity structure of
              the crust and upper mantle  beneath the region.  These data will provide
              primary information on  the presence or absence of seismically attenuating
              crustal melt  within the interior of the Plateau, and characterize the
              south-to-  north upper mantle transition beneath the region.  These efforts 
              will be augmented by a modest controlled-source "test", and a  modest field
              geology program aimed at delineating the geometry of  upper crustal structure,
              the distribution of Neogene/Quaternary  shortening, and the existence of a
              mid-crustal brig ht-spot horizon   which, if present, may indicate a
              mid-crustal partial melt zone.  ***
