Title       : Collaborative Research: Phylogeny of the Triassic-Recent Nautilaceae
               (Cephalopoda)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a9614285

Award Number: 9614285
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55735              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Bruce Saunders wsaunder@cc.brynmawr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bryn Mawr College
	      
	      Bryn Mawr, PA  19010    215/645-5000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614285  Saunders       Nautilacean cephalopods include more than a score of
              genera and hundreds of named species spanning almost 230 million years
              (Triassic-Recent).  Their history and phylogeny have been thought to be well
              understood, and their systematics have remained relatively unchanged for ~50
              years, during which three tenets have remained unchallenged:  1)  nautilaceans
              were evolutionarily conservative, showing little morphological change since the
              end of the Triassic; 2)  most genera can be differentiated by only one or two
              characters; and 3)  the last-evolved member is extant Nautilus, having evolved
              in the Pleistocene or Pliocene.  In the last decade, however, new information
              suggests that a radical re-evaluation of both the phylogenetic interpretation
              and the classification of the group are in order.  It now appears that
              post-Jurassic nautilacean species have been vastly over-slit; new fossil finds
              show that the genus Nautilus dates back at least to the middle Cretaceous;
              recent investigations demonstrate several new characters that will aid in the
              cladistic evaluation of the group; and preliminary phylogenetic analysis of the
              Nautilaceae stands in marked contrast to past interpretations.   We propose to
              develop a suite of morphologic characters that will permit us to undertake
              cladistic analysis of the group, in order to develop understanding of
              evolutionary relationships, and to assess the validity of named fossil taxa in
              the light of our understanding of variation and species-and generic concepts in
              extant taxa.  We will use the presence of shared derived characters to develop
              a classification system of the group, based on evolutionary relationships,
              rather than morphological similarity.   In addition, we propose to use
              principal components analysis (PCA) in order to:  a)  quantify and to track
              morphologic variation and diversity through time; b)  determine whether (which)
              particular shell morphotypes were preferred and the relationship between
              theoretical and occupied morphospace  over an extremely long time span (>200
              my); and c)  assess how these morphologies responded to biotic crisis, focusing
              on the terminal Triassic- and Cretaceous extinction events.   The results of
              our investigation will bear directly on understanding the evolutionary history
              of this particular lineage, one of the longest ranging of molluscan clades,
              extending from the Recent to the Triassic (~230 million years).  The results
              will have bearing on the interpretation of macroevolutionary change in
              morphologic diversity and richness, and to morphologic responses to biotic
              crisis, on a scale of nearly 200 million years.
