Title       : ZOOM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1999  
File        : a9614743

Award Number: 9614743
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valentine H. Kass                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Brigid Sullivan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kate Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WGBH Educational Fdn
	      125 Western Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02134    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9614743  Sullivan    WGBH Educational Foundation is producing Season I of Zoom,
              a daily half-hour television series for children aged 8 to 11.  Zoom, which is
              based on the highly successful 1970's series of the same name, features a cast
              of seven children who engage in activities and examine ideas submitted by youth
              who watch the show.   The new Zoom will have an enhanced educational
              concentration, an emphasis on science and math activities and projects, and a
              comprehensive outreach campaign.  A major focus of the series will be to
              develop "Habits of Mind" which promote the capacity to think about the same
              ideas and evidence in multiple ways; collect, organize, and recognize patterns
              in data; identify questions that can be answered through scientific
              investigations; and develop skills of estimation, judgment, and data literacy. 
              Season I will have three over-arching science and math-based themes: 
              Structures, Things That Go, and Living Things.  Each program will include two
              or three science and math segments, as well as encouragement to try these
              activities at home.  From time to time, the cast will provide a "challenge" for
              viewers by asking them to conduct an activity as home and send in their results
              for presentation on a later show.  Field-produced segments will feature
              children engaged in science or math projects that they have found particularly
              fascinating and have done on their own.  The series also will revisit projects
              or "challenges" over the course of a season to demonstrate that science is an
              on-going, evolving endeavor and that new information may change old
              assumptions.    Zoom outreach activities will include a Zoom science guide for
              educators, a World Wide Web Site, museum Zoom rooms, community partnerships
              with three national organizations that work with underserved children.  In
              addition, every viewer who writes, calls an 800 number, or sends an e-mail will
              receive a free four-page newsletter with directions needed to complete
              activities from the series and to tackle challenge s that the cast issues to
              the audience.    Kate Taylor will be Executive Producer for the project.  She
              has been co-executive producer for Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego? and
              for Degrassi Junior High.  The Science and Math Director will be Candace
              Julyan, Senior Project Director at TERC.  The Director of Outreach will be Beth
              Kirsch who oversees the development and implementation of national outreach
              campaigns for WGBH.  The staff will work closely with a group of consultants
              and advisors with expertise in such areas as science and mathematics, informal
              science, outreach, and evaluation.
