Title       : Transport of Sediments, Radionuclides, and Agrochemicals in Agricultural
               Watersheds, Experimental Field and Modeling Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2000       
File        : a9614701

Award Number: 9614701
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119431             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reza M. Khanbilvardi rk@ced1s0.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5939,9187,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614701  Khanbilvardi    Soil erosion is a major scientific and environmental
              problem, especially when radionuclides are involved.  The transport process of
              radioactive pollutants in soils is complex and not yet completely understood. 
              These pollutants are being transported with soil particles down and out of the
              slopes, but at the same time they influence upon the erodibility of soils
              through various geo- and biochemical processes involving soil minerals, soil
              microbiota, soil moisture and traditional pollutants.  A unique chance to
              improve our understanding of these processes and to develop a model predicting
              erosion-controlled transport of radioactive pollutants, based on both
              theoretical and field studies, has been presented by the Chermobyl disaster
              which occurred in Ukraine in 1986.  It is the goal of this project to test two
              hypotheses and develop a simulation model.  The study is designed to find
              answers to (1) fate and transport of radionuclides in soils subjected to
              erosion, (2) the influence of microoganisms upon the transport of radioactivity
              in soils, and (3) to develop a computerized model that can be used to simulate
              radionuclide migration in agricultural watersheds subjected to erosion.  With a
              unique data set which is being obtained in Ukraine, the model can be validated
              in areas where validation was not formerly possible.  The project team which
              includes scientists and experts from Ukraine and from CUNY, USDA/Purdue and
              Benedictine University is already using this opportunity to the fullest extent
              possible.  In the vicinity of Chermobyl there are facilities staffed and
              equipped to study the process in situ, using artificial rainfall, so that any
              model developed for its prediction could be verified.  This would result in a
              much cheaper research as compared with a similar one conducted in the USA
              where, moreover, no such radioactivity contaminated places can be found.  Data
              obtained from this study will be used as an important tool for development of
              process formulation of vertic al migration and horizontal transport of
              radionuclides in soils.  This international endeavor would benefit the science
              and scientists in both countries and the world in protecting environment.
