Title       : Genetics: Decoding Life
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a9614298

Award Number: 9614298
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barry A. Van Deman                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1677080            (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry S. Aprison barry.aprison@msichicago.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Museum of Sci & Ind
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60601    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9614298  Aprison    The Museum of Science and Industry will develop "Genetics:
              Decoding  Life," a 4325 sq. ft. permanent exhibit about the basic principles 
              of genetics, the Human Genome Project, new tools and technology to  study life,
              and the biomedical and biotech applications resulting  from genetic
              information.  As a result of interacting with this  exhibit, visitors will
              understand the basic principles of genetics,  they will become familiar with
              the role of genes in the development  of life, they will learn something about
              how and why scientists  used genetic tools, and visitors will become aware of
              applications  of these principles and the potential social, ethical, medical
              and  economic outcomes.  In addition to the exhibit there will be a  number of
              complementary outreach programs.  An electronic web site  will be created,
              software used in the exhibit will be modified into  a format suitable for use
              in schools, computers loaded with genetic  programs will be loaned to Chicago
              public school groups, churches  and other community agencies, and the content
              of the exhibit will  be used to enhance special Lamaze and prenatal classes
              held at the  museum.  Special consideration will be given to developing the 
              relationship between the project personnel and the staff of the  Chicago
              Systemic Initiative.  They will work together to produce a  school program
              about genetics that will be suitable for grades 5 to  8.  School materials will
              include a teacher's guide for the  exhibit, a program of classroom activities,
              and materials to be  used before and after a trip to the museum to see the
              exhibit.
