Title       : Taphonomy of Marsh Foraminiferal Assemblages: Implications for Rates and
               Mechanisms of Holocene Sea-Level Rise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9614155

Award Number: 9614155
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald E. Martin daddy@strauss.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Pizzuto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614155  Martin/Pizzuto     Over the last decade, the applied Earth Sciences
              have moved from an emphasis on resource exploitation to one of resource
              conservation and management.  In order for paleontology to fully participate in
              this "paradigm shift", the science of taphonomy, which has largely stressed
              information loss and stratigraphic disorder, must instead accentuate what can
              be regained from the fossil record.  Data must be used to reconstruct
              stratigraphic signals in order to evaluate natural versus anthropogenic
              disturbances.  Precise understanding of taphonomic filters bears strongly on
              the future application of paleontology and other traditional fields of the
              Earth sciences to environmental problems.   Marshes provide a fertile proving
              ground for applied taphonomy.  Marsh environments are extremely susceptible to
              natural and anthropogenic disturbance, so they are ideal for distinguishing
              between natural and anthropogenic change using historical (pre-anthropogenic)
              records.  Marshes also display exceptional temporal resolution (low signal
              attenuation) that approaches or surpasses that of deep-sea cores, and which
              makes them ideal for taphonomic modeling.  Nevertheless, differential
              preservation of marsh foraminiferal assemblages, which have been used to
              analyze natural and anthropogenic causes of sea-level rise, has been largely
              ignored.  By itself, though, differential preservation can mimic sea-level
              change when none has actually occurred.   We propose to construct
              taphonomic-age-environment models that describe shell input, preservation, and
              temporal resolution of foraminiferal assemblages in easily accessible
              intertidal Holocene marsh facies of the Delaware coast.  We will then test our
              forward models (taphonomic filters) by using them to reconstruct the same
              inputs used to produce the filters.  We will further test our models by using
              them to reconstruct paleoenvironments of the last ~2 ka preserved in vibracores
              taken from nearby sites, and assess the implications for distinguishin g
              natural versus anthropogenic sea-level rise.  We will use multiple techniques
              to constrain sedimentary parameters and the reconstructions based on them. 
              Inputs and decay rates of tests ("half-lives"), which affect the abundance,
              preservation, probability of reworking, and temporal resolution of
              foraminiferal assemblages, will be determined by seasonal sampling of selected
              marsh sites.  Mixed layer thickness (m), sedimentation rate (v), and the
              bioturbation coefficient (D) will be estimated using x-rays and radiotracers
              (7Be, 137Cs, 210Pb, 14C).  Field experiments involving artificial conservative 
              (non-decaying) "impulse" layers of glass beads (analogous to microtektite and
              volcanic ash layers of similar deep-sea studies) will assess sedimentary
              parameters independently of radiotracers.  Temporal resolution will be examined
              by applying several quantitative approaches, including graphic correlation, to
              dispersion (attenuation or smearing) of bead layers and other datums.  Pollens
              profiles will control for possible anthropogenic changes (eutrophication due to
              deforestation and runoff) in test production and sedimentation.   Besides the
              implications for the role of paleontology and stratigraphy in the environmental
              sciences, our investigation also bears on a number of critical (paleo)
              environmental  issues, such as:  1)  Calculation of the magnitude and rates of
              Holocene sea-level rise, their correlation with rates and mechanisms of
              proposed causal climatic phenomena, and distinguishing between natural and
              anthropogenic sea-level change;  2) Paleoenvironmental resolution in the
              Holocene below that of available climate proxies such as the marine oxygen
              isotope curve;  3)  The natural evolution of wetlands and their management in
              light of the Holocene transgression;  4)  Precise understanding of taphonomic
              filters an the integrity, time-averaging, and temporal resolution of
              stratigraphic sections, all of which ultimately bear on such profound
              paleobiological questions as patterns of extinction and  the record of
              biodiversity dynamics in the fossil record.  Answers to these questions are
              crucial to understanding, for example, past (and therefore current)
              biodiversity crises, but they are dependent upon very high temporal resolution.
               Other modeling efforts have concentrated on deep-sea assemblages and stable
              isotopes, but because of the intrinsically high temporal resolution of march
              assemblages, our study serves as an excellent starting point for applying
              quantitative taphonomic models to more stratigraphically-complex shelf and
              slope settings where much of the fossil record has formed.
