Title       : Rheology, Structure, and Dynamics of Langmuir films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a9614983

Award Number: 9614983
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John F. Foss                            
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald G. Fuller ggf@rio.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0100000   Special Interest                        
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This is a grant to support the development and application an interfacial
              rheometer based on a new design that offers increased sensitivity and a faster
              dynamic response.  Furthermore, its open architecture allows for the
              simultaneous acquisition of structural measurements using optical methods such
              as Brewster angle microscopy and absorptive dichroism.    It is demonstrated
              that most interfaces comprised of complex materials (fatty acids, polymers, and
              lipids) respond in a highly nonlinear manner when subjected to flow.  The
              evidence of this behavior includes recent measurements performed in the
              laboratory of the P.I. showing flow induced changes in interfacial
              microstructure on a variety of length scales.  Macroscopically, these molecular
              and mesoscale deformations and orientations are manifested as shear thinning
              viscosities and first normal stresses in two dimensions.  However, at the
              present time, very little is known about the connection of non-Newtonian
              interfacial rheology and molecular and microstructural mechanisms. Mechanical
              rheological data will be acquired, along with molecular level responses, to
              establish structure-property constitutive relationships.    The proposed design
              of an interfacial rheometer is of the class of controlled stress instruments. 
              The applied stress is generated using magnetic field gradients that subject a
              rod residing at the surface of a Langmuir films to flow.  Both creep compliance
              and dynamic oscillatory testing will be possible with the instrument so that
              the linear and nonlinear viscoelastic properties of the films can be obtained. 
              The use of a Langmuir trough as the platform for the measurements will make it
              possible to establish the desired thermodynamic condition of the film during
              the measurements.  It is planned to study a variety of complex fluid interfaces
              including: (1) fatty acid monolayers in a number of phases including liquid
              condensed and solid phases, (2) polymer solution monolayers where the polymers
              are rigid, hairy rod materials that  resemble two-dimensional liquid crystals,
              and (3) lipid monolayers in the liquid expanded, condensed and two phase
              states.
