Title       : Reconstruction of the Water Column Structure of Jurassic and Cretaceous Epeiric
               Seas: Biomarkers and their Carbon Isotopic Composition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1996  
File        : a9614769

Award Number: 9614769
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171216             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fabien Kenig Fkenig@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614769  Kenig     The goal of the proposal is to reconstruct the water-column
              structure of a Jurassic and a Cretaceous epeiric sea using biomarkers and their
              isotopic composition.  More specifically, our efforts will concentrate on the
              reconstruction of the water-column chemistry, and its evolution during the
              deposition of two sediment formations, the Oxford Clay (Middle Callovian, UK
              and the Greenhorn Formation (Western Interior Seaway, Cenomano-Turonian, USA). 
              We will use this information to understand paleo-oceanographic conditions at
              the onset of water column stratification, biofacies distribution, and organic
              matter accumulation in epeiric seas.  These results will be used to test the
              relationship between biofacies and benthic oxygen level.  These results will be
              used to further constrain existing paleo-oceanographic circulation models.  
              The first objective is to determine the geographic extent of intermittent
              anoxic events that characterized the accumulation of the organic mater-rich
              fossil-laggerstatten of the Lower Oxford Clay.  To achieve this, Middle
              Callovian sediments with well defined biofacies from Scotland, Central and
              Southern England, France, Germany, Switzerland and Poland will be analyzed for
              their free, sulphur-bound, and ether-bound hydrocarbon biomarkers.   The second
              objective is to use the molecular fossil record of thermally immature samples
              from the Greenhorn formation to reconstruct the water-column structure of the
              Western Interior Seaway during the Cenomanian and Turonian.  Three sections
              will be investigated in detail for their free, sulphur-bound, and ether-bound
              molecular fossils.  This analytical procedure will allow us to target the
              molecules that are diagnostic for the water-column structure.  It will result
              in the development of an efficient analytical scheme allowing analysis of the
              vast number of samples necessary for precise constraint of the water-column
              structure and chemistry of a large geographical area.   The third objective
              will be to geographicall y extend the water-column reconstruction of the
              Western Interior Seaway during the Cenomanian and Turonian.  We will use these
              results to constrain the computer models of paleo-oceanographic circulation
              constructed for the Western Interior Seaway.  Comparison of the results
              obtained from the Middle-Callovian of Western Europe will enhance our
              understanding of paleo-oceanographic circulation in epeiric seas.  Based on
              literature data and our water-column reconstruction, a model of the
              paleo-oceanographic circulation for the Middle Callovian of Western Europe will
              be proposed.
