Title       : Ancient Atmospheric Pco2, Paleoclimates and the Stable Isotope Geochemistry of
               Low Temperature Iron Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1999   
File        : a9614265

Award Number: 9614265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224763             (Estimated)
Investigator: Crayton J. Yapp cjyapp@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9614265  Yapp     The geologic record reveals that the history of climatic
              change on the Earth is one of  complexity on a wide range of time scales.  As a
              result, questions about causality and the ways in which natural systems are
              linked through the media of the Earth's fluid "spheres" (the atmosphere and
              hydrosphere) have become more complex.  The search for answers to such
              questions has required new sources of data on the abundance of atmospheric
              "greenhouse" gases (e.g., COO) and corresponding information on surfical
              temperatures at various times in the history of the Earth.   The oxygen isotope
              systematics of the common, low temperature iron oxyhydroxide, goethite
              (a-FeOOH), make it a valuable source of information on ambient temperature and
              water at the time of mineral formation.  Goethite forms in moist, oxidizing
              environments such as soils and can preserve a quantitative record of climatic
              conditions on the continents.  It was discovered that there is a small amount
              of CO 2 "trapped" in the crystal structure of goethite as an Fe(CO3) OH in
              goethites from ancient soils can be used to determine the partial pressure of
              CO2 in the Earth's atmosphere.  There appear to have been large fluctuations in
              atmospheric CO2 over the past 440 million years, but it seems that the Earth's
              climate has not always responded in a conventionally anticipated manner.   A
              continuation of the efforts to acquire and verify information on long-term
              changes in climate and atmospheric chemistry during the Phanerozoic is proposed
              here.  The diffusive mixing model for soil CO2 will be applied to carbon
              isotope data from ancient oolitic ironstones to obtain additional information
              on atmospheric CO2 pressures in the Earth's past-particularly at two
              interesting and puzzling times in the "age of the dinosaurs" (the Mesozoic
              era).  Oxygen isotope data from appropriate mineral pairs in these same samples
              would be used to evaluate temperatures and sources of water in a search for
              apparent links with the CO2 content of the Eart h's atmosphere.  Carbon,
              hydrogen and oxygen isotope and elemental analyses will be performed on young,
              active, goethite-bearing deposits to further define the isotopic systematics of
              natural goethites (and possibly ferrihydrites).  The carbon isotope composition
              of "refractory" organic carbon in these young goethites will be analyzed and
              compared with coexisting "accessible" organic carbon as part of the study of
              this newly recognized source of information in ancient samples.   As part of
              the overall effort to understand and utilize the isotopic systematics of low
              temperature iron oxides in studies of ancient environments, the following
              experimental work will be undertaken:  (I)  an experimental study of the carbon
              isotope effects associated with the adsorption of CO2 onto ferrihydrites; (ii) 
              an assessment of the potential for admixed ferrihydrite to interfere with the
              recovery of CO2 from the Fe(CO3)OH component in goethites from young natural
              systems: and (iii)  a comparison at various temperatures of the carbon isotope
              fractionation (relative to gaseous CO2) of the Fe(CO3)OH in the interior of
              goethite with that of CO2 adsorbed onto the surface of goethite.  Such
              experiments are important, because of the important role of ferrihydrite as the
              common initial Fe(III) hydroxide precipitate in natural systems (and therefore
              a precursor to goethite), and because of a need to better understand the
              mechanisms by which Fe(CO3)OH in goethite acquires its carbon isotope
              composition.
