Title       : Small Displacement Faults in Sand: What Control Do They Exert on Saturated and
               Unsaturated Flow and Transport?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1998     
File        : a9614385

Award Number: 9614385
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Wilson jwilson@nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter S. Mozley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laurel B. Goodwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      801 Leroy Place
	      Socorro, NM  878014796    505/835-5690

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614385  Wilson    We propose to study the influence of small-displacement
              faults on both saturated and unsaturated water flow and chemical transport in
              poorly consolidated sandy sediments.  Previous work has focused on the
              influence of faults on saturated fluid flow in rock, rather than sediments. 
              These studies cannot be directly applied to flow in sediments because the
              mechanics of deformation and resultant structures are different for sediments
              than for rocks, and cannot be applied to unsaturated flow because the
              distribution of permeability in a given material is different under unsaturated
              versus saturated conditions.    A complex set of variables controls the
              influence of faulting on fluid flow.  Given the lack of information about the
              behavior of faults in unconsolidated or poorly consolidated sediments,
              addressing all of the pertinent variables is beyond the scope of this proposal.
               We will focus on a small, but very important, aspect of the problems: how
              deformation influence saturated and unsaturated permeability of
              small-displacement faults in sand, the most common aquifer material in the
              southwestern United States.  Small-displacement faults are far more common than
              the large-displacement faults typically included on geologic maps.  Our
              preliminary work suggests that faulting in such material will result in
              decreased saturated permeability and, for the arid moisture conditions typical
              of the region, increased unsaturated permeability, both resulting from
              pore-size reduction caused by deformation.  Thus in the saturated groundwater
              zone faults act as barrier, while in the Vaduz zone they may act as fast paths
              that lead chemicals directly to the water table.    We will test the following
              hypotheses the course of the study:     Fault in sand, especially
              small-displacement faults, are relatively common features in tectonically
              active extensional regions like the Rio Grande Rift.  At the porous-media
              scale, fault-zone saturated and unsaturated permeability is altered by
              deformation and d iagenesis, through grain-size reduction, grain reorientation,
              and cementation.  We will focus our attention on the first two processes.  (The
              third process will be the subject of future research.)  The altered fault-zone
              permeability influences saturated groundwater flow and unsaturated Vaduz zone
              flow, and the associated movement of chemicals.  The degree influence depends
              on the permeability contrast between fault zones and host sands, spatial
              frequency of faults.  In saturated sandy aquifers these fault zones become
              barriers to flow because of reductions in saturated permeability.  In the
              vadose zone fault zones can become preferred  flow paths under the arid
              conditions typical of the southwestern US; in wetter conditions they become
              barriers.    We will test these hypotheses using a combination of geologic and
              hydrologic analyses.  The geology of several study sites will be mapped at
              different scales.  They will then determine the permeability and petrographic
              characteristics of the mapped hydrogeologic units in both deformed and
              undeformed materials.  This field-based data will be used to construct
              numerical models of fault systems in which the influence of fault properties on
              flow and transport can be evaluated.  We will also make geochemical measurement
              of cementation that is diagnostic of past flow regimes.  By addressing the
              problem with a interdisciplinary approach, using a variety of techniques at
              different scales, we hope to determine whether these faults are significant
              hydrogeologic features.
