Title       : Cooperative Research: Three-dimensional Effects of Tsunami Run-up onto a
               Coastline
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9614337

Award Number: 9614337
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George F. Carrier   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,9196,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This action is to renew support for a multi-institutional research project
              involving Professor Philip L.-F. Liu of Cornell University, Professor Costas E.
              Synolakis of the University of Southern California, Professor Harry H. Yeh of
              the University of Washington, and Professor Emeritus George F. Carrier of
              Harvard University. Professor Liu serves as the coordinator for this project. 
              The program is a coordinated effort to investigate the relationship between the
              ground movement in the source region of the earthquake, and the resulting runup
              distribution for a nearshore tsunami. Professor Yeh is responsible for a major
              laboratory experiment to measure the tsunami runup heights caused by an
              offshore seafloor displacement. The laboratory results provide essential data
              to verify the inverse algorithms which determine seafloor displacement from the
              runup information  Professors Liu and Synolakis are responsible for the
              development of the inverse algorithms and the improvement of the simulation
              models. Professors Carrier and Liu are collaborating on improving the
              effectiveness of numerical models by using some of the strengths of analytical
              approaches.  The investigators and participating researchers will meet twice a
              year to discuss research results and research directions.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
