Title       : Jurassic Floras of the Carapace Nunatak Area: Evolution and Paleoclimatic
               Significance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a9614847

Award Number: 9614847
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302227             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas N. Taylor   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edith L. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                OPP 9614847  Taylor and Taylor    Abstract  This award supports a project to
              systematically collect and  analyze the Jurassic fossil floras from three
              levels at Carapace  Nunatak, in southern Victoria Land, and to complete 
              reconnaissance for similar aged deposits at Shapeless Mountain  near the head
              of Wright Valley.  These floras represent the most  extensive deposits of
              Jurassic fossil plants that are known from  the continental portion of
              Antarctica.  They are poorly known,  both from a biostratigraphic and floristic
              standpoint, and as  such are important not only to our understanding of floral 
              changes in Antarctica, but also to correlations with other  Gondwana
              continents.  In addition to impressions and  compressions, the site also
              contains permineralized specimens.  In this rare preservation type, cells and
              tissue systems are  intact so that details about the anatomy and morphology of
              these  Jurassic plants can be evaluated.  The preservation of the 
              permineralized floral elements at Carapace is identical to those  of Permian
              and Triassic age that have been studied in over the  past ten years.  As a
              result a continuum of structurally  preserved plant fossils extending from the
              Permian into the Upper  Jurassic of Antarctica are available for examination.  
               In this context it will be possible to examine details of seed  plant growth,
              development and evolution at high paleolatitudes  during the latter stages of
              the Paleozoic and extending into the  Jurassic.  The few specimens collected
              during an earlier  reconnaissance at Carapace Nunatak suggest a flora rich in 
              conifers and seed ferns.  The conifer components will be  important in
              evaluating basal character states within the major  conifer families, while the
              seed ferns will be useful in  evaluating the characters and relationships of
              these Mesozoic  gymnosperms to the geologically younger flowering plants.  The 
              site also contains some woody specimens (small twigs, fragments  of wood), in
              which the tree rings will be analyzed and com pared  with those from other high
              latitude sites, both older (Permian  and Triassic) and younger (Cretaceous,
              Tertiary).  Because of the  patchy nature of the silicification and the
              discontinuous  sedimentary beds, field work is anticipated to involve primarily
               day trips via helicopter to the sites immediately followed by  sectioning of
              material in the Crary Laboratory at McMurdo Station  in order to reduce the
              collecting of unproductive material.
