Title       : SGER: Modification and Testing of the Time Series - Submersible Incubation
               Device (TS-SID) on the Bermuda Test Bed Mooring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1996    
File        : a9614160

Award Number: 9614160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47749              (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig D. Taylor ctaylor@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth W. Doherty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614160  Taylor    This Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) award will
              validate newly developed   instrumentation for autonomous biological activity
              measurements. The Time Series - Submersible Incubation Device (TS-SID) is a
              mooring-compatible, automated instrument for performing multiple, in situ
              microbial incubation experiments. Each incubation involves a cleaning cycle,
              procurement of a 400 ml sample at depth with simultaneous introduction of
              tracer, and the preservation of up to four pairs of subsamples during
              incubations of user-determined length. Testing under real-world conditions is
              necessary to validate performance and permit publication of results. Specific
              goals are to: A) Modify the subsample distribution valve to prevent leaking and
              construct a mooring-strength stainless steel cage to meet the technical
              requirements of the Bermuda Test Bed Mooring program. B) Perform incubation
              tests in shallow water to confirm proper instrument functioning and establish
              the incubation protocol to be used in the Test Bed Mooring studies. C) Place
              the instrument on the Bermuda Test Bed Mooring to perform autonomous primary
              production measurements.     This new instrumentation addresses the need to
              reduce the temporal disparity between key biological measurements, and
              correlative high resolution physical and biophysical measurements, as well as
              to provide a means for investigating underlying physiological response of
              microorganisms to changes in the environment. Because most of the labor
              intensive manipulations have been automated, it is possible to  increase the
              frequency of measurements in biological time series studies (up to several
              measurements per day) for directly quantifying the effects of seasonal or
              episodic physical phenomena upon biological activities, such as phytoplankton
              primary production.
