Title       : Tephrochronology Applied to Late Cenozoic Paleoclimate and Geomorphic Evolution
               of the Central Transantarctic Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9614027

Award Number: 9614027
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101529             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Marchant marchant@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a program to study the geomorphic evolution  of the Dry
              Valleys region of the Transantarctic Mountains.  The  isotopic ages and areal
              distribution of volcanic ash deposits  will be used to constrain the chronology
              and rates of landform  development and to help quantify the age of geomorphic
              surfaces.  The depositional setting and degree of weathering of the ash will 
              also help to constrain regional paleoclimatic conditions during  and after
              deposition of the volcanic ash.  This work will focus  on the Quartermain
              Mountains, Asgaard Range, Olympus Range, and  McKelvey Valley because these
              regions are known to contain some  volcanic ash deposits and because they
              contain a variety of  geomorphic settings over a substantial elevation range.  
               This project will attempt to test assumptions that underlie the  hypothesis
              that the Dry Valleys region represents a relict, semi-  arid landscape that
              formed prior to build up of the continental  ice sheets during middle Miocene
              time and that subsequent slope  modification has been limited to minor glacial
              scouring  concentrated at valley heads, glacier confluences, and deep-  valley
              troughs.  Among these assumptions are 1) that present  geomorphic processes are
              ineffective denudation agents, 2) that  widespread land surfaces within
              tectonically uniform blocks  reflect base-level changes at the Transantarctic
              Mountains front,  and 3) that geomorphic landforms of the Dry Valleys that 
              superficially resemble box canyons, escarpments, mesas, and  buttes of desert
              regions in the American southwest formed by  denudation processes now operating
              in the Colorado Plateau.    The isotopic age information generated by this
              project will  provide constraints for models of geomorphic evolution in cold- 
              desert regions and will have implications for models of landscape  development
              and uplift history of the Transantarctic Mountains.  If the hypothesis of
              ancient semi-arid erosion followed by minor  glacial incision proves correct
              for the Dry Valleys regi on, then  changes in base level, as defined by
              isotopically dated land  surfaces in the Valleys, will provide a chronology of
              late  Cenozoic mountain evolution and uplift independent of 
              thermochronological studies that have been completed.  This is  important
              because the thermochronology studies, although well  suited for determining
              long-term uplift rates, are not well  suited to distinguishing early from late
              Cenozoic uplift.  The  volcanic ash data base developed in the course of this
              study will  also be useful for studies of the McMurdo volcanic province.
