Title       : Everest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1998    
File        : a9614740

Award Number: 9614740
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1650000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg MacGillivray   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MacGillivray Freeman Films
	      P.O. Box 205
	      Laguna Beach, CA  92652    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9614740  MacGillivray    MacGillivray Freeman Films is producing a 40-minute
              large format film about a scientific and climbing expedition on Mount Everest. 
              The film will introduce viewers to the methods and significance of scientific
              field research and the rigor and excitement of the scientific endeavor through
              an expedition to the top of the world's tallest mountain.  An international
              climbing team of women and men will advance the research of geophysicist Roger
              Bilham who has been influential in applying Global Positioning System (GPS)
              technology to the study of earthquakes in the Himalaya.  The film also will
              explore the physiological challenges the climbers face at extreme altitude. 
              Endoscopic and microscopic photography will reveal the human body's amazing
              adaptations to a cold, low-oxygen environment.  A comprehensive package of
              ancillary materials for teachers, students, film exhibitors, and the general
              public will enhance the educational experience of the film.    Greg
              MacGillivray, President of MacGillivray Freeman Films, will be the PI and
              Executive Producer/Co-Producer/Director/Photographer.  Stepehen Judson and Alec
              Lorimore, both of MacGillivray Films, will be Co-writer/Director and
              Co-Producer respectively.  Tim Cahill, a freelance writer with experience
              writing for National Geographic and GEO will be the other Co-writer.  Advisors
              include:       Cynthia Beall, Prof. of Physical Anthropology, Case Western
              Reserve University   Broughton Coburn, Conservation and Development Expert on
              Nepal   James Fisher, Prof. of Anthropology, Carleton College   Kip Hodges,
              Prof. of Geology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology   Charles Houston,
              Prof. of Medicine (emeritus), University of Vermont   Peter Molnar, Senior
              Research Assoc. Atmosphere and Planetary Sciences, MIT   Audrey Salkeld, Author
              and Fellow, Royal Geographical Society   Bradford Washburn, Honorary Director,
              Museum of Science, Boston
