Title       : The Development of Computational Methods to Study the Chemical Structural
               Evolution of Organic Macromolecules with Diagenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a9614352

Award Number: 9614352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110616             (Estimated)
Investigator: George D. Cody cody@gl.ciw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614352  Cody     Organic Reactions that modify the chemical structure of
              biomacromolecules are controlled, in part by the long range topology of the
              macromolecule.  Understanding the role of macromolecular structure on monomer
              scale reactivity has important implications regarding our ability to assess the
              probability for preservation of ancient biomacromolecules (e.g. kerogen as a
              function of T, P, and fluid composition.  The work defined in this proposal
              sets out to develop a methodology for computational organic geochemistry.  A
              step-wise approach is outlined that starts with a statistical mechanical model
              of macromolecular topology (the Rotational Isomeric State Model).  The
              rotational isomeric states are characterized through semi-empirical quantum
              mechanical calculations of the inter-segmental rotational energy  surface. 
              These calculations lead to the generation of a large scale, "coarse-grained"
              macromolecular model that includes the effects of over 10000, monomers. 
              Construction of the macromolecular model is constrained by the RIS
              calculations; from the initial configuration, using a structure building
              algorithm, to the final equilibrium state obtained via Monte-Carlo methods. 
              Two macromolecular systems are selected as initial problems.  These are the
              diagenesis of lignin, a principle biomacromolecular component of the xylem
              tissue of wood, and the diagenesis of sporopollenin, a particularly resistant
              biopolymeric component of plant spores and seeds.  The developed computational
              methods will be applied to assess the energetic penalties (or gains) of various
              proposed diagenetic reaction pathways in the two systems based on consideration
              of the total energy of the macromolecular system.  The methodology obtained
              from the work outlined in this proposal will be exportable to a wide range of
              problems in organic geochemistry.
