Title       : Theory of Charge Transport in Molecularly Doped Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1997  
File        : a9614848

Award Number: 9614848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183000             (Estimated)
Investigator: V. M. Kenkre kenkre@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Dunlap  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9614848  Kenkre  Ongoing developments in xerography and in electroluminiscent 
              display devices require a detailed understanding of charge  transport in
              molecularly doped solids.  This grant, part of  a collaboration between two
              groups at the University of New  Mexico and at the University of Missouri-Rolla
              is  to  support research on this subject.  The primary issues, to be  addressed
              are the effects of disorder and high electric  fields on carrier motion in
              polymeric films.  The specific  projects include, inter alia, the
              identification of the  charge carriers, study of the field induced traps, 
              determination of the time and length scales for the  equilibration of carriers
              following photoexcitation and  several other issues necessary to clarify the
              physical  mechanism behind the phenomena.  %%%  Xerography and
              electroluminescent display devices use doped  molecular solids (for example
              polymer films).  The basic  physical phenomena involving photoconduction, i. e.
              charging  and currents following absorption of light,  contains  several
              unanswered  questions.  This grant is to support  theoretical  work  to
              elucidate the fundamental processes  which account for the phenomena,  and
              possibly to help  design materials which are better photoconductors.  The 
              grant is being awarded to two groups, one at the University  of New Mexico and
              another at the University of Missouri-  Rolla for a collaborative enterprise.
