Title       : New Approaches to Production Rates of Cosmogenic Nuclides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2000  
File        : a9614561

Award Number: 9614561
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Kurz mkurz@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Jenkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9614561  Kurz    Cosmogenic nuclides are widely used in the earth sciences,
              particularly in surface exposure dating of quaternary surficial surfaces and
              deposits, which are important to unraveling past climate changes.  One
              limitation of such studies is the uncertainty in the absolute production rates
              of thecosmogenic nuclides.  The cosmic ray flux varies significantly with
              latitude and elevation, due to the shielding effects of the atmosphere and the
              earth's magnetic field.  In order to evaluate uncertainties, and test the
              widely used latitude and elevation scaling procedures of Lal (1991), we have
              developed a method for directly measuring cosmic ray produced 3He and tritium
              in specially designed water targets.  This procedure is to deploy stainless
              steel vacuum vessels, containing tritium-free and degassed water, for known
              periods at different latitudes and elevations, allowing a direct measurement of
              the spallation rates.  The preliminary results from Hawaii and Antarctica shows
              that the procedure is effective and documents the elevation dependence at these
              two locations; the results agree well with previous estimates of elevation
              dependance.  However, the results document a large discrepancy with the
              predicted latitude dependence.  This proposal seeks funds to deploy a number of
              these vessels, in order to verify this result and to accurately determine the
              latitude dependence of spallation production mechanisms.    Because spallation
              rates are dependent on the chemical composition of the target, and oxygen (the
              target atom in the water vessels) yields the highest production rates, we also
              propose to evaluate composition dependence.  This will be accomplished by
              measuring  3He in a number of olivine/magnetite pairs from Antarctic lava
              flows, combined with major element compositions.  In addition, we will measure
              the 3He depth dependance in a 3 meter deep core, which will allow
              quantification of the muon contribution to 3He production.
