Title       : Superfluidity and Phase Coherence in Very Degenerate Atomic Gases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 2,  1998    
File        : a9614133

Award Number: 9614133
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1996  
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Leggett tony@cromwell.physics.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9614133  Leggett  Within the last year the phenomena of Bose-Einstein 
              condensation (BEC) in dilute atomic gases has been realized  in three different
              laboratories and many more are moving  into this area.  The systems in question
              lie in a regime of  parameters (density, temperature, isolation _.) many orders
               of magnitude different from those which characterize the  only previously
              known laboratory system believed to exhibit  BEC, namely superfluid 4He. 
              Consequently, it should be  possible to use these systems to subject to
              experimental  test a variety of ideas which are believed to apply to 
              superfluid Helium but have never been tested there and in  particular to
              explore the precise relation between BEC and  the complex of phenomena which go
              under the name of  "superfluidity".  Theoretical work will be carried out, both
               in general and in the context of dilute atomic gases, to  examine the
              superfluid density and the condition for the  phenomena of zero rotation and of
              persistent currents, and  to make predictions about a number of interesting 
              experiments on the subject of "quantum phase coherence" and  "phase memory"
              which are apparently feasible in these  systems. This grant has been
              co-reviewed with the  Theoretical Physics program in the Division of Physics
              and  is being co-funded with them.  %%%  This grant supports the work of a
              senior, distinguished PI  whose many thoughtful contributions to the general
              area of  superfluidity and other condensed state phenomena (such as 
              macroscopic quantum tunneling)  are well known.  This  project, motivated by
              recent experiments, takes him back to  the questions associated with
              relationship between Bose-  Einstein condensation and superfluidity in dilute
              gases.  This grant has been co-reviewed with the Theoretical Physics  program
              in the Division of Physics and is being co-funded  with them.  ***
