Title       : Hydrologic Analyses of Nested Watersheds in the Siberian Arctic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1997     
File        : a9614387

Award Number: 9614387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry D. Hinzman ffldh@aurora.alaska.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yuji Kodama  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5939,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614387   Hinzman    Developing a generalized understanding of arctic climatic
              dynamics requires a circumpolar comparison of processes and validation of
              regional models in other areas.  We propose to investigate current hydrologic
              and thermal processes occurring  in the Siberian Arctic and compare their
              dynamics to watersheds we have studied in the Alaskan Arctic.  Our approach
              will be to synthesize hydrologic and meteorologic data collected by Japanese
              and Russian scientists in two nested watersheds near Tiksi, Russia and apply
              our spatially distributed coupled model to those watersheds.  Spatially
              distributed hydrologic models require spatially distributed calibration and
              verification data.   Collection of this data will be accomplished through
              utilization of Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) imagery.  Field ground truth will
              be collected by us to develop and verify SAR imagery neural network training
              data sets.  This research will identify the applicability of utilizing SAR
              imagery for use in developmental and operational hydrologic models in the
              Russian Arctic.  It will allow us to test and improve the capability of our
              hydrologic and thermal model in simulating current physical processes and
              consequently improve the model's forecasting capability.  This research will
              also improve our understanding of the global hydrologic cycle by improving our
              understanding of the physical processes occurring in the Siberian Arctic, their
              variability and their interactions.  Finally, this research will enable a
              comparative analysis of hydrologic and thermal processes between latitudinally
              equivalent sites, and also a comparison of our ability to correctly simulate
              these processes.  This research will also enable an international meld of the
              GEXEX/GAME and ARCSS/LAII research programs and an international collaboration
              of Russian, Japanese and American investigators joining forces to share
              expertise and improve our understanding of processes of inter-continental
              dimension.
