Title       : SGER: Phylogenetic and Indigeneity Implications of MALDI-MS Determined
               Osteocalcin Protein Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1996    
File        : a9614235

Award Number: 9614235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9981               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peggy H. Ostrom ostrom@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas A. Gage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614235  Ostrom   A new approach, matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization
              mass spectrometry (MALDI-MS), to determine the amino acid sequence of the
              protein osteocalcin in bones of ancient organisms and their closest modern
              ancestors to establish preliminary evolutionary relationships and assess
              indigeneity.  The use of osteocalcin, the particular samples available, and the
              application of MALDI-MS provide a  unique position of strength for the proposed
              research.  Osteocalcin has several extremely important attributes which include
              intimate association with the hydroxyapatite mineral phase of bone,
              preferential preservation over time, exclusive occurrence in vertebrate
              mineralized tissues, absence in common contaminators including microbes,
              invertebrates and plants, retention of immunological specificity via
              radioimmunoassay (RIA), and the existence of an extensive database of protein
              sequences for osteocalcin.  In our particular case, prior work has confirmed
              the presence of osteocalcin via RIA for all ancient samples.  The MALDI-MS
              technique is not subject to the myriad of problems that confront traditional
              methods for protein sequencing.  Although this approach has never been
              attempted on ancient proteins, we intend to demonstrate its potential to
              delineate ancient protein sequences and, thus, identify indigenous organic
              matter.  Given the exclusive yet ubiquitous occurrence of osteocalcin among
              vertebrates, the techniques developed in this project will be directly
              applicable for molecular studies on any number of other vertebrate lineages
              with obscured evolutionary relationships.
