Title       : RUI: Upper Devonian Black Shales in Eastern North America, Conodont
               Biostratigraphy, Frasnian-Famennian Mass Extinction Horizon, and Absolute Dates
               from Associated Ash Layers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2001   
File        : a9614314

Award Number: 9614314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78000              (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Jeffrey Over over@geneseo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Geneseo
	      
	      Geneseo, NY  14454    716/245-5211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9614314  Over     The Upper Devonian black shales in eastern North America are
              important for hydrocarbon resources, understanding of global climate change,
              and the occurrence of a global mass extinction event, have never been
              systematically collected to determine the complete conodont biozoneation. this
              is simply because workers have had difficulties recovering conodonts from the
              black shales and have instead focused on green shale and carbonate interbeds. 
              The result is undescribed taxa, incomplete zonations, and tenuous correlations
              of black shales in the Appalachian, Illinois, and Michigan basins.  High
              resolution biostratigraphy and recognition of global event horizons is possible
              by careful sampling of black shale horizons.  Biozones, cryptic
              disconformities, the Frasnian-Famennian boundary, and the
              Devonian-Carboniferous boundary have been recognized in the Woodford Shale of
              Oklahoma - entirely within black shale.  Similar sampling and processing
              techniques in the northern Appalachian Basin have recovered new taxa, as well
              as isolated the Frasnian-Famennian boundary in the Hanover Shale of New York
              and the Upper Olentangy Shale of Ohio.  Conodonts have been described from the
              Middlesex and Pipe Creek shales, two petroliferous black shales that had
              previously been unzoned.   The purpose of this project is to expand upon
              previous studies and preliminary sample materials that are currently under
              investigation to systematically collect black shale sequences in the three
              eastern North American basins, describe conodont faunas, and utilize revised
              taxonomy and correlation techniques to prepare complete zonal schemes for the
              Antrim Shale (Michigan Basin), Chattanooga Shale (southern Appalachian Basin),
              and New Albany Shale (Illinois Basin).  This study will differ from previous
              works by collecting the black shale horizons.  This will enable recognition of
              minor disconformities, ash horizons, and determine the ranges of biozones. 
              Within this biostratigraphic framework small scale depositional cyc les will be
              correlatable between basins and absolute dates of known ash beds (e.g., Center
              Hill, Belpre), as well as ash beds found during recent sampling, will be tied
              together.  The result will be a clearer understanding of biozone and
              depositional cycle intervals, and an indication of depositional rates for the
              different members of the eastern shale formations on relative and absolute time
              scales.  This will also allow precise correlation of discrete members and beds
              within the black shale facies.   Undergraduate research participation is a
              primary focus within the project.  Students will collect, process, and analyze
              strata for microfossils and characterize ash horizons utilizing petrographic
              techniques, the scanning electron microscope, and energy dispersive x-ray
              analysis for elemental determination.
