Title       : The Mount Washington Observatory Weatherwise Radio Outreach Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1999 
File        : a9614340

Award Number: 9614340
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Valentine H. Kass                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Crane   (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Thurlow  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Mt Wash Observatory Inc
	      
	      Gorham, NH  03581    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9614340  Thurlow    The Mount Washington Observatory will produce a nationally
              syndicated, short-format radio series on the weather over a three year period. 
              The request is for a declining amount in each of the three years with the
              project becoming self-sustaining at the end of that period.    The daily,
              two-minute programs present facts about and explanations of the physical
              processes in all levels of the atmosphere, the nature of meteorological
              systems, weather observation and forecasting, and first- and second-hand
              accounts relating the effect weather and climate have on people.   During a
              fifteen month pilot stage, Weatherwise (Title to be changed to The Weather
              Notebook) has been carried on 115 public and commercial stations.  The NSF
              grant will provide the producers with the resources needed to expand carriage
              with a goal of carriage on at least 225 stations, to implement formative and
              summative evaluation, to upgrade production, to increase promotion, and to make
              ancillary material available to the public.  The ancillary materials will
              include a printed weather notebook which serves as a field guide for listeners
              in which they can make their own weather observations and draw conclusions, an
              educational weather poster, The Weather Notebook  transcripts and study
              suggestions, and a weather observation exhibit at the Mount Washington
              Observatory Museum.      The PI for the project will be David Thurlow of the
              Mount Washington Observatory who will serve as writer, host, and program
              coordinator.  The producer will be Douglas Mayer whose previous experience
              includes with NPR on Car Talk.  Evaluation will be conducted by RMC Research
              Corporation.
