Title       : Assessing Cretaceous Vegetational Change: Palynological, Mesofossil and
               Macrofossil Evidence from the Atlantic Coastal Plain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1997  
File        : a9614672

Award Number: 9614672
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127070             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Crane   (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick S. Herendeen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614672  Crane     The mid-Cretaceous diversification of angiosperms marks the
              transition from Mesozoic terrestrial ecosystems dominated by ferns, conifers,
              cycads and Bennettitales, to more modern ecosystems dominated by angiosperms. 
              In the paleobotanical record this transition is much more profound than that
              occurring at the Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary.  Angiosperm macrofossils are
              sparse in pre-Aptian fossil floras, but by the Cenomanian angiosperm leaves are
              diverse, abundant and frequently dominant in paleobotanical assemblages. 
              Compilations of data on macrofloras and microfloras (palynofloras), especially
              from western North America, show that angiosperms had attained within-flora
              diversity levels of about 40%-80% by the end of the Cretaceous, but there is
              both palynological and macrofossil evidence that angiosperm abundance remained
              subordinate to gymnosperms and ferns in some habitats, and perhaps over large
              geographic areas.   In this proposal we request support for a critical study of
              the pattern of angiospem diversification to provide a more detailed insight
              into the group's rise to ecological dominance, and to clarify temporal changes
              in the composition of Cretaceous terrestrial ecosystems.  Our approach will
              include consideration of both palynological and macrofossil evidence but will
              also incorporate detailed studies of newly discovered and highly informative
              mesofossil assemblages (composed of small flowers, fruits, seeds, shoots, and
              leaf and wood fragments), which have not been used previously to establish
              stratigraphic ranges and assess Cretaceous vegetational change.  Because there
              is a clear geographical pattern to the angiosperm diversification (initial
              radiation at low paleolatitudes and subsequent movement into high
              paleolatitudes), we focus on a sequence of exceptionally-preserved fossil
              floras in a single area - the Atlantic Coastal Plain of eastern North America -
              where it is possible to integrate data on the abundance and diversity of
              macrofossils, mesofossils and po llen-spore assemblages.   Specifically we
              will:  I)  document the leaf, mesofossil and pollen-spore assemblages from
              eight localities ranging in age from Early Aptian to Early Campanian and
              establish the systematic affinities of selected dispersed pollen and spores
              based on the affinities of the mesofossils containing comparable in situ
              palynomorphs; ii)  compare temporal changes in the diversity and abundance of
              major groups of vascular plants, using data from mesofossils as an independent
              test of patterns documented at the same sites by macrofossils and palynofloras;
              iii)  identify discrepancies in the patterns revealed by different organ
              systems, both through direct comparison, and through comparison of dispersed
              palynofloras with pollen and spores preserved within flowers, cones and
              sporangia.  These results will be used to interpret the ecological significance
              of geographic and stratigraphic patterns in pollen and spores based on an
              already completed database of more than 2,500 Cretaceous palnofloras from North
              America
