Title       : Relationship of Predominant Soil Moisture, Soil Hydraulic Processes and
               Precipitation Length Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9614884

Award Number: 9614884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274099             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Cuenca cuencarh@pandora.bre.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1325,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614881  Cuenca    While processes in the atmospheric boundary layers are
              integrated on length scales of kilometers or tens of kilometers, processes in
              soils are integrated at length scales of meters or tens of meters.  The spatial
              variability of precipitation is controlled by atmospheric processes while the
              spatial variability of soil moisture content is controlled by soil hydraulic
              properties which regulate redistribution of precipitation as it infiltrates
              below the soil surface.  Physically-based simulation models of hydrologic and
              atmospheric boundary layer processes are affected by soil moisture content and
              require incorporation of soil hydraulic properties to quantify soil moisture
              redistribution.  Information on length scales of physical processes is required
              for design of sampling schemes to retrieve process characteristics and to
              determine the optimum spatial resolution for physically-based simulation
              models.  The objectives of this project are focused on determination of
              relevant length scales for soil moisture content, soil hydraulic processes and
              precipitation from a field experiment within the Walnut River watershed in
              Kansas.  Instrumentation required includes a combination of automated and
              manual time domain reflectometery sites for soil moisture content, distributed
              tension infiltrometer measurements for soil hydraulic properties, and a rain
              gauge network for precipitaiton.  The proposed experimental site is the Towanda
              sub-basin within the Walnut River watershed which makes up the CASES
              (Cooperative Atmosphere Surface Exchange Study) experimental domain. 
              Measurements will be centralized around the Argonne National Laboratory (ANL)
              eddy correlation flux tower presently operating in this sub-basin. 
              Geostatistical techniques for regional variable analysis will be applied to
              determine the relevant length scales and investigate their variation with time.
                 The CASES project brings together an interdisciplinary team of hydrologists,
              plant, ecosystem and atmospheric scientists to st udy the coupling between
              hydrologic processes, the diurmal energy balance and the atmospheric boundary
              layer at the mesoscale.  The Walnut River watershed was chosen because
              processes within the watershed are at sufficiently large scale for effects to
              be measured in the atmospheric boundary layer.  The objective of CASES is to
              develop an experimental framework which can be used for
              hydrologic-atmospheric-ecosystem studies of sufficient duration to allow
              evaluation of interseasonal and interannual effects.  CASES can be viewed as a
              logical step in the progression of large-scale hydrologic-atmospheric
              science-remote sensing experiments starting from HAPEX-MOBILHY, through FIFE,
              HAPEX-Sahel and BOREAS.  All of these experiments have focused on a different
              ecosystem which has potential for significant impact in the global circulation
              syqtem and resulting climate but were limited in the time scale to a few weeks
              or months.  The objectives of CASES fall within the GCIP  GEWEX (Global Energy
              and Water Cycle Experiment) Continental-Scale international Project  domain and
              the International Geosphere-Biosphere Program (GBP).  The instrumentation
              required for this project will remain in the Walnut River watershed at the
              conclusion of the project and responsibility for continued operation will be
              taken over by ANL. The PI of this proposal is presently serving as the
              coordinator for the Hydrology Group of CASES.  The experimental design builds
              on the experience of the PI in the HAPEX-MOBILHY, HAPEX-Sahel and BOREAS field
              experiments.
