Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Verbal Semantics and Morphosyntax in Tsafiki
               (Colorado)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1997     
File        : a9614981

Award Number: 9614981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott DeLancey delancey@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                The current project is for doctoral
              dissertation research on the  morphosyntactic and semantic verbal system of
              Tsafiki (Colorado).  Tsafiki is the native language of the Tsachila
              (Colorados), an  indigenous minority (2,000 speakers) of the tropical western 
              lowlands of Ecuador. The dissertation topic will accomplish two  goals: 1)
              present a thorough description of one of the major  grammatical systems of the
              language; and 2) explore a topic of  theoretical interest to the linguistic
              community.     Tsafiki is an under-documented language which belongs to a 
              little-described family of languages of South America,  Barbakoan-Paesan. A
              detailed description of the morphosyntax of  the verbal system will contribute
              greatly to both the  understanding of Tsafiki and knowledge about this family
              of  languages.     Tsafiki is of theoretical interest in that it has an
              interesting  system of verbal classification, incorporation of both subjects 
              and objects and perhaps, most importantly, a very elaborate  evidential (source
              of knowledge) system. This evidential system  is an integral part of the
              grammar. Much of the morphosyntactic  resources of the language are devoted to
              coding not only the  source of information but also the type of information and
               whether the information falls into the category of cultural,  general
              knowledge or knowledge based on the speaker's own  immediate perceptions and
              internal states. The evidential system  interacts in some interesting ways with
              the person-marking  system, the tense-aspect system and the verbal
              classification  system. While evidential systems are attested in a number of 
              languages worldwide they also appear to be an areal phenomenon in  South
              America. They appear in Quechua, Aymara and languages of  the Amazonian basin.
              But very little descriptive or theoretical  work has been done on such systems.
              This dissertation will  advance the theoretical understanding of such systems. 
                 The project has also been designed to benefit thr ee different  communities:
              1) the academic community of the United States; 2)  the academic community of
              Ecuador; and 3) the Tsachila community  itself. Copies of all materials
              produced will be given to the  Pontificia Universidad Catolica del Ecuador and
              to the Tsachila  community. In addition, the materials will be used as a basis
              for  eventually producing bilingual materials, a dictionary and  pedagogical
              materials for the community.
