Title       : Retroactive Determination of Movement at Age in Relation to Water Mass in
               Patagonian Toothfish Through Laser-Based Elemental Analysis of Otoliths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2000      
File        : a9614756

Award Number: 9614756
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26202              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia M. Jones cjones@odu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Inigo Everson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julian Ashford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9614756  Jones  Laser-based Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry
              LA-ICPMS)  is a new technique, which is being applied for the first time in 
              the Southern Ocean, to examine movement-at-age in Patagonian  Toothfish
              (Dissostichus eleginoides). The chemical structure of  growth increments in the
              otoliths of fish reflects the composition  of water passing across the gills;
              the increments also give a  chronological record of the life history of
              individual fish before  capture and are used for aging. Elemental analysis
              using LA-ICPMS  allows accurate sampling of a suite of elements in the
              otoliths,  giving a record of changes in the water mass experienced by the 
              fish. This can be related retroactively to age and real time using  the
              increments.    The project is an international collaboration between scientists
               from the United States, United Kingdom, France, Chile and  Australia. The
              central collaboration is between scientists at Old  Dominion University and the
              British Antarctic Survey, bringing  together the most extensive experience
              currently available of the  technique, with that of Antarctic life systems.
              Scientists from  France, Chile, Australia and the United States are providing 
              samples of Toothfish otoliths from the Southern Ocean and southern  South
              America.    The project consists of four inter-linked modules, addressing the 
              overall question: what are the patterns of movement of Patagonian  Toothfish
              over its life history in relation to variability of  water mass in time and
              space? The objectives are to show that the  LA-ICPMS technique can discriminate
              between Patagonian Toothfish  from different geographical regions, develop a
              validated aging  method, and characterize the variability of the chemical
              signal  with age and between years. Other objectives are to elucidate 
              differential spawning sites, and examine age-specific movement  retrospectively
              in individual fish within the Southern Ocean, and  within the Patagonia-Scotia
              Arc region. NSF will fund only module  3 (Does eleme ntal analysis indicate
              movement of Patagonian  toothfish between the Atlantic, Inian, and Pacific
              sectors of the  Southern Ocean?), while modules 1, 2, and 4 will be funded by 
              other governments.    The first module consists of a preliminary test for
              elemental  variability in otoliths, using LA-ICPMS. The second is the 
              development of a reliable aging method with fully validated  criteria for
              interpretation of growth increments, using marginal  increment analysis. The
              third module consists of analysing, with  LAICPMS, a suite of elements present
              across otolith sections of  fish taken from Macquarie Island, the Kerguelen
              Islands and South  Georgia in the Southern Ocean. Discrimination of element 
              concentrations at the otolith edge between regions will confirm  that the
              technique can detect geographic separation in Patagonian  Toothfish.
              Discrimination by year class of concentrations at the  nucleus will indicate
              that spawning sites are separate. Comparison  between known-age sites in the
              otoliths will test for changes in  the elemental profile with age corresponding
              to movement of fish  between water masses. Comparison between the same
              known-age sites  of fish from different age classes will test for variability 
              between years. The fourth module examines elemental concentrations  on a finer
              scale, comparing consecutive year sites across otoliths  sampled from northern
              and southern Chile, the Falkland Islands and  South Georgia.    The results of
              the project will be of direct benefit to population  and ecosystem ecologists,
              oceanographers, and fisheries managers  working in the Southern Ocean and
              outside. They will indicate  where movement occurs in time and space, and where
              populations are  isolated potentially by oceanographic barriers. The validation
              of  aging criteria will be a major contribution to accurate aging of 
              Patagonian Toothfish. Better knowledge of age and stock structure,  and mixing
              levels, is important for the use of fisheries yield  models; better
              understanding of the role playe d by environmental  processes will allow better
              prediction of recruitment and growth.  The chemical structure of the otolith
              may be used as a retroactive  environmental record, giving data that may
              enhance understanding  of the role of inter-annual variability in structuring
              marine  ecosystems, and allow detection of trends associated with 
              climate-induced change.
