Title       : Dissertation Research: Pliocene Hominid Foraging Behavior at Sterkfontein Member
               5 (South Africa): Insights From Actualistic Studies of Modern Chimpanzees and
               Their Environ
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1996   
File        : a9614930

Award Number: 9614930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry T. Bunn htbunn@macc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Henry Bunn Mr. Travis Pickering will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his research is to examine faunal
              remains associated with early hominid skeletons to determine whether such
              materials accumulated through non-human processes or as the result of human
              activity. If the latter is the case, then analysis of these materials will
              permit scientists to gain insight into early hominid diet and behavior. If the
              opposite proves true, then faunal remains can provide information on the
              specific local environment in which a hominid lived, but little more than that.
              A number of natural processes can act to aggregate bones - human and otherwise
              - into one place: leopards, porcupines and hyenas for example all accumulate
              such remains in desecrate concentrations. To determine whether humans are the
              responsible agent scientists have used as controls archaeological sites where
              it is known, on the basis of other evidence, that hunting has taken place and
              also conducted butchering experiments using stone tools to search for
              `signatures` of human butchering behavior. Likewise they have collected bones
              from hyena and other carnivore dens and from lion kills to determine the
              characteristics of non-human carnivore modification. As Pickering notes however
              it is quite unlikely that the earliest hominids who lived millions of years ago
              behaved in ways similar to their more recent counterparts and one has very
              little idea what such an assemblage should look like. Because they were similar
              in size to chimpanzees and probably relied primarily on their hands and teeth,
              Pickering believes that modern chimpanzees may provide a relevant model.      
              Although it is not an important element in their diet, chimpanzees do eat meat
              and hunt and kill animals in the wild. In the first stage of this research Mr.
              Pickering will provide captive chimps with goat carcasses, and allow the chimps
              to feed on them. The residues will be collected, cleaned and taken to the
              University of Wisconsin for zooarchaeological analysis which focuses on the
              location and nature of gnaw marks and on breakage patterns. In a later stage of
              the research, also supported through this grant, he will travel to South Africa
              to analyze faunal remains from the australopithecine site of Sterkfontein.
              Similarities and differences in skeletal part representation and bone
              modifications between the Sterkfontien material modern control material will
              then be noted.       This research is important for several reasons. It will
              provide insight into early hominid behavior. It will help to develop analytic
              techniques which can be employed in many sites   and it will assist in training
              a promising young scientist.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
