Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Development of Environmental Tracers for Water and
               Solute Transport in Arid Vadose Zones with Applications to Paleohydrology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1997   
File        : a9614509

Award Number: 9614509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140019             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred M. Phillips phillips@nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      P O Box Q, Campus Station
	      Socorro, NM  878010389    505/835-5700

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614509  Phillips    The transport of water and solute through the vadose zone
              represents a major area of uncertainty in hydrologic processes of arid regions.
               The understanding of these fluxes in arid regions is critical in developing
              hydrologic models, estimating water resource availability and in the siting of
              waste disposal facilities.  Two the most promising tracer techniques, chloride
              mass balance and secular variations in chlorine-36 (36Cl) rely on untested
              assumptions of the consistency of their deposition at the land surface.  This
              has led to significant criticisms of these methods.  The goal of this research
              is to develop sound techniques for measuring recharge and solute transport
              using the southern Great Basin, where the thickness of the   vadose zone in
              alluvial valleys often exceeds 250 meters as field research laboratory.    To
              use this tracer data to reconstruct the water solute flux history in  the
              vadose zone, accurate reconstruction of the flux of Chloride and   36Cl from
              precipitation and dry deposition are needed.  We first propose to develop an
              accurate 36Cl chronology using age dated pack rat midden materials from the
              area.  Recent pack rat midden data from Plummer et al. (1996) show convincing
              evidence that 36Cl deposition varies both with magnetic field intensity and
              climatic patterns, and is also preserved in ground waters and soil waters.  The
              36Cl chronology will be developed using these data, combined with paleomagnetic
               intensity data to determine the secular 36Cl production through the late
              Pleistocene.  The 36Cl/Cl chronology will next be used to estimate the
              variations in chloride flux through the late Pleistocene. Knowledge of the
              chloride flux is crucial if the chloride mass balance approach is used to
              estimate recharge and soil water age and represents one of the major
              uncertainties in the application of the method, particularly during dry and
              windy periods of the Pleistocene.  36Cl/Cl ratio changes that are not in phase
              with secular variations are the result  of dilution of the ratio by increased
              chloride flux from precipitation and/or dry deposition.  Two methods are
              proposed to bracket the paleochoride flux, by first ignoring any additional
              36Cl in dry deposition (minimum chloride flux) and secondly by accounting for
              36Cl/Cl observed in lacustine dust sources.  The chloride flux chronology will
              be extended beyond 14C dated material by analogy with climatic conditions
              occurring prior to 40 ka.  Modern chloride deposition will also be measured
              using in situ samplers in both Nevada and New Mexico.  Soil from these areas
              will first be leached of chloride and repacked into columns open only at the
              top.  The columns will be buried on site and allowed to accumulate chloride,
              bromide and 36Cl to calculate the integrated modern flux of these tracers.  Due
              to the low fluxes, the accumulation period must extend beyond the length of
              this project (5-10 yr), but will provide firm estimates of modern tracer flux. 
                The reconstructed 36Cl and Cl chronologies will then be used to infer the
              recharge and paleoclimatic conditions preserved in three previously analyzed
              boreholes in Frenchman Flat and a 1200 meter core hole (Ue6e) drilled in 1973,
              preserved and archived at the USGS Core Library in Mercury, NV which penetrates
              450 meters of unsaturated zone comprised primarily of alluvial sediments.  The
              boreholes in Frenchman Flat have preserved up to 120 kyr of soil water and it
              is hoped that the deeper vadose zone found at Ue6e will push this record back
              significantly further.  Analysis of chloride and 36Cl/Cl ratios will be
              conducted on the archive core.  Chloride analysis will be used delineate
              portions of the core where 36Cl will be analyzed.  The chloride flux chronology
              and paleorecharage developed in this project will be compared to soil-derived
              paleorecharge reported from other sites in the American Southwest (Mojave
              Desert, New Mexico and Texas) along with ongoing paleohydrology studies in the
              adjacent Amargosa River drainage for consistency and to develop a  regional
              picture of paleorecharge.  Data obtained during DOE investigations of both
              Frenchman Flat and Yucca Flat  will be incorporated as it becomes available. 
              This project will closely coordinate with DOE drilling activities to obtain new
              core samples for additional analysis and work through DOE to obtain drilling
              support for a shallow borehole adjacent to Ue6e.    The tracer profile to be
              analyzed in this proposal, previously reported tracer profiles from adjacent
              Frenchman Flat, also represent natural vadose zone tracer tests and provide an
              excellent opportunity to study solute transport at much larger time and length
              scales than are currently available.  Using the reconstructed chloride and 36Cl
              flux, the research proposed herein will simulate the observed water and solute
              profiles to determine the effective dispersive properties of dry, alluvial
              sediments.  Soil water fluxes in the Frenchman Flat boreholes has varied from
              less than 0.1 mm/yr today to as high as 3 cm/yr during pluvial times, based on
              chloride concentrations in soil water.  Analysis of solute transport will
              therefore be transient in nature, using the fluxes constrained by the observed
              chloride concentrations.  Traditional advection-dispersion solvers as well as
              mobile-immobile models of solute transport will be applied to the data sets to
              determine the mechanisms of transport and to provide confidence in the methods
              over long-length and time scales.    This proposed research will significantly
              increase the understanding of vadose zone processes in arid regions.  The
              development of an accurate 36Cl and Cl chronology constrain the tracer fluxes
              will significantly reduce the principal uncertainty in these wildely used soil
              water flux and recharge estimators.  The core data available represents a
              unique opportunity to quantify the response of thick vadose zones to major
              climatic shifts extending back as far as the penultimate glaciation.  Finally
              the development of large scale vadose zone tracer test data and the estimation
              of  transport parameters will provide new insight into the fundamental behavior
              of arid zone hydrology.
