Title       : Collaborative Research: Refinement of the Late Permian and Early Triassic Time
               Scale through Integrated Ar/Ar and U/Pb Radioisotopic Dating and
               Magnetostratigraphy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9614324

Award Number: 9614324
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42388              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Renne prenne@bgc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Ludwig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Berkeley Geochronology Cen
	      2455 Ridge Road
	      Berkeley, CA  947091211    510/644-9200

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614324  Renne     Environmental crises at the end of the Paleozoic are
              indicated by evidence for profound marine regression, severe faunal and floral
              extinctions, and geochemical and isotopic anomalies.  The search for a cause or
              causes, as well as establishing genetic links between the observed phenomena,
              is hindered by a paucity of reliable geochronologic data.  Though the
              Permian-Triassic (P-T) boundary is now reasonably well dated, much work remains
              to test whether the boundary events were globally isochronous and to establish
              the time scale of events before and after the boundary.  Whether the
              extinctions were protracted or rapid, or occurred in pulses, relies on better
              calibration of the time scale.   The research proposed herein would provide
              high-precision Ar/Ar an U/Pb dates for sanidine and zircon from tephras
              combined with magnetostratigraphic data, which would vastly improve the
              resolution of the time scale.  Establishing a well-calibrated magnetic polarity
              time scale for the "Illawara" reversals after the Kiaman Superchron will
              facilitate global correlations and help obviate problems arising from faunal
              provincialism and possible diachronism of biostratigraphic boundaries.   The
              proposed research would concentrate on accessible, well-studied sections in the
              western U.S. (Texas, New Mexico, and Wyoming) for which many samples and some
              data have already been obtained.  Additional feasibility studies are proposed,
              at little or no cost to this project, which would help determine whether
              sections in Antarctica, Argentina, China, and South Africa merit future
              research towards the goals of this project.
