Title       : Collaborative Research: Lithospheric Structure and Evolution of the Rocky
               Mountain Transect of the Western U.S.: An Integrated Geological and Geophysical
               Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1999       
File        : a9614638

Award Number: 9614638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39298              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean D. Willett swillett@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614638
Willett

This collaborative study is aimed at understanding the
              evolution of the lithosphere of the Rocky Mountain transect in the North
              American southwest.  This transect is located at the juncture of two
              globally-unique tectonic regimes, each of fundamental importance for
              understanding continental tectonics and together representing an outstanding
              field laboratory for studies of continental lithosphere.  First, a 1000 km wide
              juvenile Proterozoic orogenic belt records rapid accretion of continental
              materials from mantle sources and their assembly to southern Laurentia along
              NE-trending boundaries between 1.8 and 1.6 Ga.   Second, the present high
              elevation of the SW in general and the Rocky Mountains in particular, is the
              manifestation of Laramide, Tertiary, and still ongoing modification of
              Proterozoic Lithosphere that has resulted in a wide NW-trending mantle
              boundaray zone between old, cold, high velocity mantle in the continental
              interior and hotter, lower velocity mantle in the western U.S.  By examining
              the present-day lithospheric structure across ancient boundaries, the P.I.s
              hope to better understand the interplay between "active" and "passive"
              processes during lithospheric evolution.

Their principal hypothesis is that 
              lithospheric structures produced during assembly of the southwestern U.S. have
              profoundly influenced physical and chemical modification of the continental
              lithosphere during all subsequent magmatic and tectonic events, including those
              related to the ongoing reorganization of small-scale asthenospheric convection
              and replacement of lithosphere by asthenosphere.  To test this hypothesis, they
              propose an integrated set of multi-scale experiments using state-of-the-art
              geophysical, geological and geochemical techniques that, together, are designed
              to decipher lithosphere structure and evolution, and processes of lithosphere
              formation and deformation.
***
