Title       : West Siberian Sequence Stratigraphy and Mesozoic Eustasy: Testing a Quantified
               Sea-Level Curve Toward Application to Sedimentary Basins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9614752

Award Number: 9614752
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160013             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dork L. Sahagian dork.sahagian@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614752  Sahagian     We propose to develop a self-consistent depositional model
              of the West Siberian Basin by sequence stratigraphic analysis of the
              Jurassic-Neocomian section.  Existing stratigraphic models have led to
              inconsistencies in basin stratigraphy.  We also propose to test the validity 
              of the Quantified Eustatic Curve (QEC) developed in our previous study by
              comparing against the stratigraphy of tectonically independent regions.  We
              will then apply the QEC to quantify the subsidence history of various parts of
              the West Siberian Basin.   Motivation to conduct this proposed study stems from
              the following:  --  No basin-scale sequence stratigraphic analysis of West
              Siberia has ever been performed, although copious stratigraphic information has
              already been accumulated.  --  The depositional history of West Siberia is not
              well understood because most previous investigations have been focused on local
              petroleum exploration.  --  Basin subsidence has not been well constrained
              because it has been impossible to separate the eustatic signal from basin
              stratigraphy.  --  The recently developed Quantified Eustatic Curve (QEC) based
              on Russian Platform stratigraphy must be tested on tectonically independent
              basins before it can be used as a globally applicable tool.  West Siberia
              provides an ideal test case because of its well-established biostratigraphic
              correlation with the Russian Platform.  --  It will be possible to use the
              newly constructed Quantified Eustatic Curve to filter the eustatic signal from
              tectonic and sedimentary factors for any basin, once it has been tested.  -- 
              No quantified eustatic input has been available for synthetic stratigraphic
              models.  Inclusion of the Quantified Eustatic Curve will enhance their
              applicability to basin analysis.   Our plan of attack includes:  --  Data
              Compilation  --  Sequence stratigraphic analysis  --  Backstripping and
              construction of relative sea-level curves  --  Further testing of the
              Quantified Eustatic Curve  --  Application of eustatic cu rve to basin
              stratigraphy and determination of subsidence history  --  Utilization of
              synthetic stratigraphic simulations to fine-tune parameters and test system
              sensitivity to parameter uncertainties.   We will first compile a database
              including geophysical, lithostratigraphic, and paleontologic information from
              published literature and unpublished data housed in Siberian Institutes.  We
              will then apply sequence stratigraphic techniques to selected regions in West
              Siberia in order to develop a consistent model of basin stratigraphy and
              depositional history.  The next  part of the proposed project involves
              construction of local relative sea-level curves by backstripping individual
              points in the stratigraphic database.  Our previously constructed Quantified
              Eustatic Curve will be tested and then applied to the local relative sea-level
              curves, making it possible to quantify the subsidence and sedimentation
              histories of the different parts of the basin.  Finally, we will construct
              synthetic stratigraphy of West  Siberia using standard modelling packages.  
              The results of the project will be significant on local and global scales in
              that the project will:  --  include the first basin-scale sequence
              stratigraphic analysis of West Siberia (basin-scale), thus providing a better
              understanding of its depositional history.  --  reconcile the differences
              between presently existing, parochial depositional models.  --  produce a
              quantified history of basin subsidence more reliably than previously possible. 
              --  provide a test of the applicability of the recently constructed Quantified
              Eustatic Curve for filtering the eustatic signal from basin stratigraphy.  -- 
              be the first use of the Quantified Eustatic Curve in synthetic stratigraphic
              computer models.
