Title       : Collaborative Research: Modeling Studies of Eddies Under Arctic Sea Ice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2001      
File        : a9614107

Award Number: 9614107
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ping-Tung Shaw pt_shaw@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Eddies play an important role in the circulation and mixing in the Arctic Ocean.
              Past observations have shown that anticyclonic eddies dominate over cyclonia
              eddies under Arctic Sea ice. Current theories of small eddies generated in the
              open ocean, in the marginal ice zone, and under sea ice give incoherent
              explanations of this phenomenon. In a recent numerical study using a model with
              high vertical resolution, the principal investigators demonstrated that a
              shallow density source of cooling or brine ejection produces anticyclonic
              eddies under sea ice, contrary to the intuition that cooling produces cyclones.
              This counterintuitive result suggests two things. First, high vertical
              resolution is needed to correctly simulate the dynamic behavior of small
              eddies. Second, the presumption that iceinduced friction will modify an eddy to
              a submerged state without altering its polarity or stability is highly
              questionable and should be intensely scrutinized. A thorough examination of
              existing theoretical ideas including the one mentioned above using qualified
              numerical models is proposed. The dynamics to be investigated under the Arctic
              environment include stability of isolated eddies, eddy-eddy interactions,
              eddy-current interactions, and shallow brine convection. A three-dimensional,
              hydrostatic, primitive-equation model will be used initially. In addition, the
              principal investigators will develop a nonhydrostatic model suitable for
              studying small-scale motions under sea ice. Hopefully, results from this
              investigation will not only answer the question why anticyclones dominate under
              sea ice but also shed light on the circulation and mixing processes in the
              Arctic Ocean.
