Title       : An Updated Magnetometer Array on the Greenland Ice Cap (MAGIC-II) to Investigate
               Multi-Scale Ionospheric Current Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1998   
File        : a9614189

Award Number: 9614189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150573             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir O. Papitashvili papita@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This proposal is directed toward the development of a new updated magnetometer
              array on the Greenland ice cap (MAGIC-II) and the analysis of the data in
              conjunction with other Greenland data and with conjugate Antarctic data.  This
              project is a  cooperative effort between the University of Michigan and the
              Danish Meteorological Institute.  By way of background, in 1991, an array of
              magnetometers (MAGIC) was deployed in central Greenland providing valuable
              magnetometer measurements between the Greenland eastern and western coastal
              stations. This original MAGIC array of four stations is being closed in a
              phased withdrawal during the 1996 and 1997 summer field seasons.  The data from
              the MAGIC stations in combination with the other Greenland magnetometers have
              been critical in resolving the spatial and evolutionary characteristics of
              various dynamic ionospheric current systems, including traveling convection
              vortices, poleward propagating DPY currents, and the spatial and temporal
              evolution of the large scale convection currents.  Thus, it is proposed to
              deploy a new array of updated equipment in easily accessed locations.  The
              three proposed sites are: Summit GISP, North GRIP (the new European ice
              drilling site), and a meteorological station at the most northern point of
              Greenland, Kap Morris Jessup.  It is particularly important to continue the
              MAGIC data collection for coordinated investigations during the ISTP mission
              which includes the POLAR and CLUSTER spacecraft.  Unique opportunities for
              coordinated science with a focus upon high latitude dynamics will be possible. 
              Continued acquisition of the Greenland data will also benefit from upcoming
              missions, such as  (RSTED and the new generation of DMSP spacecraft.  The data
              will contribute as well to the other richly instrumented ground arrays in both
              the Arctic and Antarctic.  Studies will focus upon various high latitude
              electrodynamics phenomena, including high latitude micropulsations, large scale
              plasma convection, and the high latitude io nospheric responses to the IMF and
              solar wind, as well as to substorms.  Also, high latitude phenomena observed at
              Thule, Nord, and the proposed new station Kap Morris Jessup, will be related to
              nearly "conjugate" locations in the Antarctic to determine and understand the
              symmetries and asymmetries of the polar cap dynamics between the two
              hemispheres.
