Title       : Development of Holography Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1996      
File        : a9614331

Award Number: 9614331
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Satava rsatava@arpa.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Research Proj Agy
	      3701 North Fairfax Drive
	      Arlington, VA  222091714    /   -

NSF Program : 5419      INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0204000   Oceanography                            
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Significant advances in fundamental understandings of the complex interactions
              of different components of the Earth system as they operate around the world
              have highlighted the need for new and more effective ways to help people
              visualize and understand the planet's myriad patterns and interactions. 
              Advances in holographic technology initially developed for medical uses offer
              intriguing new possibilities for projecting dynamic data for the entire world
              on a three-dimensional spherical projection surface.  This new application will
              occur through the development of a five-foot diameter holograph-like
              representation of the surface of the Earth that appears to be suspended in the
              air.  Through links with advanced computational equipment, detailed displays of
              images and data for atmospheric, oceanic, geologic, biological, and human
              components of the Earth's dynamic systems will be projected onto the globe.  An
              accompanying audio narration will provide viewers with additional information. 
              This globe initially will be displayed at the Smithsonian Institution's
              National Museum of Natural History, with its opening scheduled to coincide with
              the Smithsonian's 150th birthday celebration in August 1996.  After a number of
              months, the globe will be relocated to a more permanent installation at
              Smithsonian's National Air and Space Museum. The overall cost of constructing
              and displaying the globe is estimated at about $1-million.  This cost is being
              shared by a Federal-private sector partnership that includes NSF, the
              Smithsonian Institution, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA),
              the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the National Oceanic
              and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), Silicon Graphics, Inc., and Dimensional
              Media Associates (DMA).  Through this interagency agreement, NSF funds will be
              transferred to DARPA, which will use them to supplement one or more standing
              contracts with DMA, a private firm that is developing and constructing the
              globe.  In addition to being viewed by hundreds of thousands of museum
              visitors, all of whom will have an unmatched opportunity to view, appreciate,
              and better understand the Earth's integrated systems, the globe will be
              accessible to research scientists, who can explore this sophisticated new
              technology in order to better understand how three-dimensional media can be
              used to analyze and present data about global systems more effectively.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
