Title       : International Workshop on Ultra-high Reynolds Number Flows, Brookhaven National
               Laboratory, Upton, New York
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1996  
File        : a9614058

Award Number: 9614058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Donnelly russ@vortex.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9614058  Donnelly  This  project will fund the "International Workshop on Ultra-
               High Reynolds Number Flows at Brookhaven National  Laboratory, June 18-20, 
              1996".  Fully developed turbulence  at high Reynolds  numbers is  a 
              challenging problem of  fundamental importance in nonlinear physics  and  is 
              of  great practical importance  in  engineering. While  there  are several ways
              of attaining high Reynolds  number numbers,  one  of  the more attractive ways
              is to  use  cryogenic  gaseous  and  liquid helium as the working fluid.  This 
              Workshop will  bring together a group of experts on various  facets of  the
              turbulence  problem:   theorists and  experimentalists  on  fluid turbulence,
              experts on low-  temperature physics, with emphasis  on instrumentation,  users
              of high Reynolds  number  flow  research, etc.  The  purpose  is to discuss the
              future  of  high  Peynolds  number turbulence research with some (though not
              exclusive)  focus on  helium  as  the working fluid.  The Workshop  will 
              emphasize fundamental  physics  issues, but the phenomena  have  long-range
              technical importance in the context of  practical testing of scale models for
              design of aircraft of  submarines.  %%%  This  project will fund the
              "International Workshop on Ultra-  High Reynolds Number Flows at Brookhaven
              National  Laboratory, June 18-20,  1996".  Fully developed turbulence  at high
              Reynolds  numbers is  a  challenging problem of  fundamental importance in
              nonlinear physics  and  is  of  great practical importance  in  engineering.
              While  there  are several ways of attaining high Reynolds  number numbers,  one
               of  the more attractive ways is to  use  cryogenic  gaseous  and  liquid
              helium as the working fluid.  This  Workshop will  bring together a group of
              experts on various  facets of  the turbulence  problem:  theorists  and 
              experimentalists  on  fluid turbulence, experts on low-  temperature physics,
              with emphasis  on instrumentation,  users of high Reynolds  number  flow 
              research, etc.  The  purpose  is to  discuss the future  of  high  Reynolds 
              number turbulence research with some (though not exclusive)  focus on  helium 
              as  the working fluid.  The Workshop  will  emphasize fundamental  physics 
              issues, but the phenomena  have  long-range technical importance in the context
              of  practical testing of scale models for design of aircraft of  submarines. 
              ***
