Title       : Characterization of Fluvial Suspended Matter Using Field-Flow Fractionation and
               Related Methods.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1998  
File        : a9614186

Award Number: 9614186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan M. Shiller alan.shiller@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1043,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614186  Shiller    The composition and properties of size-fractioned riverine
              suspended matter will be determined, with special emphasis on particles in the
              sub-micron size range.  This work is important because suspended particles
              carry much of the load of many elements in rivers and because particle surfaces
              can control dissolved concentrations through adsorption.  However, little is
              known about how particle composition and adsorbing properties vary with
              particle size---especially in the sub-micron (or colloidal) size range.    The
              work will utilize relatively new technologies for size fractioning suspended
              particles, specifically field-flow fractionation (FFF) and split-flow thin-cell
              lateral transport (SPLITT) fractionation.  The capabilities of these methods
              have been demonstrated in the literature; however, their application to
              environmental problems is still in its infancy.  Thus, a primary objective of
              this proposed work is the further development and quality assurance testing of
              environmental FFF methodology.  Other objectives include the application of FFF
              and SPLITT to the  characterization of fluvial suspended matter from a variety
              of fluvial environments, analysis of filtration artifacts in samples
              processing, investigation of bacterially-induced changes in particulate
              composition, and development of methodology for investigating variation of
              adsorption with particle size.    The project will have two types of results:
              1) development of FFF and SPLITT methods to the point where they can be applied
              more routinely for particle characterization in natural waters and 2) solution
              of some specific environmental questions.  These specific questions include how
              best to filter samples for dissolved trace element analysis, what size
              fractions of the suspended particles contain what types of materials (and how
              this affects adsorption of trace elements), and how bacteria affect particle
              surfaces.    The work will include examination and comparison of FFF results
              with ultrafiltration, light sca ttering, and electron microscopy. 
              Additionally, we will do the size fractionation work using different sample
              pre-treatments and fractionation conditions.  This will shed light on potential
              artifacts of the techniques.  Although this is a stand alone project, the work
              will be pursued collaboratively with colleagues at the US Geological Survey.
