Title       : IAI: A Survey of the Research and Researchers Relating to Human Dimensions of
               Global Environmental Change in Latin America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9614565

Award Number: 9614565
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14966              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana M. Liverman liverman@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria Carmen M. Lemos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              0201000   Agriculture                             
              0208000   Water Resources                         
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              65        Agricultural                            
              82        Economics                               
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              964565  Liverman  The goal of this project is threefold:  to identify
              individuals and institutions developing research on issues related to the human
              and policy dimension of global change in the region; to inform Latin American
              social scientists about the research mission and project funding opportunities
              of the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI); and to  
              involve them in the development of the IAI's Human Dimensions research agenda. 
              Although the IAI has held two meetings with Human Dimensions as one of the foci
              (at Taxco, Mexico, in 1993, jointly with the International Human Dimensions
              Programme; and at Bel=E9m, Brazil, in 1995), few proposals have been received
              by the IAI dealing with social, economic, or policy issues identified by these
              two meetings as critical to the success of the Institute.  This survey will
              identify the current researchers, their institutions, and their programs in
              order to target these groups for specific program announcements and more
              detailed information regarding the availability of funds and areas of research
              interest for the IAI.  The proposal will produce the following:  1) an overview
              paper of the IAI describing how environmental social science research can
              contribute to the IAI agenda; 2) a mailing list for the later use of the IAI
              Directorate in mailing Human Dimensions-related calls for proposals; 3) a
              tri-lingual survey (English, Spanish and Portuguese) addressing collaboration,
              resources and capabilities, electronic connectivity, and research interests and
              current projects; 4) a set of compiled survey results, and a preliminary
              analysis; and 5) a final report to the IAI Director and the IAI Scientific
              Advisory Committee.  If the survey has a good response rate, it could also
              serve as the basis for a formal IAI directory on Human Dimensions Research in
              the Americas.  %%%  The goal of this project is threefold:  to identify
              individuals and institutions developing research on issues related to the human
              and policy dimension of global cha nge in the region; to inform Latin American
              social scientists about the research mission and project funding opportunities
              of the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI); and to
              involve them in the development of the IAI's Human Dimensions research agenda. 
              Although the IAI has held two meetings with Human Dimensions as one of the
              foci, few proposals have been received by the IAI dealing with social,
              economic, or policy issues identified by these two meetings as critical to the
              success of the Institute.  The proposal will produce the following:  1) an
              overview paper of the IAI describing how environmental social science research
              can contribute to the IAI agenda; 2) a mailing list for the later use of the
              IAI Directorate in mailing Human Dimensions-related calls for proposals; 3) a
              tri-lingual survey (English, Spanish and Portuguese) addressing collaboration,
              resources and capabilities, electronic connectivity, and research interests and
              current projects; 4) a set of compiled survey results, and a preliminary
              analysis;   and 5) a final report to the IAI Director and the IAI Scientific
              Advisory Committee.  If the survey has a good response rate, it could also
              serve as the basis for a formal IAI directory on Human Dimensions Research in
              the Americas.  The IAI is an initiative to stimulate cooperative research on
              global change issues in the Americas.  The National Science Foundation is the
              designated U.S. Government agency to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the
              IAI.  ***
