Title       : Impacts of Increased Solar UVB on Antarctic Marine Heterotrophs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9614892

Award Number: 9614892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230096             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. William Detrich ICEMAN@NEU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kirk D. Malloy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ***  Malloy  9614892  Recent decreases in stratospheric ozone have resulted in
              dramatic increases in the flux of mid-ultraviolet light (UVB) reaching the
              earth's surface, especially over Antarctica and, to a lesser extent, in
              temperate zones.  Ozone depletion is expected to continue well into the next
              century, and to worsen at lower latitudes over time.  Recent evidence suggests
              that present intensities of UVB are sufficient to produce significant impacts
              on phytoplankton communities in the Southern Ocean, as well as to negatively
              impact tropical marine communities and populations of temperate amphibians. 
              The abbreviated trophic structure of the Antarctic marine ecosystem places an
              increased importance on primary and secondary consumers, especially on many
              species of zooplankton which form a critical link between primary production
              and top predators such as adult fish, marine mammals and birds.  Although these
              zooplankton species and other heterotrophs, which include larval and adult
              fish, krill, and copepods, are important components of the trophic structure in
              the Antarctic ecosystem, there is no information regarding the effects of
              increased UVB on natural populations of these organisms.  However, laboratory
              and field studies on non-polar species suggest that the impact of increased UV
              on Antarctic heterotrophs, and therefore on the Antarctic ecosystem, could be
              substantial.  The proposed research will use established methods:  1) to
              measure the vulnerability of Antarctic zooplankton to UVB damage in the field
              and in the laboratory; 2) to measure DNA repair rates of Antarctic heterotrophs
              at ambient temperatures (-2 to +40C); and 3) to determine the relationship
              between UVB exposure and decreases in organismal fitness (measured as RNA:DNA
              ratios and transcription rates).  The field component of this research is a
              unique effort to determine the in situ vulnerability of natural populations of
              Antarctic heterotrophs during normal and depleted ozone conditions.  Laboratory
              experiments will deter mine dose:response (UVB fluence:DNA photoproducts)
              relationships for the zooplankton taxa which are most abundant during ozone
              depletion in order to determine species-specific vulnerabilities to increased
              UVB.  However, DNA damage measured in natural populations represents both the
              net damage added by UVB and that removed by DNA repair.  Therefore, DNA repair
              rates of several abundant pelagic heterotrophs will be measured to facilitate a
              more complete understanding of the potential vulnerability of each taxa. 
              Photolyase genes from Antarctic fishes that have already been cloned will be
              sequenced and the deduced amino acid sequences will be compared to other
              photolyase sequences to better understand the underlying mechanisms of DNA
              repair at low temperatures.  Finally, the sub-lethal impacts of UVB exposure,
              and the associated DNA damage, on fitness will be evaluated by measuring
              long-term (RNA:DNA ratios) and short-term (nuclear run-on assays) measures of
              biochemical condition.  Together, these studies are critical for developing
              predictive models of the relative impact of increased UVB on Antarctic marine
              heterotrophs and for relating ozone depletion on decreased fitness, survival,
              and population dynamics of these species.  ***
