Title       : Development of a 3-D Sea Ice Model for Climate Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9614492

Award Number: 9614492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323259             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Curry curryja@cloud.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julie L. Schramm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Maslanik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,5219,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    The fundamental scientific question to be addressed by this research is:
              "How do different physical processes influence the response of sea ice to a
              heat flux perturbation?" A new 3-D sea ice model for climate applications will
              be developed. This research is motivated by large discrepancies between the
              response of the 1-D thermodynamic and 2-D dynamic/thermodynamia models (both
              widely used in climate simulations) to a surface heat flux perturbation such as
              would arise from a CO2doubling.    Uncertainties regarding important physical
              processes occurring in sea ice still remain, and further observational data
              (and analyses of existing data) are required. However, there is a sufficient
              amount known about the individual physical processes and significant progress
              can be made in sea ice modeling by synthesizing state-of-the-art understanding
              of the different physical processes currently included in l-D and 2-D models
              into a 3-D dynamic/thermodynamic sea ice model. The success of a single-cell
              thermodynamic/dynamic sea ice model that was developed recently by the
              investigator's research group is very encouraging in this regard. Building upon
              previous and ongoing research activities, sea ice modeling for applications in
              climate models will be developed as follows;    a) improve a single-cell
              thermodynamic/dynamic sea ice model and test it against            field and
              satellite observations  b) conduct sensitivity studies using the single-cell
              model to assess simplifications that can be made to improve computational
              efficiency  c) incorporate the processes deemed necessary in the single-cell
              studies into a 3-D dynamic/thermodynamic sea ice model;   d) assess if further
              simplifications of the 3-D model can be made to improve computational
              efficiency  e) conduct basin-wide simulations to assess model performance be
              comparing with observations and to assess model sensitivity to heat flux and
              momentum perturbations.    A product of this work will be a comprehensive,
              modular, well-documented, and publi clyavailable 3-D sea ice model that can
              serve as a tool for a variety of researchers involved in polar applications,
              and that could provide an improved sea ice component for regional and climate
              system models.
