Title       : Studies of New Materials for Separations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9614947

Award Number: 9614947
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luis A. Colon lacolon@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project, directed by Assistant Professor Luis A. Colon at   SUNY-Buffalo,
              is supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry   Program in the Division
              of Chemistry.  The work will use sol-gel   technology to synthesize chemically
              bonded stationary phases for use with   chromatographic methods, particularly
              high performance liquid   chromatography (HPLC) and electrochromatography in
              open and packed   columns.  The incorporation of the desired functional groups
              into the   sol-gel reagents during the fabrication of the silica will create
              Si-C   bonds that do not undergo hydrolysis and provide a material that is  
              multilayered.  These characteristics are especially promising for solving   the
              existing problem of suitable packing and surfaces for separations at   high pH.
              Studies will be done of the variables affecting the chemical   reactions
              involved in the glass formation process.  A number of   techniques (ESCA, SIMS,
              FTIR and others) will be used to examine the   physicochemical properties of
              the glasses, followed by examination of the   chromatographic performance.  The
              overall objective is to correlate the   processing parameters, the material
              characteristics and the separation   performance.  Liquid chromatographic
              methods are powerful techniques to separate   complex mixtures of compounds
              into their individual constituents.  The   purpose of this work is to provide
              an entirely new way to synthesize the   materials upon which the separation
              takes place.  Applications of such   separations are wide-spread in areas such
              as environmental analysis,   pharmaceutical analysis, and many others.  The
              focus of the project is to   make materials with properties superior to those
              now available.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
