Title       : Collaborative Research: Observations and Modeling of Flow and Fracture Processes
               Leading to Iceberg Calving
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1999    
File        : a9614505

Award Number: 9614505
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78613              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Krimmel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark F. Meier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard P. Amadei  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Tad Pfeffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : US Geological Surv WRD ADO
	      4230 University Drive, Ste. 201
	      Anchorage, AK  99508    907/786-7100

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Most of the ice lost from the world's glaciers is lost through the calving
              of icebergs.  An understanding of this process is vital to projections of
              sea-level rise, to reconstructing changes in the great ice sheets of the past,
              and to analyses of present and future changes in many Arctic glaciers. 
              Unfortunately, the process is complex and no satisfactory calving relation that
              can be incorporated into numerical models has been developed and validated.  A
              unique opportunity to do this is now at hand:  An extensive data set on
              geometry, flow and calving of the rapidly disintegrating Columbia Glacier,
              Alaska, has been developed by the U.S. Geological Survey, and new developments
              in fracture mechanics now make it possible to compute crevasse interactions and
              other processes that are critical to the breakoff problem.    The investigators
              will collect additional, highly-detailed strain and geometric data at and near
              the terminus of this glacier using primarily aerial photogrammetry.  They will
              then use these and the existing data set in newly-developed fracture and flow
              models.  These models, which use discrete displacement analysis (DDA) as well
              as finite element models, will be used to simulate breakoffs and define the
              interaction between calving and flow.  The results will be tested to see if the
              current behavior of the glacier can be simulated well, and if so, to see if the
              1978-95 history of change in this glacier can be modeled accurately.  Then the
              generality of the modeling for other applications will be explored.  It is
              expected that this study will produce 1)  a detailed observational data set on
              dynamics and calving for use by others, 2) further insight into iceberg
              discharge mechanisms and the interrelations between calving and ice dynamics,
              3) better knowledge of large-scale fracture processes in ice, 4) new
              glaciological modeling tools, such as DDA, and 5) an iceberg calving relation
              which will be useful for a wide range of paleoglaciological and current ice
              sheet and glacier investi gations as well as studies of the role of iceberg
              discharges in ice/ocean interactions.
