Title       : Hydrologic Change and Accelerated Erosion in Mountainous Tropical Watersheds:
               The Impact of Rural Roads
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1999  
File        : a9614259

Award Number: 9614259
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Giambelluca thomas@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ross A. Sutherland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1325,1579,5927,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614259  Giambelluca    Unpaved roads play a significant role in altering
              near-surface hydrologic response and subsequently accelerating soil erosion in
              temperate drainage basins.  Road-related impacts are also of particular concern
              in tropical areas where agriculture practices are most often blamed for erosion
              and sedimentation problems.  The focus of this study is to show how an
              expanding road network changes the hydrological and erosion processes of a
              mountainous tropical watershed in northern Thailand.  The major objective are
              to (1) determine the degree to which hydrologic processes in tropical
              watersheds are disrupted by roads--this information can later be compared with
              what is known about road disruption in temperate watershed; (2) establish the
              importance of roads in relation to agricultural areas in initiating hydrologic
              change and contributing to accelerated erosion; and in so doing, obtain a
              detailed understanding of erosion processes operating on and adjacent to road
              surfaces; and (3) evaluate the conservation value of several road
              management-related what if scenarios.    The proposed research strategy can be
              represented by four components: (1) a comprehensive field study to build a
              database of hydrological, erosional, and soil-vegetation-atmosphere-transfer
              (SVAT) information; (2) in-depth analysis of changes in hydrologic and erosion
              processes due to land-cover change, especially changes due to road expansion;
              (3) determination of the important road-related runoff processes in order to
              select the appropriate model or models to simulate hydrologic change and
              erosion resulting from the expansion of road networks; and (4) use of model(s)
              to simulate the effects of several management scenarios.  This research will
              improve our knowledge of hydrologic and geomorphic processes operating in
              tropical watersheds undergoing dramatic landuse changes; help determine the
              importance of roads, as compared with agricultural practices, in contributing
              to cumulative watershed impacts; aid in the fut ure management of tropical
              mountainous watersheds; and provide insight into improving the design, routing,
              maintenance, and usage of rural roads.
