Title       : Pressure, Stress, and Stratigraphy: Hydrodynamic Analysis of a Young Compacting
               Sedimentary Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9614689

Award Number: 9614689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89012              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Flemings flemings@geosc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614689  Flemings     The research proposed will use observation and theory to
              pursue a hydrodynamic analysis of the Eugene Island 330 mini-basin of offshore
              Louisiana, Gulf of Mexico.  I will characterize the geology (e.g.
              lithostratigraphy and age of  deposition), pressure, porosity, and stress field
              of this system.  I will then study the individual behavior of these components.
               Examples of this include porosity/stress behavior, stress/pressure behavior,
              and rock property/pressure behavior.  Finally, I will study the linkages
              between these components and develop a quantitative two-dimensional numerical
              (finite-element) hydrodynamic model to predict the state and evolution of fluid
              flow in this region.   This research is new and innovative for three reasons. 
              First, it is interdisciplinary (it integrates theory and observation in
              geology, hydrology, and rock mechanics).  Second, it proposes to study a system
              at a higher resolution than previous basin-scale fluid-flow studies (for
              example the work of Bethke or Garven).  Third, theory will be tightly
              constrained by observation of this system.  A critical component of the project
              is that I have chosen a mature oil and gas field with an extraordinary database
              that will allow me to characterize this system at the kilometer scale.  This
              includes multiple 3-D seismic surveys, hundreds of well logs, and direct
              measurements of pressure and permeability.     This study will directly address
              a number of continuing controversies in basinal fluid flow.  These include:  1)
               what causes the generation of abnormal pressures?  2)  what component of
              fluid-flow is controlled by fracture permeability?  3)  how is the horizontal
              stress controlled by the evolution of the pressure field?  4)  how and when do
              faults behave as permeability conduits?  The very nature of these questions
              shows the interdependence of rock mechanics, geology and hydrology.  The
              inter-disciplinary or 'systems' approach that is proposed has the potential to
              gain insight not found with studie s of individual components of this system.
