Title       : Computational Studies of Transition Metal Bonding and Reactivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1996  
File        : a9614346

Award Number: 9614346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Cundari tcundari@memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program provides support to Dr. Thomas R. Cundari, Chemistry Department,  
              University of Memphis, for continued development of computational   approaches
              to modeling the bonding and reactivity of inorganic and   organometallic
              complexes.  Molecular mechanics strategies, which are less   computationally
              intensive, will be applied to transition metal complexes,   particularly to
              develop a force field to efficiently and accurately   predict geometries. 
              Three specific areas will be emphasized:  methane   activation by mercury
              complexes, multiply bonded transition metal   complexes, and molecular
              mechanics of biochemical and catalytic   intermediates.  The mercury system
              differs from more usual high- or   low-valent oxidation methods and the
              electronic details of the activation   process are not well understood. 
              Transition metals that participate in   multiple bonding to heavier main group
              elements have potential in   advanced materials and in catalysis, and more
              efficient methods for   modeling the chemistry of these systems will be
              developed.  Describing the electronic properties of molecules containing
              transition   metals and a large number of atoms is a computational challenge,
              and it   is particularly difficult to develop effective methods for modeling
              their   dynamical behavior or reactivity with other molecules.  Dr. Cundari
              will   use new and efficient computational approaches for describing these  
              molecules and their changes during important catalytic reactions.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
