Title       : National Conference on Climate Change, Climate Variability, and Water Resources
               Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1997 
File        : a9614791

Award Number: 9614791
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87133              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Strzepek   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1673,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614791  Strzepek    In November  5-7, 1991, the First National Conference on
              Climate Changes and Water Resources Management was held in Albuquerque, New
              Mexico, to inform water resource managers about the state of the science on
              climate change, the ability to predict regional climate change, and management
              strategies for coping with climate change.  Almost five years have passed since
              the conference, and there have been major developments in our understanding not
              only of climate change and water resources, but also of climate variability 
              and water resources.  There is much more certainly about climate change and
              there have been significant improvements in capabilities to forecast extreme
              events and long-term climate.  In addition,  a significant amount of research
              has been done on how water resource managers can prepare for changes in extreme
              events and climate.  Water resource managers and planner can benefit by meeting
              with scientists and water resource researchers to learn about and discuss the
              latest developments in science.  In addition, they can benefit from discussions
              about how to plan for and adapt to changes in climate.    We propose to
              organize a conference that will present the latest developments in the
              understanding of climate change, climate variability, forecasting, and
              hydrologic analytic methods as they relate to water management.  The
              presentations will be by academic,  govenment, and other researchers and by
              water resource managers.  The target audience will be the research community
              and water resource managers.  The conference will be organized so water
              managers can learn about the latest research on managing water resources in
              light of climate variability and climate change and can tell researchers what 
              additional Climate variability and climate change.  We intend to involve all
              the major federal agencies information, methods, and models the water managers
              need to successfully adapt to the risks  from involved in climate change and
              climate variability related activities.     The conference will take place in
              1997 to allow sufficient time for organization and advertising.  We hope to
              attract 100 to 150 attendees. Speakers will be solicited and invited based on
              the relevance of their work to the conference goals and objectives.  An
              emphasis of the conference will be feedback from water resource mangers on
              where federal research on climate change, variability, forecasting, and water
              resource management to cope with climate should be directed.  A proceedings
              with the best peer reviewed papers will be published .      Sessions will be on
              such topics as the use of improved weather and climate forecasts  in water
              resources management, impediments to the use of weather and climate forecasts
              in water resource management, water resource management under uncertainty,
              implications of climate change for long term supply and demand management, use
              of models and other analytic techniques to analyze vulnerability and adaptation
              to climate change, and incorporation of climate change in formal analytic
              methods for water resource management.
