Title       : Analysis of the Significance of Erosional Denudation on the Geometrical and
               Stratigraphic Evolution of Foreland Basins and on Strain Partitioning in their
               Orogens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1997      
File        : a9614286

Award Number: 9614286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa E. Jordan tej1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614286  Jordan     Foreland basins have been studied extensively I the last
              years to explore the relationships between crustal thickening in the orogen and
              the stratigraphic and geometrical response of the adjacent foreland basin. 
              Since >60% of the total deflection of foreland basins may be due to the
              sediment load, temporal and spatial variations in sediment flux due to changing
              erosional denudation rates and patterns in the hinterland have a great
              potential to significantly affect the geometrical and stratigraphic evolution
              of foreland basins.  Furthermore, as revealed by critical taper wedge models,
              variable erosional denudation rates in the orogen are likely to control strain
              partitioning, which in turn affects the geometrical evolution of foreland
              basins.  We propose to explore the influence of temporal and spatial variations
              of erosional denudation rates on the geometrical and stratigraphic evolution of
              the Molasse and Bermejo Basins and on strain partitioning in the Alps
              (Switzerland) and the Precordillera (Argentina).  These systems are ideally
              suited to our objectives because of the extensive data available and because
              they represent denudation/dispersion end members.  The erosional denudation
              rates will be compiled from the dense data set of cooling and metamorphic ages
              in the Alps, and by restoring the volumes of sediment preserved in the
              internally drained Bermejo Basin to their specific source terrains.  These data
              will be compared with the subsidence histories of the foreland basins
              determined by backstripping, which will allow us to recognize the importance of
              sediment flux on the evolution of the Molasse and the Bermejo Basins. 
              Similarly, a careful three dimensional subsidence analysis will allow us to
              compare the subsidence patterns of the internally drained Bermejo Basin and the
              open Molasse Basin.  Comparing and contrasting the subsidence histories, the
              sediment flux, and progradation/retreat rates of facies will allow us to
              critically evaluate whether unconformities are mo re likely to form in open
              than in closed basins.  In addition, we propose to explore whether the
              sensitivity of the basin stratigraphy to tectonic episodes depends on the
              location of the principle sediment source area.   The evolution of facies and
              geometries of the basins will be visualized by stratigraphic simulation with
              Strata2.11.  Using this software, we will be able to test whether sediment flux
              rather than tectonic subsidence and/or eustatic sea level changes caused the
              regressions and transgressions in the Molasse Basin.  Furthurmore, applying
              Strata2.11 to the Molasse and Bermejo Basins, we can explore the significance
              of varying sediment flux on the generation of unconformities in fluvial
              systems.   Comparing the temporal and spatial variations of erosional
              denudation rates with strain partitioning in the orogens will enable us to
              critically evaluate whether erosion significantly controlled the sequence of
              thrust motions as predicted by critical taper wedge models.  We propose to
              analyze how climate and erodibility of rocks affect the chronology of thrusting
              in orogens by contrasting the two denudation end members.
