Title       : The Effect of Quaternary Climate Change on the Balance of Silicate Mineral
               Weathering and Eolian Input in Desert Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1996  
File        : a9614875

Award Number: 9614875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126139             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary C. Capo rcapo@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614875  Capo     The interaction of atmospheric processes and terrestrial
              weathering is crucial to understanding global geochemical cycling and its
              relationship to climate change.  The quantification of cation fluxes in the
              soil-atmosphere system is an essential part of this problem.  Knowledge of the
              effect of climate change, time, parent material and other soil-forming factors
              on the development of desert soil and the storage and mobility of elements is
              also critical.  The objective of this research is to quantify the effect of
              atmospheric input and silicate mineral weathering on Quaternary desert soil
              pedogenesis as a function of climatic regime.   We will use a combination of
              field, mass balance and isotope tracer studies to examine the factors involved
              in soil formation in desert soils over the last 2 million years.  Soil profiles
              from the Desert Soil-Geomorphology Project of the U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation
              Service, near Las Cruces, NM, and from Kohala Peninsula, Hawaii, will be
              studied to place constraints on the role of atmospheric addition of cations and
              in situ silicate weathering in arid to semiarid environments in an
              eolian-dominated and a silicate weathering-dominated system over Quaternary
              time.  Strontium isotope measurements will be combined with micromorphologic
              studies, major and trace element analyses, and cation mass balance calculations
              in order to (1) determine the sources and quantify the relative contributions
              of cations into desert soil systems; (2) examine the locations, rates and
              mechanisms of silicate mineral weathering within the soil profile; and (3)
              identify shifts in the relative contributions of silicate mineral weathering
              and eolian input to the soil cation budget as a function of climate change. 
              Well documented and preserved soil chronosequences at both locales permit
              detailed sampling of modern, relict, and buried soil profiles of known age and
              climatic history.  The strontium isotopic and major and trace element
              composition of soil parent material, local atmo spheric inputs from dust and
              rain, and soil carbonate will be determined.  Calcium provencance in the soil
              will be determined by Sr isotopic analysis.  Mass balance analysis will
              quantify the gain, loss, and redistribution of cations in the soil system. 
              These data will b correlated with existing radiocarbon, stratigraphic, stable
              isotope, pollen and paleohydrology records.  The data will aid in
              reconstructing the history of desert soil formation over the Quaternary as a
              function of environmental change.
