Title       : Collaborative Research: Lithospheric Structure and Evolution of the Rocky
               Mountain Transect of the Western U.S.: An Integrated Geological and Geophysical
               Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  1999   
File        : a9614787

Award Number: 9614787
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370714             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl E. Karlstrom kek1@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Pazzaglia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Scholes Hall, Room 102
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9614787  Karlstrom    This collaborative study is aimed at understanding the
              evolution of  the lithosphere of the Rocky Mountain transect in the North 
              American southwest.  This transect is located at the juncture of  two
              globally-unique tectonic regimes, each of fundamental  importance for
              understanding continental tectonics and together  representing an outstanding
              field laboratory for studies of  continental lithosphere.  First, a 1000 km
              wide juvenile  Proterozoic orogenic belt records rapid accretion of continental
               materials from mantle sources and their assembly to southern  Laurentia along
              NE-trending boundaries between 1.8 and 1.6 Ga.   Second, the present high
              elevation of the SW in general and the  Rocky Mountains in particular is the
              manifestation of Laramide,  Tertiary, and still ongoing modification of
              Proterozoic Lithosphere  that has resulted in a wide NW-trending mantle
              boundary zone  between old, cold, high velocity mantle in the continental
              interior  and hotter, lower velocity mantle in the western U.S.  By examining 
              the present-day lithospheric structure across ancient boundaries,  the P.I.s
              hope to better understand the interplay between "active"  and "passive"
              processes during lithospheric evolution.     Their principal hypothesis is that
              lithospheric structures produced  during assembly of the southwestern U.S. have
              profoundly influenced  physical and chemical modification of the continental
              lithosphere  during all subsequent magmatic and tectonic events, including
              those  related to the ongoing reorganization of small-scale asthenospheric 
              convection and replacement of lithosphere by asthenosphere.  To  test this
              hypothesis, they propose an integrated set of multi-scale  experiments using
              state of the art geophysical, geological and  geochemical techniques that,
              together, are designed to decipher  lithosphere structure and evolution, and
              processes of lithosphere  formation and deformation.  ***
