Title       : Molecular Phylogenetics of the Wild Perennial Relatives of Soybean (Glycine
               Subgenus Glycine): Intron-Containing Nuclear Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9614984

Award Number: 9614984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey J. Doyle jjd5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9614984  Doyle   The wild perennial species of Glycine subgenus Glycine (family
              Leguminosae) are the closest known relatives to the soybean, Glycine max, and
              its wild progenitor, Glycine soja, in Asia. The subgenus comprises 16 species
              native to Australia, two of which are widespread in the Pacific region. They
              occur in a variety of habitats including very dry areas of central Australia.
              Particular species are of potential economic interest as sources of drought and
              disease resistance, and consequently have been used in breeding programs with
              the cultivated soybean both in the U.S. and Australia. Relationships among the
              species of subgenus Glycine have been studied using many approaches, and
              groupings ("genome groups") have been hypothesized primarily on the basis of
              artificial hybridizations. Prof. Jeff Doyle's studies some years ago using
              chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) provided the first rigorous phylogenetic hypotheses for
              the subgenus. Although results were in substantial agreement with earlier
              biosystematic studies, some areas of disagreement were noted with the genome
              groupings. Within the genome groups, however, cpDNA data either failed to
              resolve relationships, or produced hypotheses that were incongruent with
              traditional taxonomic boundaries. The chloroplast evidence could be giving the
              "right" answers, in which case taxonomic boundaries should be reassessed and
              realigned; alternatively, the genealogical pattern of cpDNA data may not be
              tracking the historical pattern of speciation in the subgenus, for any of
              several possible reasons.   Testing these alternatives using molecular
              (genetic) data requires the use of DNA sequences capable of showing historical
              independence from the chloroplast genome. The most obvious choices are nuclear
              genes; however, apart from the nuclear ribosomal gene locus, nuclear gene
              sequences appropriate for the low levels of divergence expected for closely
              related species within a genus have not been available. This is a general
              problem in molecular systematics that is  not unique to Glycine. Non-coding
              regions of nuclear genes theoretically should provide variation suitable for
              phylogenetic reconstruction at this taxonomic level. Of the various types of
              non-coding regions, intervening sequences (introns) afford technical advantages
              because they are flanked by coding regions (exons) whose higher degree of
              sequence conservatism facilitates the design of oligonucleotide primers for
              amplification by the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). In preliminary work,
              Prof. Doyle has shown that introns of one such locus, histone H3-D, provide
              useful phylogenetic data in Glycine; and he and his Australian colleague, Dr.
              Brown, plan to utilize DNA sequences from this genetic locus to test a wide
              range of chloroplast and non-molecular hypotheses in the subgenus. These
              include relationships among and within the diploid genome groups as well as the
              origins and diversification of at least one of the three polyploid complexes in
              the subgenus. The basic methodology includes amplification by PCR, DNA
              sequencing of PCR products either directly or after molecular cloning, and
              phylogenetic analysis.
