Title       : Eighth Copper Mountain Conference on Multigrid Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1997      
File        : a9614997

Award Number: 9614997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen F. McCormick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Front Range Sci Computatio
	      1005 Gillaspie Drive
	      Boulder, CO  803036544    303/494-6232

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              McCormick  9614997       The principal investigator and his colleagues organize
              the eighth Copper Mountain conference on multigrid methods, in cooperation with
              the Society of Industrial and Applied Mathematics.   This grant provides
              support for students to participate in the conference.         Numerical
              methods for solving a differential equation usually begin by imposing a grid on
              the region where the equation holds.  From the differential equation, algebraic
              equations are then developed; their solution represents the solution of the
              differential equation.  The accuracy of the approximate solution commonly is
              measured by the fineness of the grid.  Multigrid methods are numerical methods
              for solving partial differential equations that systematically exploit the
              relationship between approximate solutions on different grids to arrive at a
              solution whose accuracy is consistent with the finest grid but for considerably
              less work.  The methods are often dramatically more efficient than others. 
              Research in the past dozen years has extended the methods to a broad range of
              problems of considerable practical import in engineering, manufacturing,
              materials, physics, and fluid dynamics.  This project supports student
              participants at the eighth Copper Mountain conference on multigrid methods. 
              The students present a talk on their research in the regular sessions of the
              conference.  The primary objective here is to encourage student participation
              in this rapidly evolving field, and to provide an excellent opportunity for
              these students to demonstrate their new results, to learn more about the field
              from its experts, and to become a more integral part of the discipline. 
              Supporting student participation is critical for improving the infrastructure
              of this important field and for advancing the quality of its core contributors.
