Title       : Thirteenth International Workshop on Operator Theory and Applications
               (IWOTA2002), August 6-9, 2002, Blacksburg, Virginia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0126746

Award Number: 0126746
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Ball ball@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leiba Rodman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Klaus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. William Helton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0126746
Ball

The International Workshop on Operator Theory and Applications
              
(IWOTA) has been held biannually since 1981 and more frequently in 
recent
              years (starting in 1995) in eight countries in North America, Europe 
and
              Asia. The IWOTA conferences offer a rich program on a wide range 
of the
              latest developments in operator theory and its applications. In a 
combination
              of plenary lectures by eminent mathematicians and parallel 
sessions of
              invited and contributed talks, the plan is for this year's 
conference (to be
              held August 6-9, 2002 on the Virginia Tech campus in 
Blacksburg, Virginia) to
              cover a wide range of topics, including 
operator/system theory,
              operator/scattering theory, operator 
theory/numerical analysis, operator
              theory/wavelets and signal processing, 
operator theory/harmonic analysis as
              well as topics in Krein space 
operator theory and core engineering. These
              topics form a core of the 
basic science behind a variety of applications,
              including control of 
industrial processes or high performance aircraft,
              tomography and image 
reconstruction, pulse propagation in optical fibers,
              seismology, data 
compression and reconstruction, and identification of only
              approximately 
known parameters.

The original concept of IWOTA was as a
              satellite conference for operator 
theorists to the broader based
              international symposium on Mathematical 
Theory of Networks and Systems
              (MTNS), to be held August 12-16, 2002 
at the University of Notre Dame. While
              this concept is still in place, the 
scope of IWOTA has broadened considerably
              in recent years and IWOTA 
has now attained an independent identity as a
              world-wide conference for 
recent developments in core operator theory and its
              applications. IWOTA's 
primary objective is to bring together major
              researchers in the area of 
operator theory and related fields. These meetings
              provide opportunities 
for all participants to present their own work in
              contributed talks, to 
interact with other researchers from around the globe,
              and to broaden their 
knowledge of the field by hearing the invited lectures
              of eminent 
mathematicians. In addition IWOTA emphasizes cross-disciplinary
              
interaction among mathematicians, electrical engineers and mathematical
              
physicists, and encourages participants to continue on to the MTNS
              
conference for a further broader interdisciplinary interaction. In addition,
              
IWOTA encourages and financially supports the participation of young
              
researchers, i.e., advanced graduate students and recent Ph.D. recipients,
              
for whom the opportunities offered by expert conferences are particularly
              
important

