Title       : Adapting Models of Excellence to Enhance the Core Biology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2002  
File        : a0126393

Award Number: 0126393
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Lewis lewiss@cc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa Conley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia J. Horst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carroll College
	      100 North East Avenue
	      Waukesha, WI  531863103    414/547-1211

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
Carroll College, Wisconsin's oldest institution of
              higher education, is adapting an effective model of core curriculum reform for
              the liberal arts setting. We are modeling our curriculum reform efforts after a
              successful program developed at the California State University at Fullerton.
              Our initial efforts at curriculum revision resulted in substantive changes to
              the content presented in the four core courses, but did not impact how that
              content was delivered. As outlined in this proposal, our efforts at curriculum
              reform now center on three objectives for enhanced student learning: 1)
              strengthening the investigatory skills of students, 2) modeling the integration
              of biological fields, and 3) developing and implementing multi-level assessment
              strategies that validate practice and identify areas for growth. This project
              supports faculty development to help coordinate our teaching efforts, enhance
              our expertise with particularly effective pedagogical strategies, and measure
              the effectiveness of our curriculum. Students are using essential equipment
              including mobile workstations in a series of integrated investigations designed
              to develop research skills incrementally while also demonstrating the
              connections between multiple levels of biological inquiry. Our ultimate goal in
              this phase of curricular reform is to enhance student learning by creating an
              assessment-driven core curriculum. The outcome of our project is students who
              more successfully retain basic concepts in upper-division courses and who
              approach their senior research project with a solid foundation in how to ask
              and answer biological questions. Secondary biology education students are
              integrated into our teaching collaboratives, enhancing their professional
              preparation. We are also improving the teaching skills of faculty in the
              biology department, with reform spreading to other members of the Science
              Division, other Carroll faculty members, and local high school and college
              science teachers who participate in faculty development opportunities.
