Title       : Introducing Unsaturated Flow Phenomena into an Undergraduate Civil Engineering
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2002    
File        : a0126306

Award Number: 0126306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ning Lu ninglu@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William Likos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Vaughan Griffiths  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Civil (54)
The objective of this proposal is to introduce
              unsaturated flow phenomena in soils in undergraduate civil engineering
              education at the Colorado School of Mines by introducing unsaturated flow
              phenomena in soils. The project responds to a pressing need in civil
              engineering practice by filling the gap between current textbooks and
              engineering practice. Over the last two decades, geotechnical engineering, a
              sub-discipline of civil engineering, has experienced radical changes.
              Traditional foundation design methodology, which is based strictly on soils
              under saturated conditions, is now being supplemented with the considerations
              of unsaturated soil conditions in many structural foundation problems such as
              construction and operation of dams, natural slope stability and landslide
              analysis, underground waste containments, and expansive soil damages to houses
              and civil infrastructures. As a result, today's geotechnical engineers must
              deal with soils under unsaturated conditions in engineering practice; a subject
              typically excluded from many formal undergraduate education curricula.
              Furthermore, all soil mechanics and laboratory textbooks currently in use at
              the undergraduate level in the United States cover little, if any, material on
              unsaturated flow phenomena in soils. 

The fundamental concepts of
              unsaturated flow phenomena in soils are being incorporated into "Soil
              Mechanics" and "Soil Mechanics Laboratory" courses by adapting and implementing
              two experiments which illustrate unsaturated flow phenomena in soils. These
              experiments consist of "Soil Water- Suction Characteristic Curve Test" for
              quantifying dependency of soil suction head on water content, and "Coefficient
              of Permeability Test" for quantifying dependency of soil permeability on water
              content. Comprehension of the working principles for both experiments is
              critical for the full understanding of unsaturated flow in soils, and
              application of these principles to structural foundation design and other
              pressing geotechnical engineering problems. 



