Title       : Teaching Quantification Skills in the Biology and Mathematics Curricula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0126740

Award Number: 0126740
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56311              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raina S. Robeva robeva@sbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robin L. Davies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Kirkwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sweet Briar College
	      
	      Sweet Briar, VA  24595    804/381-6100

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
This cross-disciplinary project integrates mathematics
              and biology in the undergraduate curriculum at Sweet Briar College (SBC). The
              overall goal of this initiative is to improve the quantification skills of SBC
              students using applications in the life sciences. Quantification skills are
              defined as the ability to look at an unfamiliar problem, determine the type of
              data necessary to address the problem, select the appropriate mathematical
              tools, and draw conclusions on the adequacy of the results. 
The objectives
              for the initiative are to:
1. Strengthen the quantification skills of biology
              students.
2. Expose mathematics students to the usefulness and applicability
              of mathematical knowledge and highlight career opportunities in the life
              sciences.
3. Introduce students to interdisciplinary research, emphasizing
              collaboration with researchers from different fields.
4. Improve the overall
              oral and writing skills of mathematics and biology students with specific
              emphasis on interdisciplinary content.
These objectives are achieved by: 1)
              Developing a new course, Quantification Skills for Biomathematics, focusing on
              applications of mathematics to biology, and 2) Enriching the mathematics and
              biology curricula by developing and implementing additional educational modules
              that are used as biomathematical projects in existing courses. The focus is on
              the biological applications of common mathematical tools, rather than
              underlying mathematical theories. Students experience the usefulness of complex
              mathematical techniques as applied to biological problems.
Modules are adapted
              from: 1) existing texts and programs; 2) results from our research, and 3) data
              from our collaborators at the Center for Biomathematical Technology at the
              University of Virginia.

