Title       : Technology Literacy for Non-technical Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2001  
File        : a0126876

Award Number: 0126876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84989              (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Ollis ollis@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Engineering Technology (58)
This A&I project seeks to create a
              technology literacy lecture course and a hands-on laboratory
for non-technical
              undergraduate majors in the College of Humanities and Social Sciences (CHASS),
              the College of Education, and the College of Management at North Carolina State
              University (NCSU). The course structure is based on key elements from a
              successful education venture developed and offered since 1995 at Hope College,
              Michigan, by Professor John Krupczak. Krupczak's course materials including:
              (1) lectures on modern technology; (2) a device laboratory; and (3) writing
              assignments on the impact that a technological device has on the social, the
              economic, and the cultural of the United States society. The project is to
              adapt Krupczak's Hope College model to an earlier laboratory created by the PI.
              The laboratory is for first year engineering students who work in teams of two
              or three. They READ a technical description of a device or system and then play
              the role of: (1) the USER of the system; (2) the ASSEMBLER (dissect the system
              and study it); (3) the ANALYST ( analyze and solve particular problems dealing
              with the system operation); and (4) TEACHER ( tell others about their system,
              its purpose, its principles of operation, and present an illustrative problem
              representative of the system's functions) Specifically, the Hope College
              component consist of the format of fourteen lectures and a six week laboratory
              consisting of six hands-on roles (read, use, dissect, calculate, design, and
              present/teach/explain), and two papers on the impact of the particular system
              on society. Evaluations include pre/post student attitude surveys, a standard
              NCSU
student course evaluation, and a new course assessment developed by the
              College of Engineering
staff. Student outcomes are measured using the Nan
              Byar's definition of technology
literacy.



