Title       : Occipital Visual Dysfunction and Its Consequences in Hungarian Williams Syndrome
               Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0126151

Award Number: 0126151
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234272             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilona Kovacs ikovacs@cyclops.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Akos Feher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Csaba Pleh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Petra Kozma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1358,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Williams Syndrome (WMS) is a genetic condition in which a relatively consistent
              neurobehavioral phenotype is produced by a genetic deletion. The syndrome has
              high potentials in bridging genes and behavior because of the genetic
              specificity and the consistent cognitive features in WMS. The crucial link
              between the genetic and behavioral levels is likely to be provided by cortical
              neuroanatomy. Recent neuroanatomical studies indicate that the most severe
              volumetric reductions in WMS are in the occipital lobe involving especially the
              primary visual cortex (V1). Furthermore, V1 is the only cortical area where
              anatomical observations have shown signs of abnormal neural connectivity. These
              anatomical findings call for studies addressing early levels of visual
              processing in WMS. The current study, in response to the NSF Children's
              Research Initiative, will be the first systematic behavioral investigation of
              low-level visual processing in WMS.
The primary visual cortex not only carries
              out a local analysis of the retinal image along the main feature dimensions
              (such as color, texture, depth), it also participates in the integration of
              local information, primitive figure-ground segmentation, and visual contextual
              integration. V1 also remains plastic and dynamically changing even in adult
              life, and takes part in visual short-term memory. How are these functions
              affected by the anatomically indicated abnormal connectivity in V1? The first
              objective of the study is to assess the development of local and integrative
              visual functions, and their plasticity related to occipital cortical areas in
              WMS. The assessment involves psychophysical measurements to estimate (1)
              orientation discrimination abilities, (2) contour integration abilities, (3)
              contextual sensitivity, and (4) perceptual learning in WMS subjects. All these
              procedures are based on the PI's previous work in visual spatial integration,
              visual plasticity and development. The PI's previous work also provides normal
              developmental trends in the studied visual functions, enabling the research
              group to evaluate developmental dispositions in WMS from the perspective of
              normal development. 
How does occipital visual dysfunction affect the
              development of higher-level cognitive functions, such as language? The cortical
              areas mediating language are not as severely involved anatomically as the
              low-level visual areas, and  language seems to be preserved in WMS.  However,
              abnormal visual processing might interfere with the normal development of some
              linguistic functions, such as visuo-spatial language. It has recently been
              indicated that the link between low-level vision and language might be visual
              memory. The second objective of the study is to assess the consequences of
              occipital dysfunction on the development of higher-level cognitive functions.
              The assessment involves behavioral studies on (1) visuo-spatial working memory
              and (2) visuo-spatial long-term memory, and  (3) visuo-spatial language.
              Correlations between memory and language related task performances are
              evaluated. The conjecture is that abnormal connectivity in the visual cortex
              leads to memory limitations, and language impairments.

The research is novel
              in that it offers a systematic investigation of (a) the development of
              occipital functions, and (b) consequential memory limitations, and language
              impairments in WMS. It also offers to test the whole population of Hungarian
              WMS children and young adults, therefore the whole range of patients with a
              genetic disorder within an isolated population. Experiments are designed to
              ensure age-matched (normal), mental-age matched (normal), and IQ matched (Down
              Syndrome) controls. In addition to its potential to reveal neurobehavioral
              developmental rules in WMS, the research is significant in terms of a better
              understanding of both psychological functions (e.g., contextual integration,
              working memory, visuo-spatial language), and the neural circuits underlying
              these. 

