Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Constraining Tertiary Temperatures, Salinities, and
               Ocean Chemistry: An isotopic and Trace-Metal Study of Serially-Sampled Mollusks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0126173

Award Number: 0126173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53938              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yair Rosenthal rosentha@imcs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Caroline H. Lear  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Constraining Tertiary Temperatures, Salinities, and Ocean Chemistry:
              An Isotopic and Trace-metal Study of Serially-sampled Mollusks

E. Grossman,
              Y. Rosenthal, and C. Lear

	The Tertiary Period (55 to ~2 million years ago)
              presents our best opportunity to study the transition from an ice-free
              "greenhouse world" to today's "icehouse world" and to understand the response
              of present and future climates to high atmospheric carbon dioxide levels.  This
              proposal will take advantage of the superb fossil record of the US Gulf Coast
              and two independent measures of ancient ocean temperatures, oxygen isotope
              (18O/16O) and strontium/calcium ratios in fossil shells, to characterize this
              dramatic change in global climate.  These results will address a longstanding
              controversy of early Tertiary climate, the "cool tropics paradox".  Oxygen
              isotope measurements of planktonic foraminifera indicate cool tropical
              sea-surface temperatures for a time when high latitudes experienced unusual
              warmth.  This contradicts model simulations of greenhouse world climates that
              predict that both polar and tropical temperatures must have been significantly
              warmer than today.  A common explanation for the discrepancy is that
              paleotemperature data from planktonic foraminifera have been modified by
              post-depositional chemical alteration (diagenesis).  By analyzing pristine
              mollusk shells, this study will obviate this limitation of previous studies.  A
              second objective is to improve our understanding of the nature and causes of
              the climatic transition near the Eocene-Oligocene boundary associated with
              rapid Antarctic glaciation and faunal overturn. Recent work using oxygen
              isotope ratios in fish otoliths from US Gulf Coastal Plain sediments has linked
              faunal overturn to increased seasonality, in particular colder winters in this
              region.  However, interpretation of such data is limited by poorly constrained
              estimates of global ice volume and local salinity variations. This study will
              use paired measurements of mollusk Sr/Ca and 18O/16O to examine changes in
              low-latitude sea-surface temperatures and seasonality across this event. 
              Lastly, modern mollusk samples will be collected with temperature, salinity,
              and seawater 18O/16O data from various sites in the Gulf of Mexico and Eilat,
              Israel.  These samples will be analyzed for stable isotopes and trace metals
              (especially Sr/Ca) to calibrate trace metal-temperature relations. 


