Title       : Request Routing for Scalable Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0126231

Award Number: 0126231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Chase chase@cs.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amin M. Vahdat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Clustering technologies enable incremental scaling of Internet server sites at
              modest cost.  It is increasingly common in cluster-based service architectures
              to distribute incoming request traffic among servers using redirecting
              intermediaries integrated into the network switching fabric or interposed
              between the client and servers.  However, Internet services and their delivery
              architectures continue to evolve rapidly.  This creates new challenges and
              opportunities for redirecting intermediaries, and motivates basic research in
              both the mechanisms for request redirection and the request routing policies
              for specific service environments.

This work will undertake a coordinated
              research program to expand the potential of redirecting intermediaries as an
              enabling technology for scalable Internet services.  The work focuses primarily
              on integrating service-aware redirection and request routing as network-level
              functions in a high-speed switching architecture.  The methodology combines
              simulation, construction of software prototypes, and evaluation of prototypes
              using synthetic and real workloads.

The expected outcomes of the work are:
              
    An improved understanding of the role of request routing as an enabler
              for large-scale Internet services, 
    Simulation results evaluating these
              policies in large systems, 
    Software prototypes that demonstrate the value
              of these solutions in practice for Web-based services and network storage
              services, and 
    Opportunities to train students as participants in this
              research at both the graduate and undergraduate levels. 

In summary, the
              research work has the following basic objectives:

1.  Define protocol
              features essential for redirection at the level of the transport protocol.  The
              switch routes incoming requests on each transport connection to any active
              server at the discretion of a service-specific routing policy; referred to as
              Anypoint communication.

2.  Implement an Anypoint-capable transport protocol
              that supports features commonly required by service protocols: reliable
              communication, ordering and duplicate suppression, and congestion
              control.

3.  Define interfaces and capabilities for service-specific policy
              modules in Anypoint intermediaries.  This defines an architecture for
              decomposing service protocol implementations into a client, a server, and
              service module to extend the intermediary.

4.  Evaluate the intermediary
              architecture defined by Anypoint by constructing software prototypes of
              virtualized service implementations.  The initial targets are HTTP 1.1
              application services and NFS.

