Title       : Chemistry of the Earth's Deep Mantle and Core
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  2001   
File        : a0126009

Award Number: 0126009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350477             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Hemley hemley@gl.ciw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ho-kwang Mao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
EAR-0126009
Hemley and Mao
Carnegie Institution of Washington,
              Geophysical Laboratory

The goal of this project is to determine the chemical
              properties of lower mantle and core materials at relevant deep Earth conditions
              in order to obtain direct experimental constraints on the chemical composition,
              formation, and evolution of the planet's interior. The research takes advantage
              of numerous new developments in situ high-pressure techniques, including
              synchrotron x-ray diffraction and spectroscopy, infrared and optical
              techniques, neutron diffraction, and new high diamond-cell methods. The project
              will start by improving both pressure and temperature calibration at deep
              mantle and core conditions. With this improved accuracy, in-situ x-ray
              diffraction studies will be performed to resolve current questions about the
              post-spinel phase boundary as a function of pressure-temperature and
              composition (P-T-X). The defect structure and concentration of iron and
              aluminum-bearing magnesium silicate perovskites will be characterized by
              detailed compositional studies and by direct site-occupancy measurements with
              neutron powder diffraction. A series of complementary synchrotron x-ray
              spectroscopic techniques used to characterize the spin and oxidation state of
              iron in these phases throughout the P-T range of the lower mantle. The question
              of additional, very high P-T phases of Fe and Fe-Ni alloys will be investigated
              using diamond gasket double-sided laser heating/synchrotron x-ray diffraction
              techniques. High-resolution x-ray emission, nuclear resonant forward
              scattering, and optical Raman spectroscopies will be used to identify possible
              pressure-induced changes in electronic, magnetic, and vibrational properties of
              iron alloys to core pressures. High P-T x-ray diffraction measurements in the
              lower pressure range will also allow investigations of structural changes in
              the liquid state of Fe. The problem of the light element in the core will be
              examined in a few pseudo-binary systems with Fe-Ni, starting with oxygen and
              then moving to sulfur and hydrogen using the same battery of diffraction and
              spectroscopic techniques.


