Title       : Physical and Structural Properties of the Siple Dome Core
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0126212

Award Number: 0126212
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $394334             (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra A. Meese dmeese@crrel.usace.army.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USACRREL
	      72 Lyme Road
	      Hanover, NH  037551290    /   -

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a 2-year renewal program to continue research on the
              physical and structural properties of the Siple Dome ice core. This work will
              include continued monitoring of the core relaxation process, additional
              examination of the volcanic ash and dust record preserved in the Siple Dome
              core and its relationship to the timing and distribution pattern of widespread
              infall of tephra in the Byrd core, and possible climatic implications,
              additional thin sectioning of ice from below 800 m to obtain a more accurate
              picture of the response of the deeper ice to increased deformation and elevated
              temperatures, and measurements of total air content in the basal debris-bearing
              ice to evaluate mechanisms by which debris is incorporated at the bed.
              Especially intriguing are ongoing attempts to resolve the climate record at
              Siple Dome and to refine the time scale. Currently, we are working to obtain
              the best possible depth-age scale that utilizes annual layer counting based on
              visual stratigraphy and ECM in conjunction with the gas record. Many
              climate-related records from the Siple Dome core have recently been presented
              showing a possible hiatus at approximately 680 m and a potential major climatic
              event at around 720 m. However, the layer structure in the Siple Dome core
              shows reversed inclined layering as high as 559 m and evidence of disturbed and
              steeply inclined layering in deeper ice. It is critical that we determine
              whether this kind of structural disturbance has resulted in discontinuities in
              the climate record or is some other structural artifact that has not impacted
              the continuity of the record. In addition to conducting further visual
              examination of the core, we plan to prepare vertical thick sections in several
              regions of disturbed ice structure to determine if the crystal structure
              reveals evidence of deformation. Until this is complete, we will not know how
              deep into the core a continuous climate record exists.
