Title       : Integrating New Learning Strategies in a Community College Engineering Science
               Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a0126877

Award Number: 0126877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167563             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mahmoud Ardebili   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel Hernandez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Enrique Izaguirre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Research Foundation
	      555 West 57th Street
	      New York, NY  10019    212/417-8423

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59)
 Borough of Manhattan Community College (BMCC) is
              using this CCLI-A&I project to redesign its core engineering science courses by
              transforming the instructional methodology from one that is primarily lecture
              based to one that emphasizes active learning in a laboratory setting. The aim
              is to enhance students understanding of engineering theory and develop their
              analytical skills. The project is the result of recommendations made by an
              outside evaluator, and discussions between our faculty and engineering faculty
              from several four year institutions. Our faculty are working with
              representatives from The City College of New York (CCNY), the University of
              Virginia (UV) and the Louisiana Technological University (LTU) to adapt and
              implement exemplary educational materials and pedagogical strategies that have
              been successfully tested and implemented at each of these institutions. The
              specifically topics are:
1) Circuits--adapt and implement (a&i) a set of
              laboratory exercises developed at CCNY School of Engineering. Hands-on
              activities are complemented by the use of Electronic Workbench and LabView
              software.
2) Graphics--a&i computer based activities such as solid modeling
              using Pro/Engineer software as are used at CCNY and other schools. 
3)
              Mechanics-- a&i a series of hands-on exercises such as Working Model as was
              developed at LTU.
4) Thermodynamics--a&i a set of workshops developed at UV.
              Simulations and analysis at the workshops are supported by the CYCLEPAD
              software.

In support of these curricular reforms, this project is setting up
              a computer laboratory and an experimental engineering science laboratory
              equipped with up-to-date software and instruments. A training program
              consisting of workshops conducted by faculty from the model institutions
              ensures that our faculty are knowledgeable in the pedagogical methods of the
              model institutions and are capable of using active learning and project based
              activities. The measurable outcome of the project will be a manual for the four
              courses, which will include hands-on laboratory experiments and computer
              activities. A separate manual consisting of student projects will also be an
              outcome product. These products will be disseminated at national and regional
              engineering meetings and will be made available on the college's web site. 

              

