Title       : Implementation of the Learning Factory Model in an Upper Division Engineering
               Technology Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2002    
File        : a0126856

Award Number: 0126856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116727             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mukasa E. Ssemakula m.e.ssemakula@wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gene Y. Liao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Engineering Technology (58)
The Learning Factory concept was
              first developed as part of the TRP/NSF funded Manufacturing Engineering
              Education Partnership (MEEP). The objective of the Learning Factory (LF) is to
              integrate a practice-based engineering curriculum that balances analytical and
              theoretical knowledge with physical facilities for product realization in an
              industrial-like setting. The LF model, which emphasizes practical experience,
              moves Engineering programs closer to the Engineering Technology (ET) model;
              which by design is oriented to practical applications. Consequently, ET
              programs are well suited to implementing the LF. This project's goal is the
              adaptation of the LF model for implementation in ET programs. Under this
              project, five carefully selected courses in the current programs are being
              modified. This will lead to the use of coordinated projects across those
              courses. The specific coordinated projects focus on the design and building of
              functional model engines. In the various courses, students generate CAD
              drawings of all the engine 1components, produce process plans for the engine
              components, fabricate the engine components and assembling and testing the
              engines. This education process provides the students with a good understanding
              of engines. That is, the students gain the exposure to the full range of issues
              involved in the product design phase, in the manufacturing planning phase, in
              the fabrication phase, in the assembly phase and in the testing phase. Since
              the implementation component of the project is modifying of existing courses
              rather than developing new ones, it is highly likely that the results of the
              project will be widely accepted by the ET community. The results will be
              disseminated through conferences and journal publications geared to the
              Engineering and Engineering Technology community. There will also be particular
              outreach to area community colleges to encourage coordinated implementation of
              the LF concept.

