Title       : Technology to Enhance Learning in an Introductory Biology Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a0126782

Award Number: 0126782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39368              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian W. Schwartz schwartz_brian@colstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harlan Hendricks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbus State University
	      4225 University Avenue
	      Columbus, GA  319075645    706/568-2011

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
This project will introduce new technology into the
              introductory Principles of Biology laboratory at Columbus State University. The
              technology would support and maximize the impact of inquiry-based activities
              built around the learning cycle approach to science education. Specifically,
              computers and graphing calculators will be interfaced with an array of probes
              and sensors to facilitate measurement, quantitative analysis, and presentation
              of
data. These skills are now critically lacking in our students. The use of
              these instruments will better engage students in laboratory activities, allow
              them to experience the use of technology in modern biology, and enhance their
              ability to visualize and understand the biological phenomena they are exploring
              in the laboratory. Outcomes will be assessed through comparison of learning and
              attitudes among students who use the new technology with students who carry out
              similar experiments without the technology. DUE themes addressed by the project
              include integration of technology in science education, professional
              development of science faculty, preparation of future science educators, and
              participation in science by women and underrepresented minorities.
              Participation of the PIs in appropriate workshops and specific efforts to share
              their experiences with colleagues will ensure professional development. Student
              demographics at CSU guarantee significant involvement in the project of women,
              underrepresented minorities, and future teachers. Project results will be
              disseminated through publications and presentations at regional and national
              meetings, and products will be disseminated through publication on a web site
              devoted to the project.

