Title       : Undergraduate Experiments in Electron Diffraction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0126105

Award Number: 0126105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21741              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis F. Rioux rioux@uwosh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael T. Umlor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Oshkosh
	      800 Algoma Boulevard
	      Oshkosh, WI  549013551    920/424-1415

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) The Department of Physics & Astronomy has added a laboratory
              component to its Modern Physics course and moved some experiments from the
              Experimental Physics Laboratory course to the
Modern Physics course. A
              capstone research project has also been added for senior physics majors.
As
              part of these course modifications, the department is adding
              high-energy
electron diffraction (RHEED) equipment to be used by undergraduate
              students in a wide variety of
experiments. Experiments adapt and draw from
              undergraduate labs on diffraction and on research techniques using RHEED to
              make measurements on materials.
Students who work with the electron
              diffraction equipment 
demonstrate for themselves the wave-like behavior of
              electrons and also gain valuable hands-on
experience using particles as a
              probe of the structure of matter. Other more advanced topics that are 
covered
              include the concepts of diffraction and reciprocal space, surface symmetry and
              order,
and structural differences between amorphous and crystalline
              solids.
The diffraction equipment complement the real space imaging
              capabilities of two
scanning probe microscopes already owned by the
              department. Together the electron diffraction
and scanning probe microscopy
              experiments make a powerful combination that enable 
students to gain a deeper
              understanding of important fundamental physical ideas like
              diffraction,
tunneling, and the wave-like nature of matter. Laboratory manuals
              and supporting materials
developed under this project are shared at regional
              meetings of the AAPT in addition to being
posted on web sites. Results
              stemming from undergraduate research is published
separately in appropriate
              peer-reviewed journals and presented at scientific meetings.
