Title       : A Standards-Driven, Inquiry-Based Science Curriculum for Future Elementary
               School Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a0126968

Award Number: 0126968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50446              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill Nelson Granger granger@sbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Orvos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George H. Lenz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca K. Ambers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sweet Briar College
	      
	      Sweet Briar, VA  24595    804/381-6100

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
The science departments at Sweet Briar College are
              making a strong commitment to enhancing the preparation of new teachers by
              developing a set of new science courses for the undergraduate pre-service
              teacher. These courses, Chemistry by Inquiry, Life & Earth Science by Inquiry,
              and Physics by Inquiry, fulfill the newly mandated requirements for teacher
              licensure by the Commonwealth of Virginia. Our new Science by Inquiry
              curriculum supports National Science Education Standards and is modeling for
              pre-service teachers "best-practices" in inquiry-based and hands-on approaches
              to teaching.
This project is building upon a strong commitment to
              undergraduate science education and a commitment by the science faculty to
              outreach activities in the community. In addition our project is informed by
              national efforts in undergraduate science reform, including similarly focused
              NSF-funded projects: 
(1) Steven Fifield, et. al., "Integrating Inquiry-Based
              Science and Education Methods Courses in a 'Science Semester' for Future
              Elementary Teachers" (NSF award no. 0088527), University of Delaware. This is a
              problem-based learning project.
(2) Sally Jean, "Project Inspire:
              Investigations in Science for Pre-Service Teachers; Promoting and Producing
              Inquiry-Based Relevant Experiences" (NSF award no. 0088646), Keene State
              University. 
(3) Alfonso M. Albano, "Building Bridges: Science Education
              Reform at Bryn Mawr College" (NSF award no. 9850090), Bryn Mawr College.
              
Through adaptations of these programs we are creating science courses for
              pre-service undergraduate teachers that inspire them to create and discover.
              Our objectives in implementing this new curriculum are to provide the newly
              trained teachers with content mastery and hands-on science experiences and
              activities which are directly transferable to the NK-6 classroom, and to do so
              in an environment which encourages open-ended investigation and active
              learning. Students who complete these courses develop competency in
science
              methodology, acquire a good attitude toward science and the scientific process,
              and learn the requisite skills (written, oral, and quantitative) to be
              successful teachers of science.
