Title       : Development of a Project-Oriented Neuroscience Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a0126692

Award Number: 0126692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27760              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leah A. Chase chase@hope.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher C. Barney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/395-7190

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
One of the greatest challenges in the development of
              scientific curricula is to develop courses that teach students important
              scientific concepts while fostering critical thinking and hypothesis testing
              skills. The faculty and administration of the Natural Science Division at Hope
              College believe that "science is best learned by doing". With the recent
              commitment by the college to establish a neuroscience program, our objective is
              to develop a research-oriented neuroscience laboratory that will facilitate
              student understanding of neuroscience concepts and support the divisional
              emphasis of nurturing critical thinking skills. This new laboratory will
              continue to build on students' prior investigative laboratory experience,
              wherein students are first trained in a scientific technique (using structured
              lab exercises) and then use that technique to complete a long-term project
              based on their own hypothesis and experimental design. We are adapting the
              structured labs from two complimentary neuroscience lab programs currently
              being used at other undergraduate institutions: 1) The Crawdad Program, which
              is currently being used by institutions such as Cornell University and Williams
              College, introduces students to modern neurophysiology techniques including
              electrophysiology. 2) A Laboratory Manual of Leaning and Memory Experiments
              currently being used at Wesleyan College and Kent State University, presents
              students with experimental techniques used at the organismal level to study
              behavior and learning. The resources used in this neuroscience lab are also be
              utilized by students in the advanced physiology and introductory biology
              courses.
