Title       : Enhancement of the Organic Chemistry Laboratory Curriculum Using
               Temperature-Programmable, Computer-Controlled, and Network -Accessible Gas
               Chromatographs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0126580

Award Number: 0126580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38314              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura E. Parmentier parmentr@beloit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Abrams  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Beloit College
	      
	      Beloit, WI  53511    608/365-3391

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
We are using temperature-programmable, computer-controlled gas
              chromatographs (GCs) equipped with TCD detectors to refine, adapt and
              incorporate a comprehensive set of experiments in the general and organic
              chemistry sequences. The enhanced throughput of the computer-controlled GCs
              provides access to the acquired data and powerful data analysis software
              anywhere on the campus intranet. The experiments extend our innovative
              inquiry-driven model for General Chemistry and Chemical Equilibrium to Organic
              Chemistry. Students are first introduced to GC instrumentation in General
              Chemistry through an analysis of fats and oils as part of our current topical
              module on fats and nutrition. In the Organic sequence, several key experiments
              are run in an investigative, "what if" fashion by individual students. For
              example, detailed examination of the conditions and mechanistic details of the
              hydroboration reaction by observing the effect of different solvents, alkenes,
              and hydroboration reagents are investigated by students. In another experiment,
              students compare E1 vs. E2 elimination of 2-bromobutane to give cis- and
              trans-2-butene. Since the isomers can be resolved by the GC system, the
              relative yields lead to insights about the mechanism. Finally, the GCs are also
              being used in an inter-disciplinary course on perfumes and in community
              outreach activities in a Howard Hughes-funded program for "Girls and Women in
              Science," where sixth grade girls and their teachers perform "hands-on" GC
              analyses of gasoline and other common materials. We are carrying a
              comprehensive assessment of the project by an on-site specialist in chemical
              education. We will disseminate the results of the project nationally through
              the web sites and links to the NSF-funded ChemLinks Coalition, as well as
              through articles in The Journal of Chemical Education once they become
              available.

