Title       : The Children's Research Initiative -- Integrative Approaches -- CRI: The Ecology
               of Early Language Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0126502

Award Number: 0126502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83892              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cristina Schmitt schmit12@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. Barratt  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1358,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The Ecology of Early Language Development

Marguerite Barratt

 
                 Establishing proficient communication skills in early childhood provides a
              critical foundation for social and emotional development and for subsequent
              academic achievement. The vast individual differences in early language skills
              that emerge in the context of children's families, cultures, and communities
              are important because of their long-term implications for children's school
              readiness and subsequent adaptation.

     The goal of the planning grant is
              to bring multidisciplinary perspectives to bear on the causes and consequences
              of individual differences in early language development. Some aspects of
              language are particularly fragile, particularly vulnerable to deprived
              conditions. Decades of excellent research within individual disciplines,
              including psychology, education, linguistics, family ecology, medicine,
              genetics, nursing, and speech and language science have described early
              language development.  However, the explanations of processes that are emerging
              necessarily cross disciplinary boundaries (Chapman, 2000). Each discipline uses
              different theoretical frameworks, different vocabularies, and asks different
              questions. 

     The ecological and developmental framework that will guide
              this research will bring together the perspectives of the various disciplines
              of 16 faculty scholars from Michigan State University. The planning process
              will (a) build the multidisciplinary context for the work through sessions with
              nationally prominent visiting scholars and (b) through planning sessions
              focused on development of a Center for the Study of the Ecology of Early
              Language Development. (c) The effort will integrate the domains of biology,
              family, culture, and community through research clusters that work to refine
              and integrate their science, with a focus on assessments, research designs,
              sampling strategies, and pilot research. During the planning period, (d)
              linkages will be strengthened with other research institutes and departments at
              MSU and with other Michigan institutions of higher education, particularly
              community colleges that provide certificates and degrees in early childhood
              education. (e) A Community Forum will solicit information about early language
              development from a broad coalition of Michigan partners. (f) Dissemination
              linkages are already in place with MSU Extension, collaborations with the state
              networks for child care and Head Start, the human service planning groups in
              each county, and the 53 Intermediate School Districts. (g) Policy linkages are
              in place with the Michigan legislative Children's Caucus, the state departments
              addressing social services, community health, and education, and several state
              level advocacy organizations. (h) A National Advisory Committee and a Community
              Advisory Committee will be assembled.

     The Institute for Children,
              Youth, and Families (ICYF), within the College of Human Ecology at Michigan
              State University, has a 30-year history of multidisciplinary research and
              outreach that serves as the foundation for this proposal. The research on the
              ecology of early language development will explicitly link to MSU's 10-year-old
              multidisciplinary Interdepartmental Graduate Specialization in Infant Studies.
              It will also link to MSU multidisciplinary graduate training programs in
              applied developmental science, cognitive science and neuroscience. 

