Title       : Planning for an American Indian Child Development Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0126488

Award Number: 0126488
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15379              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. White joseph_white@sdstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly R. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Dakota State Univ
	      Box 2201, Admin 130
	      Brookings, SD  570071998    605/688-4181

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1358,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Planning for an American Indian Child Development Center

Joseph
              M. White & Beverly R. King

Efforts to develop an American Indian Child
              Development Center on the campus of South Dakota State University in Brookings,
              SD, will begin with a two day workshop designed to address several issues.  The
              workshop will help in the development of a specific mission and a set of
              narrowly defined research objectives.  At present the purposes of a Center at
              SDSU would be to identify factors that influence positive development from
              different levels of analysis (e.g., individuals, families, and communities) and
              context (e.g., ethnicity, culture) among American Indian children.  These
              influences may or may not be the same as the majority culture.  Further insight
              into this issue is needed in order to use this information to assist American
              Indian children and their families in the process of understanding functional
              pathways to development across childhood.

Activities planned for the
              workshop include training in the life course perspective, both in terms of a
              theory to guide future research and in terms of designing methodologies that
              will be sensitive to multiple influences on American Indian child development. 
              This will include selected faculty involved in defining the research questions
              and potential projects.  Although much of this work will have been done prior
              to this time via preliminary correspondence, this initial morning session will
              be designed to review and refine the research questions and ensuing framework. 
              The afternoon session will be open to the academic community at large to
              receive training on the life course perspective and the methodology used to
              work within this framework.  Smaller breakout groups are anticipated to explore
              issues related to this paradigm.  Groups will then reconvene to conclude the
              day's activities and to allow the consultants to respond to any final
              questions.

The second day of the workshop will include a more focused level
              of training from American Indian representatives from local tribes and
              communities.  They will be asked to share presentations about their beliefs,
              understanding, and practice relative to children.  Smaller breakout sessions
              will occur prior to lunch and resume after lunch.  Groups will again reconvene
              to pull information together and provide concluding comments.  Input from the
              tribal communities will be critical to finalizing the research questions and
              agenda.

Research collaborators will have several follow-up meetings to
              review the information gleaned from the workshop and integrate it into the
              original set of specific research questions that were developed prior to the
              workshop.  This information will then be used to develop a more coherent and
              focused proposal for the development of a center.  

Finally, visits to a few
              existing American Indian Centers sometime following the workshops will be
              invaluable.  The visits may help identify ways in which a center focused on
              American Indian Child Development might function and how the specific research
              questions and ensuing projects may be facilitated.

