Title       : Case-Based Reasoning for Engineering Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  2001  
File        : a0126855

Award Number: 0126855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74622              (Estimated)
Investigator: George C. Runger runger@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah K. Brem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Norma F. Hubele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Using findings from cognitive science, a prototype of an intelligent tutoring
              system (ITS) is being developed. This ITS utilizes case-based reasoning (CBR)
              to scaffold undergraduate engineering students in their learning of
              introductory probability and statistics. This scaffolding process is based on
              the principle that successful problem solvers and experts gain a better grasp
              of the underlying problem structure by moving back and forth as they reach
              dead-ends or see new ways to formulate the problem. Specifically, the students
              learn the following three steps: 1) situation conception--understand the
              problem in everyday language; 2) mathematized situation conception--create a
              mathematical representation; and 3) solution method conception--carry out the
              mathematical procedures. Existing commercial software and well-established
              research index-based CBR and rule-based expert systems are used to support the
              presentation of ITS by graduate students to the undergraduate students in the
              course. The assessment of ITS is to test two hypotheses: 1) Does the ITS
              increase the internalization of key concepts by the students? and, 2) Does the
              ITS increase the student independence in representing and solving problems?
              Also, assessments based on comparing the performances on questions related to
              the hypotheses for ITS-students and non-ITS-students. 

This initial
              evaluation of ITS from the standpoint of integrating it with an existing
              engineering statistics course, allows the participation of other universities
              who also offer the engineering statistics course to participate in a joint,
              longer term project to realize a fully functional ITS. Also, the partnership
              with other universities provides a vehicle for embedding ITS into other courses
              where the same cognitive and instructional principles are appilcable.

The
              final product--a prototype and recommendations for a more fully functional
              ITS-- will:
1. Assist students in extracting the underlying common structure
              from engineering statistics problems that illustrate the full range of
              engineering disciplines;
2. Allow the student to generate, customize, and
              change a virtual infinite collection of exercises that can be solved with the
              assistance of the ITS. The students can explore the effect of changes to
              different parameters and how those changes influence the solution; and
3. Help
              students formulate and solve practical and open-ended problems.

The final
              product will be kept on CD-ROM, and further dissemination will be via
              workshops.

Keywords: Case-based reasoning, intelligent tudoring system
