Title       : Continuing Operation of the Antarctic Submillimeter Telescope and Remote
               Observatory (AST/RO)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0126090

Award Number: 0126090
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vladimir Papitashvili                   
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2580704            (Estimated)
Investigator: Antony A. Stark aas@cfa.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adair P. Lane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacob Kooi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher K. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Chamberlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian-Astrophys Obs
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    716/831-3051

NSF Program : 5115      ANTARCTIC AERONOMY & ASTROPHYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Antarctic Submillimeter Telescope and Remote Observatory (AST/RO) is
              designed to investigate one of the least explored bands of electromagnetic
              radiation emitted by astronomical sources.  Submillimeter-wave radiation, at
              frequencies from about 300 Gigahertz (billions of cycles per second) up into
              the Terahertz (trillions of cycles per second) range, is emitted by dense gas
              and dust between the stars, and submillimeter-wave observations allow us to
              study in unprecedented detail the galactic forces acting upon that gas and the
              star formation processes within it.  AST/RO is a 1.7 meter diameter single-dish
              instrument, which has been operating for six years at South Pole station in
              several wave bands with arcminute resolution over regions of sky which are
              several square degrees in size.  AST/RO's relatively large field of view allows
              the observation of interstellar molecular clouds throughout the fourth quadrant
              of the Milky Way and the Magellanic Clouds, in order to locate star-forming
              cores and study in detail the dynamics of dense gas in our own galaxy.  Studies
              of molecular clouds with varying heavy element content under a variety of
              galactic environments shows us how molecular clouds are structured, how the
              newly-formed stars react back on the cloud, and how galactic forces affect
              cloud structure.  AST/RO is recognized as the test bed and progenitor of
              planned instruments which will go on to study how stars form throughout the
              universe from the earliest times to the present. Essential to AST/RO's
              capabilities is its location as Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station, an
              exceptionally cold, dry site which has unique logistical opportunities and
              challenges.  Most submillimeter radiation from astronomical sources is absorbed
              by irregular concentrations of atmospheric water vapor before it reaches the
              Earth's surface.  The dry air over South Pole Station allows an accurate
              intercomparison of submillimeter-wave power levels on the scale of the Milky
              Way and its companion galaxies.

