Title       : Adapting and Implementing the "Working With Chemistry" Laboratory Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0126498

Award Number: 0126498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98353              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Woolcock woolcock@grove.iup.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne Kondo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Indiana, PA  15705    412/357-2100

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
This project focuses on adapting and implementing the Working
              With Chemistry (WWC) laboratory program for General Chemistry students. WWC is
              an NSF DUE-funded inquiry-based laboratory program, developed by Wink,
              Gislason, and Kuehn at the University of Illinois-Chicago, designed for
              non-chemistry science majors. Experiments are grouped in threes:
              "Skill-building" (detailed procedure given; new skill learned), "Foundation"
              (students design part of a procedure, using new skill), and "Application"
              (students design a
procedure using a new skill to solve real-world problems).
              Adoption of the WWC program changes instructional styles from traditional to
              problem-based. Adaptation of the WWC program is needed to better meet the needs
              and backgrounds of Indiana University of Pennsylvania (IUP) students, improve
              the instructional abilities of IUP faculty, and integrate technology into the
              laboratories. Trial runs of WWC indicated several changes were needed to
              successfully implement the program at IUP. The objectives and expected outcomes
              include: improve the pre-laboratory assignments to better prepare students for
              each experiment; implement a laboratory report tutorial; adapt the few WWC
              laboratories that have proved problematic at IUP; incorporate diode-array
              spectrophotometers and Vernier interfaces; develop and implement new experiment
              groups relevant to other majors in General Chemistry; adapt the existing
              instructor's guide; and implement a WebCT site. To achieve these outcomes,
              eight faculty, with appropriate expertise, are working individually and
              collectively to develop/adapt prelabs and experiment groups, install software
              and write student guidelines. Faculty reports for each laboratory are being
              used to enhance the instructor's guide. Continuing evaluation of the program is
              underway, and dissemination of results is planned.
