Title       : Teaching Psychological Research Methods with Online Examples
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a0126433

Award Number: 0126433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102147             (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Maki Bill.Maki@TTU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Francis T. Durso  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Psychology - Cognitive (73)
This project is creating and disseminating a set of
              empirically-validated materials for teaching psychological research methods
              using formal instruction supplemented by examples. The psychology major
              continues to be popular among undergraduate students in liberal arts and
              pre-professional programs. The psychological research methods course is
              important for teaching critical, scientific thinking skills that are applicable
              to real-world problem solving. Investigators of cognition and instruction know
              that formal instruction must be supplemented by many varied concrete examples
              in order for transfer of skills outside the classroom to occur. However, a
              review of educational materials indicates that a validated collection of such
              examples is not available for research methods instruction. Thus, the specific
              objectives of this project are to (1) implement a set of instructional modules
              for learning by examples, (2) use the technology of the world wide web to
              provide students with unrestricted, asynchronous access, and (3) gather
              experimental evidence supporting the application of learning by examples in the
              research methods course. This proof-of-concept is creating three modules (on
              confounding and control of variables, statistical inference, and interactions
              among variables). Each module contains several examples culled from various
              psychological research literatures and presented to students as lengthy
              abstracts containing methodological flaws that need to be discovered and
              repaired. The effect of training on the examples is being assessed in a
              pretest-posttest nonequivalent groups design that allows generalization across
              classes and instructors and the assessment of modes of delivery (web vs.
              face-to-face, and individual work vs. group activity).
