Title       : Structural Engineering Workshop: Experiments In The Structural Engineering
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2002   
File        : a0126373

Award Number: 0126373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46217              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas C. Stahl stahl@msoe.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. DeVries  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Milwaukee School of Eng
	      1025 N. Broadway
	      Milwaukee, WI  532023109    414/277-7300

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Civil (54)
The projects adapts a series of large-scale
              experiments into the advanced undergraduate structural engineering courses, and
              exercises to enhance continuity between graduate and undergraduate courses.
              Although the literature describes several successful efforts to bring physical
              experiments into structural engineering courses, the Structural Engineering
              Workshop is going to advance this methodology in two important ways: First,
              most previous projects were limited to illustrating structural analysis
              concepts, but the Structural Engineering Workshop emphasizes failure modes of
              real structural components and systems. This is important because many design
              procedures are meant to steer us toward some failure modes and away from
              others, but it is difficult for students to appreciate why most students never
              get the chance to see (and hear and touch!) the difference between the brittle
              failure of an over-reinforced beam and the ductile failure of an
              under-reinforced beam. Second, while projects reported in the literature were
              limited in scope to one particular course, the Structural Engineering Workshop
              is going to use the experiments as a means to integrate activities across a
              range of courses in an engineering program. 

Students of different years and
              specialties are going to participate in planning and production of test
              specimens, testing, and analysis of results. Giving students the opportunity to
              revisit the experiments throughout their academic programs, each time from the
              shifted viewpoint of a different course, is going to help them understand the
              critical links between material/component behavior, construction methods, and
              structural design.
