Title       : High Resolution Studies of the Earthquake Source
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2001   
File        : a0126315

Award Number: 0126315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147349             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel E. Abercrombie rachel@seismology.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this work is to obtain higher resolution, more precise source
              parameters of small earthquakes than are currently available. To accomplish
              this, the highest quality existing data are being analyzed using techniques
              that compare closely located earthquakes to improve the precision of both
              relative and absolute source parameters. Small earthquakes do not in themselves
              present a major natural hazard, but they provide much of our understanding of
              the source processes of larger damaging earthquakes. Many models of earthquake
              nucleation and rupture dynamics, and earthquake triggering require assumptions
              about small-scale behavior, for example, whether there is a minimum sized
              earthquake or nucleation patch. Observations to constrain these parameters are
              therefore critical. To date, studies using shallow and deep borehole recordings
              containing high frequency signals have shown that the static stress drop is
              constant down to the smallest earthquakes we can measure, but the scatter and
              uncertainty in the individual measurements are large. Measurements of seismic
              energy, which are fundamental to understanding the rupture dynamics have even
              larger uncertainties. These uncertainties severely limit the use of such
              observations to constrain models of the earthquake source process.

In this
              study, new techniques are used that take advantage of closely-located
              earthquakes to obtain significantly more precise source parameters of small
              earthquakes than in earlier studies. The data analyzed first are from the deep
              borehole recording at Cajon Pass, California where local earthquakes were
              recorded with seismometers between 1 and 3 km depth over a total of four years.
              These seismograms remain the cleanest, least attenuated recordings of small
              earthquakes available. In previous work source parameters were estimated for
              some of the earthquakes recorded at 2.5 km depth, simply to address long
              standing scaling controversies. Since then, the importance of more precise
              measurements of energy and stress drops, as well as quantification of the onset
              of the seismograms has become clear for solving fundamental questions about
              earthquake rupture processes. Earthquakes recorded by the borehole network at
              Parkfield, California, (where there is considerable controversy about small
              earthquake stress drops), and a high frequency network at Acu Dam, northeastern
              Brazil, installed to monitor reservoir-induced seismicity, are also being
              analyzed for comparison. At each location, the catalogues are searched for
              similar earthquakes, including foreshocks and aftershocks.  The waveforms and
              spectra of the clustered earthquakes, which can be assumed to have identical
              path effects, are compared to obtain high-resolution relative source
              parameters. Detailed study of the onsets of the waveforms is also performed to
              investigate the earthquake nucleation process and determine, for example,
              whether it differs with magnitude. These measurements are then used to improve
              the constraints on models of the nucleation and dynamics of earthquake
              rupture.

This work will improve our understanding of the earthquake source
              process, which is fundamental to any improvements in hazard minimization. It
              funds a graduate student and also undergraduate assistants to enhance
              education.
