Title       : Collaborative Research: Geodetic and Geologic Study of the Kinematics of Late
               Cenozoic Displacement Transfer, Central Walker Lane, Western Great Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0126205

Award Number: 0126205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285485             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Oldow oldow@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Late Cenozoic deformation is broadly distributed across the North American plate
              margin of the conterminous western United States and stretches from the San
              Andreas fault system eastward across the Mojave Desert and into the Basin and
              Range. The eastern California shear zone and Walker Lane of the western Great
              Basin form an active belt of structures accommodating about 25% of the relative
              motion between North America and the Pacific plate. From the Mojave Desert, the
              displacement is carried north, east of the southern Sierra Nevada, in a narrow
              zone of deformation bound on the west and east by the Owens Valley and Furnace
              Creek fault systems. North from the latitude of the central Sierra Nevada, the
              zone of deformation broadens to include the Walker Lane and central
Nevada
              seismic belt in the northwestern Great Basin. The Sierra Nevada behaves as a
              coherent tectonic block with a northwest-directed motion of 10-14 mm/yr and
              forms the western boundary of the zone of distributed deformation in the Great
              Basin. A complex pattern of active structures underlies west-central Nevada
              where displacement is transferred from the eastern California shear zone to the
              Walker Lane and the central Nevada seismic belt. Integrated geologic,
              seismological, and GPS geodetic results indicate that the central Walker Lane
              serves as an displacement transfer system linking stepped northwest-trending
              transcurrent faults. Within the central Walker Lane displacement partitioning
              is active and may be accommodated by differential motion of tectonic blocks. A
              GPS velocity field exhibits a systematic increase in magnitude from east to
              west across the central Walker Lane and is consistent both with block
              translation and vertical-axis rotation. Zones of divergent, transcurrent, and
              convergent motion are observed across suspected block boundaries. The observed
              velocity field is not easily reconciled with the current understanding of fault
              displacements and points out the difficulty in comparing geodetic and geologic
              displacement fields.

The PI's propose an integrated geodetic and geologic
              investigation of the central Walker Lane to address two questions: (1) Is
              displacement transfer between transcurrent structures wholly accommodated by
              kinematically coordinated slip on throughgoing faults, and (2) are the
              kinematics of active displacement transfer derived from GPS geodesy consistent
              with the displacement field estimated by earthquake seismology and fault-slip
              inversion? The central Walker Lane is ideally suited for this study for three
              reasons: (1) the region is seismically active and well defined earthquake focal
              mechanisms exist for the displacement transfer fault system, (2) the faults are
              well exposed and have produced preliminary fault-slip estimates of deformation
              kinematics, and (3) a complex present-day displacement field with ~10 mm/yr of
              differential slip is recorded by a GPS geodetic network. These elements will
              allow characterization of the kinematics of displacement transfer and offer the
              opportunity to directly compare different means of measuring deformation
              kinematics. The PI's primary interest is to characterize the kinematics of
              deformation in the active displacement transfer stepover and to compare the
              geodetically determined displacement field with that derived from earthquake
              focal mechanisms and fault-slip inversion. To achieve their research
              objectives, several aspects of the extensional stepover system exposed in the
              central Walker Lane must be examined in greater detail. The primary tasks set
              out in this project are: (1) to establish the spatial distribution of active
              high-angle faults linking the bounding transcurrent faults, (2) to document the
              detailed geometry and slip history of fault systems that transfer displacement
              between transcurrent faults, and (3) to deploy a GPS network with sufficient
              density to differentiate between continuous versus discontinuous variations in
              the present-day velocity field.
The PI's will address the tasks listed above
              with an integrated study utilizing detailed geologic mapping, structural
              analysis, and GPS geodesy. The investigators (Oldow and Satterfield) each have
              substantial experience working in the area and by building on previous studies,
              geological mapping and structural analysis will establish the areal limits of
              the transtensional fault system, document variable geometric relations between
              major and secondary fault systems, define the kinematic history of fault
              motion, and develop first-order estimates of recent slip magnitude by
              documenting offset landforms. Combined with other ongoing or proposed studies
              in the central Walker Lane, the results of this research should contribute to
              an unprecedented view of active transtensional displacement transfer and yield
              critical insight into the comparison of geologic and geodetic measures of
              deformation kinematics.

