Title       : Laser Spectroscopy to Enhance Inquiry-Mode Laboratories in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2001  
File        : a0126710

Award Number: 0126710
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38399              (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Keller kellerj@kenyon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott D. Cummings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kenyon College
	      22 Ransom Hall
	      Gambier, OH  43022    740/427-5114

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
Reflecting the importance of lasers in scientific research,
              medical practice, and numerous current and emerging technologies, leading
              chemistry programs have incorporated laser experiments into their advanced
              laboratory courses. We are introducing laser experiments at several levels of
              the Chemistry Department curriculum in a project that is central to our goal of
              moving the curriculum toward a "research model" in which students work with
              research-grade instrumentation, design experiments through guided inquiry, and
              interpret their results within the context of primary research literature. The
              experiments we are implementing are adapted from the Journal of Chemical
              Education and from primary chemistry research literature and are modified from
              procedures tested at other institutions. We are enhancing a Spectroscopy
              Laboratory course with the innovative goals of: (1) having students work with a
              versatile set of laser equipment to recognize how the capabilities and
              limitations of sources and detectors affect experimental design, and (2)
              designing two research-based experimental modules which address bio-inorganic
              photoinduced electron transfer and nonlinear optics using the appropriate
              spectroscopy tools. A second adaptation incorporates fluorescence lifetime and
              laser photochemical kinetic measurements into an Introductory Chemistry
              Laboratory and supplements our outreach efforts with secondary school chemistry
              programs. This project supports a trend in our department of increasing
              interest in student-faculty collaborative research. With new chemistry
              facilities to support instrumentation and new faculty members with expertise in
              spectroscopy, this is an ideal time to introduce laser spectroscopy experiments
              into our program.
