Title       : Active Learning in Psychology Core Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0126976

Award Number: 0126976
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73077              (Estimated)
Investigator: Danuta Bukatko dbukatko@holycross.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia E. Kramer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Holy Cross College
	      1 College Street
	      Worcester, MA  01610    508/793-2011

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Psychology - Cognitive (73)
This project is creating an interactive
              computer-based classroom for the teaching of core content courses in
              psychology. We are building on our previous success in revamping the Statistics
              and Research Methods courses, which now use exploratory computer exercises to
              encourage active, collaborative learning of fundamental concepts. In the
              present project, we are applying similar methods to incorporate a hands-on,
              research-based approach to the teaching of Developmental Psychology and
              Sensation and Perception. We are doing this by adapting materials developed
              primarily at Pennsylvania State University - Erie for use in our Developmental
              Psychology course. We are also adapting materials developed at the University
              of California - Riverside and Skidmore College to our course on Sensation and
              Perception. Our goals in this project are to (1) create a more interactive
              classroom environment in courses that in the past were often taught by lecture,
              (2) continue the emphasis on developing students' research skills that begins
              in Introductory Psychology and our Statistics/Research Methods sequence, and
              (3) guide students to focus on methodology as they critically evaluate
              scientific research findings. We are equipping a new computer laboratory/
              classroom with 31 seats and software. In addition, this project includes a plan
              for assessing the impact of students' experiences in the interactive classroom
              on their mastery of course content, as well as their interest in and attitudes
              toward science. Upon completion of this grant, we will also encourage and
              assist other department faculty in the development of similar materials for
              other core courses within the department.
