Title       : Implementing Guided-inquiry Laboratories Utilizing Gas-chromatography
               Mass-spectrometry in the Chemistry/Biochemistry Majors Sequence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2001  
File        : a0126468

Award Number: 0126468
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64312              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl A. Longfellow longfellowc@PhilaU.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Krishna L. Bhat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey T. Ashley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Philadelphia University
	      Schlhse Lane & Henry Ave
	      Philadelphia, PA  191445221    215/951-2700

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

With the purchase of a Varian Saturn gas-chromatograph
              mass-spectrometer (GC/MS) equipped with electron ionization (EI) and chemical
              ionization (CI) capabilities, we are adapting and implementing GC/MS-based
              laboratory experiments into four courses, Organic Chemistry, Physical
              Chemistry, Instrumental Methods of Analysis, and Environmental Chemistry at
              Philadelphia University. In addition, we are developing disciplinary and
              interdisciplinary guided-inquiry projects for the four courses. The GC/MS
              system is used as the catalyst in the development of these guided-inquiry
              projects. In these laboratory projects, students are given chemistry problems
              to solve as in an actual research setting. Solution to these problems requires
              the students to work as a team to formulate a response and use GC/MS and other
              instrumentation to solve the problems. The projects increase in complexity as
              students gain experience with the instrumentation. For example, in organic
              chemistry a two-component mixture is analyzed by GC/MS to gain insight into
              reaction mechanisms. Identification of the compounds in natural and manmade
              products with high vapor pressures and unique smells is explored in physical
              chemistry. And, in environmental chemistry, a GC/MS required project examining
              sediment contamination in the local Philadelphia area will soon be undertaken.
              The overcharging goal of our project is to enable our students acquire highly
              valued technical skills, develop critical thinking, and improve their
              communication and teamwork skills. Furthermore, with the knowledge and
              expertise gained working with modern research-grade instrumentation, our
              students would be well equipped for entering into chemistry-related industrial
              positions and/or highly competitive graduate programs. 


