Title       : Digital Imaging Array Detector Experiments in Undergraduate Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0126625

Award Number: 0126625
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58693              (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Bulman jbulman@lmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James K. McCarthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Marymount Univ
	      One LMU Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  90045    213/642-2700

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13)

This project is improving an upper-division advanced physics lab
              course through the adaptation and implementation of a cohesive set of
              experiments built upon digital imaging array detectors. These experiments were
              originally designed as part of a lab course in optical astronomy
              instrumentation at Caltech, which was funded by NSF's Instrumentation and
              Laboratory Improvement (ILI) program (Award No. 9250725).

The six
              experiments being adapted focus on geometric optics and aberrations, CCD
              electronics, CCD characteristics, fundamentals of spectroscopy, applications of
              spectroscopy, and imaging using an IR array camera. These experiments give
              students hands-on experience with IR and CCD array cameras and detectors,
              optics, and spectrographs as tools for making experimental measurements. By
              analyzing the collected digital data, students gain competence in the areas of
              analog-to-digital conversion, computer data acquisition, statistics, and modern
              computer image-processing techniques.

The new equipment is also being used
              in a chemistry course on instrumental analysis; in physical chemistry lab
              experiments pertaining to spectroscopy; and in introductory physics and
              astronomy courses to demonstrate concepts such as visible light, infrared
              radiation, and temperature.

Loyola Marymount University serves a diverse
              student population. Typically, about one third of the students enrolled in the
              advanced physics lab course are members of underrepresented groups, and 65% of
              the students in introductory astronomy are female. As the investigators
              implement the new equipment in these courses, they are not only improving the
              quality of the educational experience for all students but also attempting to
              excite women and ethnic minorities about pursuing careers in science.

As
              part of assessing the effectiveness of the improved advanced physics lab
              course, at the end of the course, students are giving demonstrations based on
              the experiments, and explaining the physics involved, to high school physics
              classes. The feedback from the high school teachers and students provides a
              gauge of how well the LMU students have grasped the advanced lab material.

