Title       : Revision of Undergraduate Chemistry Laboratory Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0126958

Award Number: 0126958
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147096             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Canary james.canary@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc Walters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry C. Brenner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas E. Geacintov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

The laboratory curriculum for chemistry majors is being
              restructured with a focus on inquiry-based experiments in the areas of modern
              chemical research. Three major educational goals are being addressed: (1)
              stimulating student interest in chemistry through projects in contemporary
              chemical issues; (2) providing students with the opportunity to apply modern
              instrumentation in experimental investigations; and (3) fostering collaborative
              interaction among students across different courses in the laboratory
              sequence.

A sequence of three laboratory courses is being implemented to
              fill the niche in the undergraduate curriculum normally occupied by second
              semester organic, advanced inorganic, and physical chemistry laboratories.
              These courses are emphasizing modern themes from contemporary chemistry
              research and development and include topics in nanotechnology, combinatorial
              chemistry, chiral technology, and biophysical chemistry. Seven topic modules
              were developed that emphasize these themes and seventeen experiments from the
              research and educational literature are now being adapted and implemented
              across the three courses. Thus, the courses are "integrated" thematically if
              not experimentally, and this is enhancing the interest and motivation of
              students as they proceed from one course to another in the sequence. Modern,
              high-quality instrumentation and equipment is available for use by
              undergraduates in these courses. Students in a prerequisite course are
              collaborating with students enrolled in advanced courses of the sequence. For
              example, students in a module focussed primarily on synthetic chemistry are
              providing samples to students in advanced modules for product characterization
              or to perform experiments of a more physical nature requiring a more extensive
              theoretical background. Such cross-course collaborations emulate interactions
              between investigators working in different sub-disciplines of chemistry.

