Title       : Florida Interdisciplinary Center for Environmentally Sound Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0126172

Award Number: 0126172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Winfred M. Phillips wphil@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Schert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy G. Townsend  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Warwick  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0126172	
Phillips			

This award is to the University of Florida to support
              the activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in
              response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0179).

Partners
The partners for this award include the University of
              Florida (Lead Institution), Florida A&M University, the University of Miami,
              Alachua County Environmental Protection Department, Florida Department of
              Environmental Protection, NASA Kennedy Space Center, Bionetice, Camp Dressen &
              McKee, Inc., Dynamac Corporation, Jones Edmunds & Associates, Koppers
              Industries, and Post, Buckley, Shuh, and Jernigan (PBS&J).

Proposed
              Activities
The proposed partnership will establish the Florida
              Interdisciplinary Center for Environmentally Sound Solutions.  The center will
              create a forum for effective communication and collaboration among all
              synergistic university researchers while serving as a focal point for
              establishing an interface with the private sector and government.  The center
              will identify and respond to important environmental problems and develop
              innovative solutions.

Proposed Innovation
The partnership will provide
              science and engineering solutions for environmental problems, improve
              understanding of complex relationships involving public policy, economic
              issues, risk assessments, and public education.

Potential Economic
              Impact
The potential impact will depend upon the perceived economic value the
              public places on environmental issues and the cost the private sector places on
              abatement and cleanup.

Potential Societal Impact
The societal goal of
              economic growth compatible with preservation of the environment using renewable
              resources can be achieved by a judicious marriage of technology with public
              policy. The center will contribute to this. The potential societal impact of
              environmental protection is limitless.

