Title       : Lake Watch:Undergraduate Students as Teachers of Satellite Imaging Among
               Volunteer Lake Monitors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0126446

Award Number: 0126446
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard P. Blakemore rpb@cisunix.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan L. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janet W. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
This project is developing an interdisciplinary
              curriculum bringing together two highly successful but currently separate areas
              of excellence at UNH. The Lakes Lay Monitoring Program (LLMP) is a 22-year
              veteran program wherein citizen stakeholders living on NH lakes collect
              water-quality data for analysis and archiving at UNH. The LLMP is being
              augmented with the use of remote sensing and geographic information systems
              (GIS), drawing from strengths associated with a world-class facility housed in
              the Institute for the Study of Earth, Oceans, and Space (EOS). We are
              recruiting a cohort of UNH sophomores, including non-science majors, to
              participate in the project which is adapting the Blackboard Project to connect
              lay lake volunteers and UNH undergraduates. They are learning to use the
              geo-spatial technologies (GST) to develop regional algorithms to monitor
              lake/watersheds from space, while learning theory and practice of limnology and
              microbial ecology. We are engaging the undergraduates as outreach teachers
              through adaptation of methods from the Gaia Crossroads Project to train the lay
              monitors in GST. This "Lake Watch Project" develops skills for communication,
              teamwork and critical thinking through hypothesis-driven, cooperative learning.
              The project increases faculty empowerment of undergraduates as a teaching
              resource and promotes faculty awareness of lecture-less teaching. It yields,
              through a writing- and speaking-intensive Lake Watch Seminar course, a
              student-prepared resource manual and a distance-learning model. The suitability
              of this model is being evaluated as a means of introducing lake/watershed
              remote sensing into other arenas, including K-12 classrooms.
