Title       : Blurring the Line Between the Teaching and Research Laboratory - Capillary Gas
               Chromatography and GC/MS Experiments in First and Second Year Chemistry
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0126837

Award Number: 0126837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57932              (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Lever dclever@owu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kim A. Lance  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dale J. Brugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lewis E. Fikes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Heather J. Grunkemeyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio Wesleyan University
	      
	      Delaware, OH  43015    614/369-4431

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
The goal of this project is to increase the percentage of
              students continuing from introductory chemistry to more advanced courses and to
              careers in science. We are accomplishing this by changing students' perceptions
              of chemistry laboratory through adding project-oriented experiments using
              advanced GC and GCMS instrumentation to solve topical and relevant problems. A
              secondary goal is to enhance the preparation of our students by providing
              laboratory experiences more similar to those they will experience in the
              workplace. The integration into the curriculum of a series of experiments using
              four Shimadzu GC-14B series capillary gas chromatographs with data stations and
              a QP-5000 GCMS system equipped with autosampler supports a broader departmental
              plan to introduce FTIR, UV/Vis, GC, and HPLC techniques into lower level
              laboratories. Students are gradually building their skills by repeated exposure
              to the GC and GCMS instruments in each of five laboratory sections accompanying
              general, organic, and analytical chemistry. Experiments have been carefully
              selected from the Journal of Chemical Education and are being adapted to fit
              our existing program. Success in meeting our goals is being assessed both
              numerically, by tracking the fate of each student entering our general
              chemistry program, and more qualitatively through our existing departmental
              assessment plan. Results will be shared with the educational community at
              national meetings of the American Chemical Society, the Council on
              Undergraduate Research, and Sigma Xi, in addition to informal discussions with
              associates at other Colleges. Publication in the Journal of Chemical Education
              of novel or substantially revised experiments developed to support our mission
              will complete our dissemination effort.
