Title       : The Integration of DNA Microarray Technology in the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0126814

Award Number: 0126814
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Pierce j.pierce@usip.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Randy J. Zauhar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael F. Bruist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of the Scs in Philade
	      43rd St Kingsessing Mall
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/596-8800

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
This project integrates DNA microarray technology and
              the application of bioinformatic data analysis as a core technology in the
              undergraduate Biology, Biochemistry and Bioinformatics curricula at USP.
              Microarray technology is an important biotechnology tool for the study of gene
              expression and in molecular diagnostics and has launched a paradigm shift in
              the way pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries approach drug discovery and
              development. An entire industry of microarray instrument, reagent and
              bioinformatic companies have developed to meet the current and future needs of
              the biological science community. Recently, instrumentation has been developed
              for making microarrays ("gridders") and microarray readers ("scanners") that
              are marketed and priced for the small laboratory environment. Students who
              graduate with a Life Science degree in the 21st century need to know the
              scientific principles and practical technological skills of microarray
              technology. Our cross-disciplinary curriculum program adapts microarray
              technology and develops microarray specific exercises in three courses,
              Molecular Biology (BI-290), Genetics (BS-466), Bioinformatics (BI-450) and
              supports undergraduate research in our Directed Research program (BS-499 and
              CH-450). This program is part of the educational foundation for our new
              Bachelor of Science degree in Bioinformatics and gives students in the Biology
              and Biochemistry programs the opportunity to experience microarray technology
              in their 2nd , 3rd or 4th years of study. Students carry out gene expression
              and DNA diagnostic experiments, and work with the bioinformatic software that
              is used to organize and mine microarray data. Successful implementation of this
              proposal is leading to the expansion of DNA microarray exercises to other
              courses and programs (eg. Microbiology). This project is providing a curricular
              template that leads to protocols and data sets for other undergraduate
              institutions.
