Title       : Center for Culture, Health and Human Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0126544

Award Number: 0126544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88294              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sara Harkness SaraHark@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Super  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1358,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The Center for the Study of Culture, Health and Children's
              Development:
Proposal for a Planning Grant

Sara Harkness and Charles
              Super

	The majority of issues affecting children's health, development and
              well-being today demand a more interdisciplinary approach than has been
              characteristic of developmental research in the past.  Rapidly increasing
              awareness of cultural variability in the environments of children's development
              has led to a call for more contextually oriented research paradigms; but the
              continuing pressures of disciplinary constituencies make it difficult to build
              collaborative work across their boundaries.  The present project is to support
              planning and development for a Center for the Study of Culture, Health and
              Children's Development at the University of Connecticut, Storrs.  The proposed
              Center will build on existing interdisciplinary collaborative relationships
              among researchers, educators, practitioners and students, with the goal of
              increasing understanding of children's health and development in cultural
              context.  We expect that the work of this Center will make significant
              contributions to scientific knowledge and to the improvement of the lives of
              children and their families in a variety of circumstances.
	Although the
              principal investigators have extensive research experience in the area of
              culture, health and human development, a planning grant is needed to support
              the development of a larger, coordinated program of research projects on the
              cultural mediation of children's healthy development.  Specifically, we are
              requesting funding for three related activities: 
	1) A major planning
              conference, to be held in October 2001 at the University of Connecticut,  which
              will bring together the 25 faculty members associated with this proposal, plus
              selected graduate students.  The purpose of the conference will be to explore
              common areas of interest and expertise in the intersections of culture, health
              and children's development, and to define focal topics or issues for the
              development of new research.  One outcome of this conference will,
              consequently, be the formation of several (we anticipate four) working groups
              who will continue to collaborate together in preparing specific research
              proposals that will involve coordination and funding through the proposed
              Center.
	2) Four smaller working conferences, to be held during the winter of
              2001, focused on each of the focal research topics defined at the major fall
              conference.  Based on previous work and current interests of participating
              faculty, we anticipate that these topics will include the cultural regulation
              of sleep and arousal in infancy, goodness of fit between young children's
              temperaments and their culturally constituted environments of care, attentional
              and stress-related disorders of middle childhood across several ethnic and
              cultural groups, and cultural/social factors in school success (or lack
              thereof) for children as they approach the transition to adolescence.  Although
              research in each of these areas will require special expertise (e.g.
              measurement of biological markers of stress and reactivity for research on
              infant sleep and arousal), the projects will be linked through the use of a
              common theoretical framework for integrating diverse developmental, biological
              and cultural data (e.g. the "developmental niche" of Super and Harkness or the
              "developmental microniche"of Worthman).  Efforts will be made, thus, to ensure
              that the structure of inquiry and the methods of data collection and analysis
              for each project are as consistent as possible, creating a synergy among
              them.
	3) Because the proposed Center will be a context for training as well
              as research, we will  bring in speakers for a faculty/student research seminar,
              to be held bi-weekly throughout the spring semester 2002.  This seminar,
              modeled on the Culture, Health and Human Development seminar that has been held
              for the past three years, will provide an ongoing context for communication and
              mutual education among the diverse faculty and students affiliated with the
              Center.  We anticipate that at least some of the speakers in this seminar will
              also contribute to the development of thinking related to the selected focal
              research topics.
  

