Title       : MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometry in Chemistry and Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2001   
File        : a0126950

Award Number: 0126950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Owen A. Moe moe@lvc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter A. Patton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lebanon Valley College
	      College Avenue
	      Annville, PA  17003    717/867-4411

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

 The technique, matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization
              time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry has become a foundational tool in
              chemical and biochemical research. Using MALDI-TOF one can quickly and
              accurately determine masses of proteins, nucleic acids, and other polymers well
              in excess of 100,000 and, just as importantly, resolve and analyze complex
              mixtures of smaller peptides and oligonucleotides. 
We are introducing this
              powerful new technique into the undergraduate curriculum by implementing
              MALDI-based experiments in five laboratory courses and by incorporating MALDI
              in ongoing student-faculty research projects. Our goal is to have students gain
              experience with MALDI-TOF technique and develop an appreciation for the
              applicability of the technique to a wide range of problems. In the instrumental
              analysis course students are using the MALDI-TOF technique to identify unknown
              proteins through peptide mapping, they synthesize polystyrene in organic
              chemistry and determine its molecular mass distribution, they restriction map a
              multiple cloning site in molecular biology, they create a profile of cysteine
              residues for a protein in biochemistry, and they identify unknown bacteria in
              microbiology. These new experiments, adapted from the educational and
              scientific literature, are enhancing the laboratory experience of our students
              by involving them in the cutting-edge mass spectroscopic tools needed to
              address many challenging problems encountered in the chemical and biochemical
              research laboratories.

