Title       : Development of Technology Based Assessments in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0126050

Award Number: 0126050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499859             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melanie M. Cooper cmelani@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norbert J. Pienta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald H. Stevens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terry Vendlinski  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Janet Bond Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
A major emphasis in science education over the past decade has
              been the development of programs to enrich undergraduate understanding and
              appreciation of knowledge, and to improve the skills necessary for continued
              learning. However the assessment techniques typically employed do not
              necessarily assess the kinds of learning emphasized in national standards. The
              Interactive Multi-media Exercises (IMMEX) project at UCLA has been exploiting
              modern technology to allow educators the opportunity to teach, observe and
              assess student performances in realistic settings. More than 10 years of
              experience with integrating IMMEX learning and assessment technology into
              primary, secondary and medical school classrooms suggests to us that there are
              ways to overcome the perils of authentic learning and assessment, and to use
              these methods to achieve the goals envisioned by the NRC and others. We are
              building upon this proven assessment technique by developing a full suite of
              IMMEX materials for a two semester general chemistry course. The major partners
              in this plan are Learning Chameleon (the licensing organization for IMMEX
              software), Clemson University and the University of Kansas. Pilot testing also
              is being carried out at Hutchinson Community College and Claflin College, and
              in conjunction with the new American Chemical Society General Chemistry text.
              The project has three phases: 1. The integration of existing materials (10
              problems, 300 cases) into two different general chemistry programs. 2. The
              development of new problems (a) to address second semester chemistry content,
              and (b) an experimental type of problem that compresses the problem space and
              concentrates on one particular concept or skill. These problems are being used
              both as an assessment tool and as a diagnostic tool to identify different types
              of problem solvers. 3. The development of specific interventions to help
              students become more proficient, based on the analysis of the strategies our
              students actually employ when solving problems. The outcomes of this project
              will be a suite of IMMEX problems suitable for general chemistry courses, a
              workbook detailing the program and an instructors manual.
