Title       : Monazite as a Sensitive Indicator of the Timing and Type of Fluid Activity
               During Metamorphism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0126020

Award Number: 0126020
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195459             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Ayers john.c.ayers@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Calvin F. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ayers and Miller
EAR-0126020

The susceptibility of monazite to fluid-induced
              recrystallization has important implications for interpretation of ages
              measured in-situ by electron or ion microprobe.  To refine interpretations,
              complementary laboratory and field experiments have
been designed to identify
              and characterize monazite recrystallization and alteration in granitoids and
              associated rocks.  The solubility of monazite will be measured as a function of
              pressure, temperature and fluid composition using the double-capsule method to
              identify the conditions and fluid compositions that lead to enhanced solubility
              and recrystallization.  Experiments run in cold-seal pressure vessels at
              400-600 degrees C and 0.1-0.2 GPa will characterize the effects of varying
              concentrations of potential complexing ligands F, Cl and OH.  Large natural
              crystals will then be run in fluid at
identified conditions of high solubility
              to characterize the rate of recrystallization and the effect of alteration on
              intracrystalline zoning and elemental and oxygen isotopic composition. 
              Duplication of zoning styles and oxygen isotope systematics observed in natural
              monazites will create a firm link between monazite alteration and fluids,
              establish the conditions under which alteration occurs, and greatly increase
              confidence in interpretations of monazite ages.

Field studies are designed
              to test the hypothesis that the ages of altered zones in monazites correspond
              to the timing of fluid influx, and to test important hypotheses specific to
              those field areas.  The effects of changing temperature, fluid composition, and
              fluid/rock ratio on preexisting monazite will be examined in contact
              metamorphic aureoles in which magmatic fluids infiltrate monazite-bearing
              country rocks: the Ireteba pluton in southern Nevada, the Birch Creek pluton in
              the White Mts. of east-central California, and the Red Hill W-Sn deposit in
              northern Guangdong Province, Southeast China.  Fruitful geochronological
              studies of monazite and zircon in the Dabie Shan central UHP (ultra-high
              pressure) zone will be extended to the enigmatic northern Dabie complex to
              determine the areal extent of UHP metamorphism and the assignment of the
              northern Dabie to the Yangtze or Sino-Korean blocks.


