Title       : A Dual-Level, Inquiry-Based Experimental Structural Dynamics Course in a
               "Roving" Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2002  
File        : a0126832

Award Number: 0126832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67955              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas E. Adams deadams@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Mechanical (56)
Engineering undergraduate and graduate students
              are rarely asked to design, set up, carry out, and interpret their own
              experiments. Although prearranged laboratory experiments are used very
              effectively to reinforce theoretical concepts, they follow a fixed format and
              do not give students an opportunity to develop their own experimental planning
              skills.

The overall objective of this project is to give students more
              control of the learning process. Experiments in an on-campus laboratory or
              test-trips to an off-campus site, i.e. the "roving" laboratory, are going to
              create an interactive, student-driven learning environment where instructors
              serve as learning coaches. Analytical and experimental structural dynamic
              course materials are going to be adapted from a proven set of course notes to
              meet the needs of this environment. Industrial partners, who serve on an
              advisory committee as third-party evaluators, are going to donate structural
              specimens or data to be used in experimental student projects.

The project
              is going to better educate students in experimental structural dynamics within
              the roving laboratory, encourage lifelong self-learning, establish an
              educational link between university classrooms and industry, promote and
              support curriculum innovation where this approach is warranted, and provide
              other educators and industrial sponsors with information needed to implement
              this approach elsewhere.

