Title       : RUI: Quantitative XRD-Sequential Extraction Analysis of Trace Metal Speciation
               in Ultramafic-Derived Soils and Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a0126018

Award Number: 0126018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116369             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Ryan pryan@middlebury.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middlebury College
	      Old Chapel Building
	      Middlebury, VT  05753    802/388-3711

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,5926,9150,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0126018
 Ryan

In order to understand anthropogenic alterations to the trace
              metal budget of natural systems, it is first important to understand the
              mineralogical and chemical features of such systems. One type of system
              enriched in trace metals is the natural environment found in association with
              ultramafic rocks. Previous studies have documented elevated concentrations of
              trace metals such as Cr, Ni and Co in soils, plants and waters associated with
              ultramafic rocks-- in some cases, at levels considered to be detrimental to
              ecological and human health. What these studies have not done is quantitatively
              analyze speciation of trace metal-bearing phases, which is a crucial component
              of understanding mobility. We will apply a recently developed quantitative XRD
              method in conjunction with sequential chemical extractions (SCE) to assess
              trace metal partitioning. SCE is often used to sequentially dissolve minerals
              and organic matter in soil. However, it is only when combined with advanced
              powder XRD techniques that sequential extractions can be used to accurately
              determine mineral composition, structure, and abundance in the soil. This type
              of data is especially important because it provides information on (1) the
              solubility of solid phases in the soil, and (2) the influence of mineral
              composition and structure on elemental concentration, speciation and mobility. 
              In addition to XRD and SCE (using ICP-AES), C-N analyses will be performed to
              aid in determinations of soil organic matter content, transmitted light and SEM
              analyses will be used to assess primary-secondary mineral spatial
              relationships, and laser diffraction will be used to assess particle size of
              various soils and mineral phases. Field analyses will include measurements of
              Eh, pH, Cr and Ni.
The intent of this project is to characterize the
              speciation and concentration of naturally-occurring trace metals in surficial
              aspects of the hydrosphere, including ultramafic rock (fresh and chemically
              altered), soil (inorganic solids, organic matter, soil water), surface water,
              and stream sediment. In order to assess the main controls on weathering and
              release of trace metals from these rocks, we will sample and analyze rock, soil
              and water specimens from a wide range of weathering regimes, including (1) the
              cool temperate, recently glaciated northern Appalachians (Vermont), (2) cool,
              temperate, unglaciated Cornwall, England, (3) semiarid and subhumid northern
              California, and (4) humid tropical Costa Rica.  Results of this comparative
              analysis will be applied to a predictive model of trace metal speciation in a
              wide range of environments.

