Title       : Historical Biogeography of Symplocos, an Amphi-Pacific Tropical Disjunct Plant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2001  
File        : a0126631

Award Number: 0126631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147209             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Fritsch pfritsch@calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank Almeda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      Golden Gate Park
	      San Francisco, CA  941184599    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Fritsch and Almeda
0126631
Drs. Peter Fritsch and Frank Almeda at the
              California Academy of Sciences and their colleagues are studying the
              phylogenetic relationships of the tropical flowering plant genus Symplocos with
              DNA sequence data to test competing hypotheses on the evolution of organisms
              with "amphi-Pacific tropical" distributions. These are groups of plants that
              occur today primarily or exclusively in the tropical areas of the Americas and
              the lands bordering the western Pacific Rim. The means by which these land
              organisms have come to occupy areas that are today separated by thousands of
              miles of Ocean are not well understood. One hypothesis explaining this pattern
              proposes intercontinental dispersion across one or both of the land bridges
              connecting North America and Eurasia in the Early Tertiary around the
              high-latitude regions of Beringia and the North Atlantic. A competing
              hypothesis maintains that the primary avenue for the dispersion of these plants
              occurred pan-tropically in the Late Cretaceous/Early Tertiary, when the
              Atlantic Ocean was much narrower than today. The investigators will analyze DNA
              sequence data from Symplocos samples to estimate both the pattern of species
              relationships and intercontinental splitting times of major subgroups. These
              data will in turn be interpreted in the context of the extensive fossil record
              of Symplocos to arrive at a synthetic view of the biogeographical history of
              this group. The project will integrate laboratory work with field collection of
              samples from several countries, in Latin America and S.E. Asia.
The broader
              scientific significance and societal ramifications of this project will benefit
              both environmental protection and science education. By facilitating inferences
              about the past movements of tropical vegetation, the knowledge derived from
              this project will contribute to the broader issues of the ecological effects of
              climate changes that are occurring at present.  Further, it will help develop
              and refine conservation strategies of tropical countries, as many Symplocos
              species are rare and endangered. The project will contribute to the support and
              training of the next generation of organismal biologists by including
              undergraduate, Masters, and Ph.D. students involved in original research
              projects. Because the proposed research will be conducted at a major
              metropolitan natural history museum, ample opportunities exist to present the
              results of this research and its implications to the general public. This will
              take the form of articles in popular periodicals, displays in the museum's
              public venues, adult education courses, and lectures for visitors.


