Title       : High Temperature and Pressure Equation of State Models for Natural Fluids in the
               System NaCl-KCl-CaCl2-H2O-CO2-CH4
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2002   
File        : a0126331

Award Number: 0126331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Weare jweare@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Moller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Weare and Moller
EAR-0126331

This research program will contribute the
              development of an equation of state (EOS), which can be used to accurately
              predict thermodynamic properties (e.g., liquid-vapor phase coexistence,
              enthalpy and free energy) in the NaCl-KCl-CaCl2-H2O-CO2-CH4 (SWG) system over
              the wide PTX ranges associated with Earth processes. Many important geochemical
              processes, such as mineral deposition, metamorphism and chemical fractionation
              via phase separation, are controlled by the thermodymanic behavior of aqueous
              formation fluids with compositions approximately in this system. Unfortunately,
              most experimental data available for development of an EOS for this system are
              confined to much smaller PTX ranges than those encountered in Nature. To
              overcome these important limitations in data availability, our research
              approach will use recent advances in the theory of dense fluids and molecular
              simulation methods to: (1) support the construction of an EOS that not only
              correctly summarizes data but also reliably extrapolates to desired regions of
              PTX space (e.g., deep crustal and magma conditions); and (2) supplement the
              experimental data by direct simulation at the molecular level. 

The proposed
              EOS will be based on thermodynamic perturbation theory. In this theoretical
              method the free energy is written as a sum of contributions from an ideal
              reference system and from a perturbation correction. In the proposed research
              program we will concentrate on developing reference systems that optimally
              represent the behavior of the subsystem under study. Our objective is to lower
              the complexity and magnitude of the perturbation corrections needed to
              represent the measured behavior in order to maximize the extrapolation
              properties of the EOS. Molecular dynamics simulations of model systems will
              provide useful tools for testing reference system improvements and mixing
              rules.

Special functional behavior (scaling behavior) is required to
              correctly describe thermodynamic properties in the critical region. We will
              apply scaling methods to improve critical region predictions and examine how
              scaling can be generalized to calculate other thermodynamic properties, such as
              heat content and free energy. In addition, we will develop crossover EOS, which
              provide accurate predictions both in and away from the critical region. 

To
              reproduce thermodynamic properties via simulation at the molecular level, we
              will continue to develop simulation methods [e.g., first principles ab-initio
              (AIMD) and classical molecular dynamics (MD), Gibbs Ensemble Monte Carlo
              (GEMC)]. A main objective of the proposed research is to significantly improve
              the accuracy of ionic solution simulations by developing better intermolecular
              effective potential representations of ions in solution. We will test new
              methods to improve the performance of GEMC methods and prediction in the
              critical region. AIMD methods will be applied to guide intermolecular potential
              development and to study important effects on these interactions of system
              properties such as local polarization. These methods will be used to establish
              the forces for systems with little data, such as ion-neutral interactions.

