Title       : Applied Drug Delivery Throughout the Engineering Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a0126902

Award Number: 0126902
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194286             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephanie Farrell farrell@rowan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Hesketh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mariano J. Savelski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Stewart Slater  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rowan University
	      201 Mullica Hill Road
	      Glassboro, NJ  080281701    856/256-4057

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Drug Delivery is a burgeoning field that represents one of the major research
              and development focus areas of the pharmaceutical industry today, with new drug
              delivery system sales exceeding 10 billion dollars per year. Chemical Engineers
              play an important and expanding role in this exciting field, yet undergraduate
              chemical engineering students are rarely exposed to drug delivery through their
              coursework. To provide students with the skills directly relevant to the
              evolving needs of the pharmaceutical industry, this project is developing and
              integrating applied drug delivery coursework and experiments throughout the
              Rowan Engineering curriculum. The design and production of new drug delivery
              systems requires that the engineer fully understand the drug and know material
              properties related to the processing variables that affect the release of the
              drug. This requires the engineer to have a solid grasp of the fundamentals of
              mass transfer, reaction kinetics, thermodynamics, and transport phenomena. He
              or she must also be skilled in characterization techniques and physical
              property testing of the delivery system, and practiced in the analysis of the
              drug release data. This project provides the Chemical Engineering students at
              Rowan University with the necessary foundation materials and fundamental
              principles. There are seven modules adapted, implemented and used to introduce
              students to the multidisciplinary engineering principles of common drug
              delivery systems designs. Each module describes experiments used to support the
              design, preparation, characterization, and analysis of that particular drug
              delivery system. The seven drug delivery systems explored are: tablets,
              ointments, membrane systems, microcapsules, osmotic pumps, Chemical kinetics,
              and supercritical fluid-processed particles. The engineering goals of this
              project are:
--to explore different types of drug delivery systems
--to study
              drug delivery designs in a quantitative manner using engineering
              principles
--to use up-to-date industrial techniques for the production,
              testing, and analysis of drug delivery systems and to evaluate factors
              influencing the release of drug from a delivery system.

To accomplish these
              goals, this collaborative project maximizes the curricular impact by vertically
              integrating the seven modules beginning with the Freshman Clinic, followed by
              the fundamental engineering courses, the Junior-Senior research projects
              course, and finally, advanced level elective courses on pharmaceutical topics.
              These modules employ proven methods in SMET education. To maintain the quality
              , recurring meetings of senior project personnel and other Chemical Engineering
              Department faculty are planned as necessary. The project is undertaking both
              formative evaluations and summative evaluations, and its dissemination is being
              accomplished through presentations at national conferences, CD-ROM and refereed
              journals. 

Keywords: Drug delivery systems, drug delivery methods,
              pharmaceutical drug delivery systems


