Title       : Rheological Behavior of Clinopyroxene and Clinopyroxene-Olivine Aggregates under
               Hydrous Conditions: Implications for Dynamics of the Lower Crust and Upper
               Mantle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0126277

Award Number: 0126277
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320222             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Kohlstedt dlkohl@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kohlstedt
0126277

The investigators propose a laboratory investigation of
              the high-temperature, high-pressure rheological properties of clinopyroxene, an
              important mineral in both the lower crust and the upper mantle. Because even a
              small amount of water dramatically weakens nominally anhydrous minerals,
              emphasis will be given to the contribution of water to the viscosity of
              aggregates of clinopyroxene and clinopyroxene + olivine. In most studies, the
              water-weakening effect has been treated as an 'on-off' process - if water is
              present, rocks are weak; if water is absent, rocks are strong. Recently,
              however, the investigators demonstrated that the viscosity of olivine-dominated
              aggregates is inversely proportional to OH concentration. The proposed research
              builds on this observation and on recently reported experiments on the
              deformation behavior of dry clinopyroxenite. Water concentration will be
              determined by micro-FTIR analysis, and deformation-produced microstructures
              will be analyzed using optical and electron microscopy. In order to extrapolate
              from laboratory to geologic conditions, a major goal will be to determine
              detailed flow laws describing viscosity as a function of water concentration as
              well as differential stress, grain size and temperature in both the diffusion
              creep and the dislocation creep regime.

Recent analyses of the depth of
              earthquakes in continents and of the correlation between crustal thickness and
              elastic thickness have led to the conclusion that the lower crust, at least in
              some places, is stronger than the uppermost mantle. This point of view is
              contrary to most models of continental rheology such as the jelly-sandwich
              construction in which a weak lower crust lies between a strong upper crust and
              a strong upper mantle. Many models take the strength of the continental
              lithosphere to lie in the mantle beneath the Moho. Certainly, the relative
              strength of lower crust and upper mantle will depend on the presence or absence
              of water. Little is known about the strength of clinopyroxene relative to that
              of olivine, even when the two phases are present in the same rock as in the
              mantle. Our recent experiments suggest that these two minerals have similar
              strengths under anhydrous conditions but that clinopyroxene is weaker when
              water is present. A careful investigation of the dependence of viscosity on
              water concentration for aggregates of clinopyroxene and clinopyroxene + olivine
              is critical in order to address these issues and to model the dynamical
              behavior of the lower crust and upper mantle.

