Title       : Computing History Resource Adaptation (CHRAD)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0126818

Award Number: 0126818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74995              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Impagliazzo cscjzi@Hofstra.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              JAN Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Cassidy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hofstra University
	      Office of the Provost
	      Hempstead, NY  115491440    516/463-6810

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31)

This project focuses on the "history approach" to teach
              an overview course in computer science for non-majors. History is an ongoing
              theme throughout the course through the adaptation of relevant historical
              materials. Where appropriate, the project leaders are developing digital
              conversion of materials to enhance the course delivery. The project team is
              working closely with the Charles Babbage Institute, the Computer Museum History
              Center, the IEEE History Center, and the Computing History Center at Virginia
              Tech. Each of these centers has already identified, preserved, and in many
              cases catalogued a vast quantity of the exemplary materials pertaining to
              computing history. 

The project team is also creating a dedicated website
              solely for this activity. Students will have direct access to digitized
              material emanating from this project, to the collection of course-related
              historical materials, and to links to other useful and related sites. The
              expectation is that there will be a dramatic change in the course from one of
              sterile factual content to one containing dynamic interludes involving people,
              places, and events. In this manner, the computing course for non-majors will be
              much more interesting. It will stimulate more students to consider computing as
              their major, will contribute to students' life-long learning experiences, will
              encourage students from diverse and minority communities to appreciate
              computing, and will increase student retention. Students will also gain a
              better sense of the nature of inquiry, the processes of innovation, the
              constraining and driving factors involved, and the human dimension. 

