Title       : CRI: Center for Research on Children: Conducting, Synthesizing, and
               Disseminating Development Science to Benefit Children, Science and Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  2002  
File        : a0126555

Award Number: 0126555
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2455267            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Ceci sjc9@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wendy M. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Every day we hear media reports of far-reaching decisions affecting children's
              lives--made by legislators, politicians, school boards, government agencies,
              judges, and others--ostensibly based on sound research. But basic scientists
              often cringe when they learn of the misunderstanding and misapplication of the
              research that allegedly informs these decisions. There exists in our society a
              schism between the scientists who conduct sound empirical research and the
              decision-makers who translate it into practice. The goal of CIRC is to improve
              the quality of the conduct and dissemination of child-related research. We aim
              to place rigorous, scientifically defensible research findings into the hands
              of society's decision-makers to better inform their thinking about complex
              issues and the decisions they make. Research conducted through the institute
              will also inform basic science in the core disciplines. CIRC will achieve these
              goals by commissioning and servicing national teams of outstanding
              developmental scientists to study policy-relevant questions and create a
              consensus report for broad dissemination. Questions will be selected on the
              basis of their potential to contribute core knowledge to basic science. The
              planned dissemination process is designed to inform policy-makers and also to
              impact the lives of the next generation of scholars now in high school,
              college, and graduate school.
	CIRC will foster the integration of research,
              undergraduate education, graduate and postdoctoral training, and public
              dissemination of rigorous child-related scholarship with the potential to
              benefit children, science, and society. CIRC's research will tap the
              developmental sciences (including developmental psychology, economics,
              medicine, neuroscience, and life-course sociology). CIRC's goals will be
              accomplished through the interaction of seven components designed to (a)
              contribute to basic scientific knowledge, (b) inform policy and the media, and
              (c) integrate these first two goals with undergraduate education of underserved
              populations and graduate/postgraduate training of the next generation of
              scholars. CIRC will enable multidisciplinary teams to undertake studies
              pertaining to children in any substantive area of developmental science (e.g.,
              social, cognitive, biological).
	CIRC's seven components are: 1) A mechanism
              to commission high quality, developmental science studies on questions of
              relevance to children; 2) The assembling of an Advisory Board of eminent
              scholars from developmental psychology, neuroscience, economics, medicine,
              policy, and sociology, who will guide the selection of research topics to be
              commissioned and the nomination of scholars to conduct the research. The
              Advisory Board will also mentor postdocs and grad students, advise teams of
              visiting scholars on substantive issues, participate in miniconferences, and
              help spread the word about CIRC's existence and aims; 3) Graduate and
              postdoctoral training experiences to provide the next generation of scholars
              with unique training in conducting rigorous developmental research that
              benefits children; 4) A postsecondary training initiative to insert into
              current curricula the results of commissioned studies, targeting colleges and
              universities with substantial Latino and African American enrolments and
              low-SES community colleges serving students of all races; 5) Formal print
              dissemination (the publication of a monograph series translating promising
              developmental research into policy proposals, the preparation of press
              releases, etc.); 6) Formal non-print dissemination (the organization of
              miniconferences, a public web site, and press conferences); and 7) Coordination
              with existing Cornell centers and institutes to leverage resources of this
              proposal.

