Title       : Development of an Undergraduate Laboratory-Based Biotechnology Program for the
               Next-Stage Post-Genomic Era
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a0126578

Award Number: 0126578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84176              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheryl L. Fuller-Espie   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cabrini College
	      Eagle King Prussia Roads
	      Radnor, PA  19087    215/687-2100

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
This project is developing a multidisciplinary B.S.
              Program in Biotechnology that places a heavy emphasis on both methodology and
              ethical, socio-political and economic outcomes to provide students with the
              necessary skills required for (1) entry-level laboratory positions in the
              pharmaceutical industries and academia, and (2) placement into research-based
              graduate programs. We are adapting materials from institutions offering a B.S.
              in Biotechnology including: Cedar Crest College, Clarion University of
              Pennsylvania, Eastern Washington University, Elizabethtown College, Ferris
              State University, Moorhead State University, University of Southern Maine,
              University of Wisconsin and Worcester State College. A newly-approved B.S. in
              Biotechnology is providing cutting-edge technology training for biotechnology
              students within a framework of a core curriculum, community service,
              internships in biotechnology laboratories, and small faculty/student ratios.
              Cabrini College is constructing a state-of-the-art building to house a new
              Center for Science, Education and Technology. The Biotechnology Program is to
              be housed in the new Center.
In its first stage, this program is being offered
              to traditional undergraduate students, and concentrates on outreach,
              recruitment and admissions . As it matures, additional students will be drawn
              from non-traditional students and transfer students. Area high school teachers
              participating in a Cabrini-taught summer course," DNA and the New Millennium",
              will be part of the feeder school process for locating new students for the
              program.
