Title       : Advances in Modern Performance Analysis: A New Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0126263

Award Number: 0126263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Khosrow Sohraby sohrabyk@umkc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The future high-speed networks are expected to support a variety of services
              such as data,
voice, image, and video with diverse traffic flow
              characteristics and Quality-of-Service (QoS)
requirements. Developing a
              framework for the design, control and management of wide
area packet networks
              which can effciently support such QoS requirements is a
              fundamental
challenge.

Conventional frameworks for the teletraffic analysis
              of networks and QoS guarantees are
either deterministic or probabilistic. In
              the deterministic approach, the worst-case traffic
envelopes are used. This
              most likely will lead to conservative resource allocation policies
and
              inefficient usage of the network resources. In the standard probabilistic
              frameworks,
the traffic is usually modeled as a variant of Poisson process,
              e.g., MMPP, MAP, etc. Such
models are amenable to traditional teletraffic
              analysis but only capture simple and limited
correlation structures in the
              data.

The researchers propose to significantly expand the analytical
              methodology in solving complex teletraffic problems arising in modern computer
              and communications networks. Their approach
which is rooted in classical
              ballot theorem handles a large class of arrival processes including
the
              standard Markovian processes, general periodic processes, processes described
              by
time-series (auto-regressive and moving average), or even general processes
              described by the
joint distribution of number of arrivals in equally-spaced
              non-overlapping discrete intervals.
Special attention will be paid in deriving
              algorithmic solutions which are numerically robust
and efficient even when the
              system utilization is high.

The researchers proposed approach is unifying,
              it avoids root-findings, and unlike the matrix analytical approach or recently
              introduced state-space spectral decomposition method, it does not
involve
              potentially expensive iterations. Further, it is transform-free and may provide
              a
simple form of solution amenable for further analytical studies such as tail
              behavior or
asymptotic analysis.

The researchers general arrivals processes
              could be used for the end-to-end performance analysis once the departure
              process from a network node is appropriately approximated or
              probabilistically
bounded. Since they are not limited to traditional Markovian
              models, such an approach
appears to be viable.

The researchers  propose to
              implement our general algorithms and make them available as a scientific
              package to the research community.
