Title       : Collaborative Research: Late Paleozoic-Mesozoic Fauna, Environment, Climate and
               Basinal History: Beardmore Glacier Area, Transantarctic Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0126086

Award Number: 0126086
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181875             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Isbell jisbell@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a study to investigate
              paleoenvironmental conditions during the late Paleozoic and Mesozoic in central
              interior Antarctica. The 4 km thick sequence of sedimentary rocks, known as the
              Beacon Supergroup, in the Beardmore Glacier area records 90 million years of
              Permian through Jurassic history of this high-paleolatitude sector of Gondwana.
              It accumulated in a foreland basin with a rate of subsidence approximately
              equal to the rate of deposition. The deposits have yielded diverse vertebrate
              fossils, in situ fossil forests, and exceptionally well preserved plant
              fossils. They give a unique glimpse of glacial, lake, and stream/river
              environments and ecosystems and preserve an unparalleled record of the
              depositional, paleoclimatic, and tectonic history of the area. The excellent
              work done to date provides a solid base of information on which to build
              understanding of conditions and processes.

This project is a collaborative
              study of this stratigraphic section that will integrate sedimentologic,
              paleontologic, and ichnologic observations to answer focused questions,
              including: (1) What are the stratigraphic architecture and alluvial facies of
              Upper Permian to Jurassic rocks in the Beardmore area?; (2) In what
              tectonostratigraphic setting were these rocks deposited?; (3) Did vertebrates
              inhabit the cold, near-polar, Permian floodplains, as indicated by vertebrate
              burrows, and can these burrows be used to identify, for the first time, the
              presence of small early mammals in Mesozoic deposits?; and (4) How did
              bottom-dwelling animals in lakes and streams use substrate ecospace, how did
              ecospace use at these high paleolatitudes differ from ecospace use in
              equivalent environments at low paleolatitudes, and what does burrow
              distribution reveal about seasonality of river flow and thus about
              paleoclimate? Answers to these questions will (1) clarify the paleoclimatic,
              basinal, and tectonic history of this part of Gondwana, (2) elucidate the
              colonization of near-polar ecosystems by vertebrates, (3) provide new
              information on the environmental and paleolatitudinal distributions of early
              mammals, and (4) allow semi-quantitative assessment of the activity and
              abundance of bottom-dwelling animals in different freshwater environments at
              high and low latitudes. In summary, this project will contribute significantly
              to an understanding of paleobiology and paleoecology at a high latitude
              floodplain setting during a time in Earth history when the climate was much
              different than today.

