Title       : Incorporation of a Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Mass Spectrometer
               into the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a0126930

Award Number: 0126930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy C. Dopke dopke_nc@mercer.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey D. Hugdahl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mercer University
	      1400 Coleman Avenue
	      Macon, GA  312070001    912/744-2700

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

With the acquisition of a matrix-assisted laser
              desorption/ionization MALDI time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometer, we are
              incorporating MS techniques into our undergraduate chemistry curriculum. Over
              the last 20 years the ability to analyze large involatile molecules by mass
              spectrometry has grown to the extent that it is now a common technique. In
              order to introduce the use of this research tool to our students, we are
              adapting, implementing, and developing disciplinary and interdisciplinary
              projects into the General, Organic, Biochemistry and "Problems in Chemistry"
              laboratory courses at Mercer University. We are adapting these experiments into
              our discovery-based pedagogy to further enhance student learning. In addition
              to the laboratory courses, we are using the instrument in ongoing
              student-faculty research projects. The incorporation of MALDI-TOF-MS into the
              curriculum has permitted us to analyze involatile species, including proteins
              and clusters. Our students are first introduced to the MS technique during
              their first semester of General chemistry by studying the concepts of isotopes
              and average molecular mass. Students then continue their study of MALDI
              techniques by performing individual and group experiments in Organic chemistry
              and Biochemistry courses. Finally, they gain a significant laboratory
              experience in the application of MS in the capstone "Problems in Chemistry"
              laboratory sequence. In addition, students interested in organic synthesis and
              biochemical research continue to use the instrumentation in a number of ongoing
              student-faculty research projects. Our ultimate goal is to further utilize this
              instrument throughout our curriculum and generate laboratory exercises that
              demonstrate the utility of this modern technique at the undergraduate level.

