Title       : Integrating Stable Isotope Geochemistry into the Geoscience Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2002  
File        : a0126661

Award Number: 0126661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56961              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Dunn sdunn@mhc.mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Al Werner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jill L. Bubier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lauret E. Savoy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. McMenamin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42)
A stable isotope laboratory is being developed at Mount Holyoke
              College, adapted from similar efforts underway at Colgate University and
              Colorado College. The facility is designed for undergraduate student use in
              geoscience courses and stable isotope geochemistry is being integrated into the
              curriculum. The facility includes a vacuum line for the extraction of CO2 from
              carbonates and from combusted graphite/organic matter for analysis by mass
              spectrometry at nearby University of Massachusetts. A new stable isotope
              facility at the University of Massachusetts is also being used for analysis of
              water. Two- to four-week inquiry-based modules are being incorporated into
              several existing courses, and a new stable isotope course is being added to the
              departmental offerings. Impacted courses include environmental science, history
              of earth, petrology, groundwater, and the biosphere. Our goals are to enhance
              student comprehension of geochemical processes and critical thinking skills
              through active participation in real investigations. As an institution of
              higher learning for women, we hope to increase science literacy among those
              choosing non-science career paths, as well as improve the laboratory
              experiences for those who remain in science. Inquiry-based group projects are
              being used to promote teamwork, communication, excitement of discovery, and
              life-long learning skills. A variety of assessment tools are being used and
              significant results disseminated through publications in journals and
              presentations at professional meetings.
