Title       : Collaborative NMR Training in the Mid-Hudson Valley of New York State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2001  
File        : a0126857

Award Number: 0126857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19707              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Freedman freedmad@matrix.newpaltz.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kim M. Touchette  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald Janauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY New Paltz
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      New Paltz, NY  12561    845/257-3282

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

This project is providing access for two community colleges to
              the 300 MHz NMR spectrometer on the campus of the State University of New York
              New Paltz. Students in the community colleges are now being introduced to NMR
              techniques in their sophomore-level organic chemistry class. The techniques
              learned at this level are then expanded in advanced chemistry courses when they
              transfer to a four-year institution. Students at the collaborating
              institutions, Dutchess County Community College and Ulster County Community
              College, did not previously have access to an NMR spectrometer and the
              community colleges were not likely to have the resources to purchase and
              maintain a high-field instrument. Thus, students taking organic chemistry at
              these institutions were not exposed to experimental NMR spectroscopy in their
              curriculum and this presented an additional barrier for them to overcome when
              they transferred into a Bachelor program. This project is adapted from the
              collaborative programs at James Madison University, Rider University, and
              Indiana University. An autosampler is installed on the 300 MHz NMR spectrometer
              at SUNY New Paltz. Silicon Graphics Workstations equipped with the compatible
              NMR operating software is installed on the community college campuses. Samples
              are transported to New Paltz, loaded into the NMR autosampler, and students at
              the community colleges are then be able to control the NMR spectrometer in real
              time over the internet. The project also includes initial and ongoing training
              by the Project Coordinator of the students and faculty at the community
              colleges in NMR theory and the operation of the spectrometer.

