Title       : Towards the Development of Magnetic Provenance Tracers in Antarctic Glacial
               Marine Sediments: A Pilot Study in the Antarctic Peninsula Region.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2002  
File        : a0126108

Award Number: 0126108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70191              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stefanie A. Brachfeld   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a pilot study designed to test the
              potential of using rock magnetic properties as sediment provenance tracers for
              Antarctic glacial marine sediment. A means of tracing sediment provenance would
              enable more meaningful interpretation of transport and depositional processes
              recorded in sediment cores. One could conceivably determine which parts of the
              continental ice sheet were advancing and supplying till, or disintegrating to
              create debris-laden icebergs. One could conceivably trace the paleocurrents
              that carried IRD-laden bergs, or identify wind patterns that carried the eolian
              material. Rock magnetic methods have the advantage of being inexpensive, rapid,
              non-destructive analyses using highly sensitive instrumentation capable of
              working with small amounts of material.

The chosen test area is the
              Antarctic Peninsula (AP) region. The AP region is the subject of intense
              interest to the paleoclimate-global change community in light of the recent
              warming trend, disintegration of ice shelves, and rapid ecological and physical
              changes presently taking place. The tectonic setting and petrology of the AP
              region have been studied extensively, and this region is site of on-going
              marine geology and LTER research. Thousands of pre-existing samples from the
              major rock types (and supporting published petrologic and chemical data) are
              housed at the Byrd Polar Research Center and are available for study.

Rock
              magnetic methods provide a rapid, sensitive, inexpensive means of identifying
              iron-bearing minerals in rocks and sediment. This project will systematically
              investigate the material properties and magnetic properties of the major
              bedrock formations exposed on the Antarctic Peninsula along with selected
              surface and historic sediment samples. The steps in developing reliable
              magnetic provenance tracers are:
o Confidently linking sediments with their
              source materials via their materials properties such as precise chemical
              composition, oxidation parameter, lattice parameter, and grain morphology
o
              Determining if a unique magnetic signature can be used to identify those
              material properties
o Testing if the magnetic signature is recognizable in the
              sediment, thus providing a rock magnetic means of tracing sediments back to
              their source rocks
o Verifying the success of the magnetic method by using
              existing petrologic and chemical data

Igneous rocks and sediment from Graham
              Land contain magnetite, titanomagnetite, and hematite. Initial studies indicate
              that the magnetite and titanomagnetite grains in the AP rocks are affected by
              varying degrees of oxidation and impurity content, which generates a
              reproducible, measurable magnetic signature. All magnetite is not the same.
              Even small deviations from metal-oxygen stoichiometry and deviations in cation
              distributions can have large effects on the physical and magnetic properties of
              metal oxides. This is the basis for suggesting that magnetic methods may be
              effective tracers. No single magnetic parameter is sufficient to uniquely
              characterize a sample or to serve as a link between sediment and source rock.
              Therefore, by following the steps outlined above it is hoped that a link based
              on quantifiable material properties can be established, and then magnetic
              signature of those properties can be determined. This work will test the
              concept that combinations of magnetic parameters can be used to identify
              material properties. If it can be demonstrated that distinctive magnetic
              properties in sediments are indicative of material states, and these states can
              be matched with their parent material, then rock magnetism may provide a rapid,
              inexpensive means of tracing sediment provenance.

