Title       : Integrating Mathematics and Statistics into the Biology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2002   
File        : a0126914

Award Number: 0126914
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159583             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric S. Marland marlandes@appstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Arnholt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Venable  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Creed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Appalachian State Univ
	      
	      Boone, NC  28608    704/262-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
The joint project of the mathematics and biology
              departments is focused on the entire biology curriculum, including biology
              education. It is adapted from materials developed in the well-tested programs
              of the University of California at Davis, the University of Tennessee, and the
              University of Utah. The ideas implemented at Beloit College and Macalaster
              College provide additional guidance. Aspects of each of these programs are
              integrated with ideas developed at Appalachia State to take full advantage of
              existing local resources and support systems. The aims are to: a. increase
              students' computational maturity through realistic biological applications in
              mathematics and statistics coursework; b. reinforce students' computational
              skills through mathematical, statistical and technological integration in
              biology coursework; c. foster communication and collaboration between the
              departments for research, student projects, and course development; and d.
              increase the marketability of students by giving them a broader set of skills
              from which to draw. The courses affected include the introductory mathematics
              sequence (use of biology related examples and guest lectures from biology
              faculty to highlight biologically important mathematics concepts), introductory
              biology courses (introduction of mathematics modules many of which parallel
              research being done at Appalachia) and introduction of advanced
              cross-disciplinary courses developed and co-taught by faculty from both
              departments. Evaluation of the project includes oversight by a team of
              mathematicians and biologists who are actively involved in similar curricular
              reform and of a science educator and mathematics educator.


