Title       : Uplift and Exhumation of the Transantarctic Mountains and Relation to Rifting in
               West Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0126060

Award Number: 0126060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187864             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis L. Harry dharry@wgs.geo.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Audrey D. Huerta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9150,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports research to apply numerical modeling to
              constrain the uplift and exhumation history of the Transantarctic Mountains.
              The Transantarctic Mountains (TAM) are an anomalously high (>4500 m) and
              relatively broad (up to 200 km) rift-flank uplift demarcating the boundary
              between East and West Antarctica. Dynamics of the East Antarctic ice-sheet and
              the climate are affected by the mountain range, and an understanding of the
              uplift history of the mountain range is critical to understanding these
              processes. This project will constrain the uplift and denudation history of the
              Transantarctic Mountains based on thermo-mechanical modeling held faithful to
              thermochronological, geological, and geophysical data. The research will be the
              primary responsibility of post-doctoral researcher Audrey Huerta, working in
              collaboration with Dennis Harry, 1 undergraduate student, and 1 graduate
              student.

Thermochronologic evidence of episodic Cretaceous through Cenozoic
              rapid cooling within the TAM indicates distinct periods of uplift and
              exhumation. However, a more detailed interpretation of the uplift history is
              difficult without an understanding of the evolving thermal structure and
              topography of the TAM prior to and during uplift. These aspects of the mountain
              range can best be constrained by an understanding of the evolving regional
              tectonic setting. Proximity of the TAM to the West Antarctic Rift System (WARS)
              suggests a link between uplift of the TAM and extension within the WARS.

The
              project will integrate two techniques: lithospheric-scale geodynamic modeling
              and crustal-scale thermal modeling. The lithospheric-scale deformational and
              thermal evolution of TAM will be modeled by a finite element model designed to
              track the thermal and deformational response of the Antarctic lithosphere to a
              protracted extensional environment. Previous investigators have linked the high
              elevation and broad width of the TAM to a deep level of necking in which mantle
              thinning is offset from the location of crustal extension. In this study, a
              three-dimensional dynamic model will be used to track the uplift and thermal
              evolution of the TAM in a setting in which necking is at a deep level, and in
              which extension within the crust and extension within the mantle are offset.
              Velocity boundary conditions applied to the edges of the model will vary
              through time to simulate the extensional and transtensional evolution of the
              WARS. Because the model is dynamic, the thermal structure, strength, and strain
              field, evolve naturally in response to these initial and boundary
              conditions.

Dynamic models are uniquely suited to understanding lithospheric
              deformational and thermal evolution, however kinematic models are best suited
              for addressing the detailed thermal and exhumation history of crustal uplifts. 
              Thus, a 2-dimensional kinematic-thermal model will be designed to simulate the
              uplift history of the TAM and the resulting erosional, topographic, and thermal
              evolution. Uplift will be modeled as normal-fault movement on a set of discrete
              fault planes with uplift rate varying through time. Erosion will be modeled as
              a diffusive process in which erosion rates can be varied through time
              (simulating climate changes), and vary spatially as a linear function of
              gradient and distance from the drainage divide. Synthetic time-temperature
              (t-T) histories will be calculated to compare model results to
              thermochronologic data.


