Title       : COMPASS: COnvection Morphology Parameter Space Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0126408

Award Number: 0126408
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367022             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene W. McCaul mccaul@space.hsv.usra.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald J. Perkey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Space Res Assoc
	      10227 Wincopin Circle Suite 212
	      Columbia, MD  21044    410/730-2656

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Understanding and forecasting the intensity and structural characteristics of
              deep convective storms as a function of the storm environment is an interesting
              scientific problem and of great interest to operational forecasters.  This
              research seeks to explore several new dimensions of the large parameter space
              that regulates the morphology and intensity of convective storms.  The study
              will be undertaken using a full-physics three dimensional cloud simulation
              model, initialized with environments designed to permit independent
              investigation of eight separate parameters that are believed to be responsible
              for much of the sensitivity of storm structure to storm environment. 
              Exploratory studies have already demonstrated the existence of large
              sensitivities of storms to most of these parameters, in at least portions of
              the full parameter space.  Sensitivities already found include bulk convective
              available potential energy (CAPE) and bulk shear, the shapes of parcel buoyancy
              and shear profiles, and the depths of both the mixed layer and moist layer. 
              The shape of the relative humidity profile and the temperature at cloud base
              are other parameters of potential importance. 

Although the preliminary
              results already reported constitute a first step in exploring many of the
              relevant parameter space dimensions, the findings need to be extended to
              embrace a larger range of values of parameters.  In order to address these
              needs, this project will expand the previous research by building and analyzing
              a more complete archive of idealized cloud simulations.  Progress is expected
              to be rapid because the tools needed to build the simulation environments and
              to analyze the model output are already mostly in place.  In the analysis of
              the model data, emphasis will be placed on quantifying the storm morphology
              variations and on documenting the effects of the various competing physical
              mechanisms.  

It is expected that study of these simulations will
              significantly enhance understanding of convective storm behavior within a broad
              range of environmental conditions and will allow progress towards the goal of
              improving storm forecasts.
