Title       : Permian and Triassic Floras of the Beardmore Glacier Area: Icehouse or
               Greenhouse?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0126230

Award Number: 0126230
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edith L. Taylor etaylor@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas N. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for research to investigate fossil
              plants from the central Transantarctic Mountains toward an understanding of
              plant diversity and evolution as well as an improved understanding of the
              paleoenvironmental conditions. The terrestrial rocks of the central
              Transantarctic Mountains have been a source of outstanding plant fossil
              discoveries over the last 30 years, including Permian and Triassic
              permineralized peat, fossil forests silicified in growth position, and
              compression floras with cuticular preservation. The rare juxtaposition of sites
              that include many different types of plant preservation (permineralization,
              compression/impression, in situ forests, mummified wood), the exceptional
              quality of the plant preservation, and the richness of the sites make this area
              unique in the world. 

This project centers on the collection of Permian and
              Triassic plant megafossils from the Beardmore Glacier area. Fieldwork is
              anticipated in the 2003-2004 field season as part of a mini-camp with other
              researchers. Collections would include compression floras, especially those
              from Graphite Peak, and permineralized peats from Skaar Ridge and Fremouw Peak,
              both in the vicinity of Walcott Neve. These permineralizations represent the
              rarest form of plant fossil preservation. Since they preserve a
              three-dimensional record of the flora, they are important in understanding the
              basic morphology and anatomy of fossil plants, as well as detailing
              relationships among groups. The additional data provided by the juxtaposition
              of plant fossils preserved both as permineralizations and compressions have
              already contributed a great deal to our understanding of late Paleozoic-early
              Mesozoic plant evolution. This project will address several important
              phylogenetic hypotheses through further collection of material, coupled with
              material already processed. The Permian and Triassic represent an important
              time in plant evolution, and one about which we still know relatively little,
              especially in the southern hemisphere. The glossopterid seed ferns in the
              Permian (leaf type, Glossopteris), and the corystosperms in the Triassic (leaf
              type, Dicroidium) were the dominant plant groups in Gondwana. Since both of
              these groups bore seeds which were enclosed in some manner, they have been
              proposed at one time or another as possible ancestors of the flowering plants,
              and have figured prominently in phylogenetic analyses of seed plants. Only
              through a combination of permineralizations and compressions is it possible to
              reveal a complete picture of the form and structure of fossil plants, but more
              importantly, to understand the position of these plant groups in seed plant
              evolution. 

Plants and silicified logs will be collected from the section at
              Graphite Peak, which is believed to contain the Permian/Triassic boundary.
              These plant fossils will be used to test several hypotheses concerning the
              floral and paleoclimate changes that may have occurred across this boundary.
              These include: How early in the Triassic does the Dicroidium flora appear? Does
              Glossopteris occur with Dicroidium as it does in several other Gondwana floras?
              Is there any evidence of a megaflora dominated by lycopods, as some of the
              palynological evidence suggests? Silicified logs have been noted in the lower
              Buckley Formation (mid-Permian?) at this site and these will be collected and
              examined for paleoclimate data from tree rings. These can also be compared with
              tree rings in Late Permian wood (upper Buckley) from nearby Mt. Achernar. The
              Late Permian has been assumed to be much warmer than Early-Middle Permian and
              this should be reflected in differences in the width and structure of the tree
              rings.

This project is expected to lead to significant improvements in
              understanding of both plant evolution and paleoenvironmental conditions during
              the critical Permian to Triassic interval.


