Title       : SBIR Phase I: Time-Lapse P- and S-Wave Monitoring of Fluid Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0126629

Award Number: 0126629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Lumley david.lumley@4thwaveimaging.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ali Tura  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Fourth Wave Imaging
	      16A Journey, Suite 200
	      Aliso Viejo, CA  92656    949/916-9787

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 1038,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0126629
Tura
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              concerns using elastic P-wave and S-wave seismic data simultaneously to obtain
              time-lapse seismic monitoring images of fluid saturation and pore pressure
              changes in an oil reservoir.  Time-lapse seismic using P-waves alone may not
              allow discrimination between fluid saturation changes and reservoir pressure
              changes since such information is contained in the large source-receiver
              offsets of P-wave seismic data, which can be contaminated by noise and subject
              to data acquisition aperture limitations.  Using S-waves in addition to P-waves
              in time-lapse analysis can lead to more accurate inversion results, yielding
              reliable estimates of reservoir saturation and pressure changes.  The proposed
              project will allow customers to avoid costly errors in development and
              production of economic oil reservoirs and yield higher recovery rates.  For
              this feasibility phase a reservoir model will be constructed, and
              three-dimensional P- and S-wave synthetic seismic data at two production times
              will be generated.  These time-lapse P- and S-wave data sets will be processed
              simultaneously and will be cross-equalized and inverted to yield changes in
              reservoir saturations and pressure.  The inverted data will be analyzed to
              assess the feasibility of the proposed approach on field data.
     Commercial
              applications of the technology proffered by Fourth Wave Imaging will include
              accurate mapping of bypassed oil and monitoring of costly injected fluids.  In
              addition, the firm will be able to better image flow compartmentalization and
              determine the hydraulic properties of faults and fractures.  These applications
              will allow cheaper and more efficient production of oil reservoirs, guide
              reservoir management decisions, and help maximize the life of both new and
              existing fields while minimizing recovery costs.  The proposed methods also
              have commercial applications in monitoring ground water reserves, contaminant
              plumes and environmental clean-up projects.  In medical imaging, use of elastic
              waves has the potential to yield superior results over acoustic waves alone.
              Commercial products resulting from this work will consist of time-lapse P- and
              S-wave seismic data processing, interpretation and analysis tools and
              methods.


