Title       : Integrating GIS into an Earth and Environmental Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2002  
File        : a0126666

Award Number: 0126666
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38857              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Christopher Haley jchaley@vwc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Garry E. Noe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maynard Schaus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Wesleyan College
	      1584 Wesleyan Drive
	      Norfolk, VA  23502    757/455-3202

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Earth Systems Science (40)
We are integrating GIS technology into most field,
              laboratory, and classroom courses in a new Earth and Environmental Sciences
              (EES) program at Virginia Wesleyan College. Our project includes a request to
              equip an enhanced laboratory/lecture classroom and a small GIS laboratory, and
              acquire two pieces of environmental monitoring equipment capable of collecting
              digital data for import and use in ArcView . Although GIS has established
              itself as an important tool for the manipulation, analysis, and display of
              spatial data, it is not always easy for students outside of geography to gain
              exposure to, and proficiency with, this technology. To help narrow the gap, we
              are integrating GIS into nearly all courses of the existing EES curriculum. We
              are adapting parts of exemplary programs at Sul Ross University, Lewis and
              Clark University, Washington and Lee University, Richard Stockton University,
              and Miami University. Students just beginning their college career become
              familiar with only a small number of spatial manipulations in their lower
              division courses, benefiting mostly from the visual aspects of GIS, whereas EES
              majors close to graduation become quite proficient in all aspects of spatial
              data analysis.
Because the available data exist in almost limitless variety,
              equally diverse classroom situations are being employed to encourage hypothesis
              building and testing, discussion of cause and effect, and cooperative learning.
              Future K-12 teachers and students taking EES courses to fulfill general studies
              requirements are also discovering that GIS components in lecture and lab make
              the experiences more interactive, visually
stimulating, and fun.

