Title       : Children's Research Initiative: Infant Perception Of Referencing Through Dynamic
               Gestures During Early Lexical Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0126515

Award Number: 0126515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135288             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy D. Rader rader@ithaca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ithaca College
	      Danby Road
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    607/274-3111

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1358,1698,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Collaborative Proposal:  Infant Perception of Referencing Through
              Dynamic Gestures During Early Lexical Development

Nancy Rader


The main
              objective of the proposed research is to test a perceptually-based theory
              hypothesized to underlie early word comprehension. The theory has its basis in
              socialization practices used by caregivers in interacting with infants at a
              very early stage of word learning. In determining how infants initially come to
              perceive the relation between a word and its referent, complexities arise from
              the fact that the word is a segment of what perceptually is a continuous stream
              of speech sounds. Additionally, the referent is one element embedded within a
              complex, dynamic environment. How could an infant detect which span of the
              speech stream is a word and what that word means? In searching for an answer to
              this question, a set of four studies has been designed.  These studies test the
              hypothesis that the types of perceptual information that caregivers present in
              gesture and speech attract attention and make the correspondence between a word
              and its referent available and easily detectable.  The research will examine a
              range of semantic functions that includes nouns (objects), verbs (object
              motions), and adjectives (object attributes). The sample will be comprised of
              infants from English-speaking families and will include mothers whose highest
              education level is a high school diploma as well as those with a college
              education. The research will be carried out at Ithaca College, a primarily
              undergraduate institution; the undergraduate students assisting with the
              project should gain an appreciation of a scientific approach to psychology and
              a greater interest in pursuing graduate studies. While the results of this
              research will be of interest to theorists of language development, they also
              should have great practical significance. Understanding the processes
              underlying early word learning will help educators devise more effective
              techniques for impaired language learners, for children with developmental
              disabilities, and for anyone learning a second language.  		


