Title       : Collaborative Research: U-Series Isotopic Constraints on the Rates of Magma
               Genesis Evolution and Degassing at Mt. Erebus, Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0126269

Award Number: 0126269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117582             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth W. Sims ksims@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for research on magmatic processes
              that are active in the Mount Erebus volcanic system. Magmatism is one of the
              most fundamental dynamic processes of planetary interiors, yet our knowledge of
              the time-dependent parameters of basalt petrogenesis (e.g. solid mantle
              upwelling rate, melting rate, melt transport rate, magma storage time,
              crystallization rate, magma recharge rate) is quite limited. Magmatic processes
              such as melting, fractional crystallization and magma chamber replenishment can
              fractionate parent/daughter ratios of U-decay series isotopes and can thus
              create isotopic disequilibrium. Because the half-lives of the U-series isotopes
              are comparable to the time-scales of these processes, measurement of this
              isotopic disequilibrium in volcanic glasses and mineral separates provides
              constraints on the duration and rates of magmatic processes.

The objectives
              of this project are to assemble a unique geochemical-isotopic-petrological data
              set, and use this to evaluate the rate dependent parameters of magma genesis,
              evolution, and degassing at Mt Erebus, Antarctica. Mt. Erebus, the most active
              volcano in Antarctica, contains a persistent convecting and degassing
              anorthoclase phonolite lava lake that has 2-6 small Strombolian eruptions
              daily. The lava lake provides a unique window into the magmatic system and
              offers a rare opportunity to examine processes occurring deep within the
              convecting magma body. The lava lake is continuously degassing and on-going
              work is focused on sampling and measuring the gas compositions and emission
              rates. The small Strombolian eruptions conveniently eject volcanic bombs thus
              providing pristine samples of the magma containing large, well-formed
              anorthoclase crystals. These bombs, plus older radiometrically-dated lava flows
              around the summit of Mt. Erebus provide a unique opportunity to investigate the
              timing of fundamental magmatic and volcanological processes.

Through
              measurement of U-series isotopes (as well as isotopic and major- and
              trace-element constraints) from the known-age lavas, recently erupted bombs,
              and gases collected from Mt Erebus, this project will examine the timescales
              of: 1) magma genesis and melt transport from the mantle; 2) magma evolution and
              crystallization processes during magma storage in the crust; and 3) magma
              degassing and recharge rates into the current erupting magma chamber.

This
              integrated study of gases and associated magma using U-series isotopes should
              lead to a major improvement in understanding of the Erebus system, and might
              yield a significant new insights about the whole magmatic system from magma
              formation by partial melting in the mantle through its evolution and finally to
              it degassing and open system behavior in the lava lake.

