Title       : Enhance Heterologous Protein Production in High-Density Plant Suspension
               Cultures using Cell-Cycle Engineering and GFP-based On-line Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0126191

Award Number: 0126191
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249717             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei Wen Su wsu@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ning-Shou Xu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henrik H. Albert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1491      BIOTECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9150,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of this project is to develop plant cell bioreactor cultures
              into a more effective system for producing high-value recombinant proteins. The
              specific objectives of the present research are as follows: 1) Test inducible
              cell-cycle control to maximize the useful culture life and yield of the target
              protein; 2) Employ tested molecular strategies that complement the cell-cycle
              control to further enhance the level of target protein expression; 3) Optimize
              protein production using on-line GFP-fusion monitoring and dynamic process
              optimization in high-density cultures.  To accomplish these objectives, the
              Principal Investigators (PIs) will embark on the following research tasks: (1)
              examine the effect of expressing a cell-cycle inhibitor on cell proliferation
              in plant suspension cultures; (2) study coordinated expression of the target
              gene and the cell-cycle gene to enhance the target protein production; (3)
              exploit suitable targeting and endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-retention signals to
              promote secretion and to stabilize the target protein; (4) engineer GFP as a
              dual function fusion tag for process monitoring and protein purification; (5)
              investigate signal processing of on-line detected fluorescence of GFP-fusion
              proteins; (6) devise an effective dynamic process optimization scheme that
              draws on the on-line fluorescence data; and (7) develop high-density perfusion
              and fed-batch cultures integrated with the controlled proliferation technology
              and the fusion protein monitoring/optimization schemes. Tobacco will be used as
              the model host system. Human granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor
              (GMCSF) with GFP fusion is chosen as a model protein in this research.  The
              proposed research should lead to development of a more effective plant cell
              culture process for recombinant protein production. It should also shed light
              on regulation of the plant cell cycle and cell-cycle dependence of foreign gene
              expression in plant cells.


