Title       : Computer-Enhanced Project-Based Laboratories for General Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0126654

Award Number: 0126654
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37721              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Squattrito   (Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret A. Hill  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

This proposal is developing project-based laboratories (PBL)
              for the General Chemistry sequence as a means to foster a more learner-centered
              environment. Projects presented to students must be solved through
              experimentation, with individual student teams contributing experimental
              results to the larger, class pool of results. As the students progress through
              the two-semester sequence, they are becoming less dependent on instructor
              directions, more independent in their ability to modify suggested procedures,
              and are eventually required to have significant input into their own
              experimental design. Computer-interfaced laboratory equipment is providing
              continuity, reduced data-collection times, and networking capability necessary
              to implement this proposal. Specific experiments have been adapted from the
              education literature and are being implemented in a PBL format. Twenty-four
              student workstations, four computers, four printers and two networked diode
              array visible spectrometers are present in the teaching laboratories.
              Approximately 600 students in General Chemistry are using this equipment during
              Fall, Spring, and Summer terms, with nearly two-thirds of the General Chemistry
              laboratory curriculum affected. Given the extent of the proposed change, this
              process is being phased into the curriculum over a three-year period. It is
              anticipated that these changes will enhance scientific reasoning skills since
              the students are actively applying and modifying their laboratory skills to
              solve problems in which they have an interest.

