Title       : Calvin-Rehoboth Robotic Twin Telescopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0126841

Award Number: 0126841
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Molnar lmolnar@calvin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Van Baak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah Haarsma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Calvin College
	      3201 Burton, S. E.
	      Grand Rapids, MI  49546    616/957-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Astronomy (11)

This project is adapting and implementing a model of
              complementary telescopes--one local and one remote--pioneered at the University
              of Iowa. The investigators are installing a pair of 16-inch telescopes, one at
              Calvin College in Grand Rapids, Michigan, where observing is sometimes hampered
              by poor weather and light pollution, and one at the Rehoboth Christian School
              near Gallup, New Mexico, a remote location with clearer and darker skies. The
              choice of the remote site builds on a century-old relationship between the
              college and the high school, which serves primarily Navajo and Zuni students. A
              teacher at the school is assisting with the installation and maintenance of the
              telescope there and is integrating it into the school's physical science
              curriculum.

Students and faculty at Calvin College use their local telescope
              in a hands-on and a training mode, and use the nearly identical, robotic
              telescope at Rehoboth Christian School to make observations remotely. Both
              telescopes provide individual data for many students, including
              research-quality data for upper-level undergraduates.

This arrangement
              provides a flexible but reliable system, in which the local telescope at the
              college can be switched between eyepiece, camera, and spectroscopic modes, and
              in which skills gained by students using the local telescope immediately
              transfer to data acquisition on the remote telescope in New Mexico. Efficient
              queue operation of the remote telescope supplies large quantities of
              high-quality data, enough for individual students to pursue a wide range of
              physically interesting experiments with their own data sets.

Outcomes of the
              project include sequential installation and reliable operation of the local,
              and then the remote, telescope; training in the new equipment and procedures
              for Calvin College faculty who teach astronomy courses, as well as their
              student assistants; training in the new equipment and assistance in curriculum
              development for the participating teacher at Rehoboth Christian School;
              integration of new observing capabilities into the college's lab curriculum and
              existing and newly developed courses; enhanced recruitment of Native American
              students (at Rehoboth Christian School) into careers in science; conference
              presentations that disseminate the college's model for astronomy labs; and the
              development of relationships with the college's "feeder" high schools (in
              addition to Rehoboth Christian School), so that they can incorporate use of the
              new telescope in their science curricula.

