Title       : Geochemical Signals and Magmatic Consequences of Arc Migration in the Central
               Andes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a0126000

Award Number: 0126000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159121             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne M. Kay smk16@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5974,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kay
EAR-0126000

The Central Andean margin, the classic example of an oceanic
              slab subducting beneath a continent, is a laboratory for studying processes
              that typify continental crustal formation, modification and destruction.  This
              study focuses on such a process - the migration of an arc magmatic front
              towards the backarc - that has reconfigured the forearc, arc and backarc of
              continental margins since plate tectonics began. Lithospheric scale profiles
              indicate significant mass balance problems that imply recycling of continental
              crustal and mantle lithosphere into the mantle.  We plan a trace element and
              isotopic study of magmas erupted before, during and after arc migration as
              probes to changing magmatic source regions and lithospheric configurations
              beneath the migrating arc.  The focus area from 26.5?S to 28?S latitude
              overlaps the transition between the modern Central Volcanic Zone (CVZ) and the
              non-volcanic region above the shallowing dipping subduction zone to the south. 
              In this region, the magmatic arc front migrated ~ 50 km eastward from the
              Maricunga belt to the southern CVZ and Bonete region between ~7 and 2 Ma.
              Existing geologic maps, K/Ar ages (~300) and major element and Instrumental
              Neutron Activation trace element data (~ 400 samples at Cornell) from virtually
              every center provide a basis for an in-depth ICP-MS and Nd, Sr, Pb and O
              isotopic study of magmatism in this environment.  Chemical data show that lavas
              erupted in the old dying arc and as the front migrated eastward have extremely
              steep REE patterns (La/Yb > 60) and high field strength (HFS) element
              depletions (La/Ta to 85) that contrast with lower ratios in both pre-8 Ma and
              post-4 Ma arc lavas.  The magmas with the steepest REE patterns appear better
              analogues to anomalous Archean (TTG) magmatic suites than do magmas thought to
              be melts of the subducting slab (adakites). Variable age mafic magmas (<58%
              SiO2) in the region, which include the most mantle-like Central Andean lavas,
              are critical to deciphering mantle processes whereas silicic magmas are keys to
              crustal processes. A crucial question is why very steep REE patterns occur in
              lavas erupted as the arc terminates and migrates, but not before or after. 
              Residual garnet must play a role, but is that garnet associated with melting in
              the mantle, in situ thickened crust, or in crust removed by subduction erosion
              from the base of the arc and forearc and cycled through the subduction zone? 
              Tests are to correlate spatial and temporal isotopic patterns with variations
              expected across the arc region and to look at interrelations between the
              isotopes and trace elements.  Other questions are the origin of La/Ta ratio
              variations and the history of fluid interaction as the slab shallows and the
              arc migrates. Oxygen isotopes and expanded trace element data sets can be used
              with fluid/melt distribution coefficients to constrain spatial and temporal
              variations.  Expanded trace element data sets including Nb, Zr as well as Ta,
              Hf, and Ti will allow modeling of residual phases and source areas.  Longer
              range questions are the importance of crustal thickening, arc migration and
              removal of young continental lithosphere in both the modern Central Andes and
              the Archean, and the extent to which continental lithospheric is recycled in
              this setting. As Andean analogies are used to understand processes in both
              ancient and young mountain belts, results of this project will set up Os-Re and
              Lu-Hf isotopic studies and define geophysical targets addressing fundamental
              questions in Earth's continental lithospheric evolution.


