Title       : Collaborative Research: Remote Observations of Ice Sheet Surface Temperature:
               Toward Multi-Proxy Reconstruction of Antarctic Climate Variability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0126161

Award Number: 0126161
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $332567             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale Winebrenner dpw@apl.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric J. Steig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop spatially extended and statistically reliable
              estimates of Antarctic surface temperature variations over the past several
              centuries, using a multi-proxy calibration/verification approach that combines
              the climate signal in ice core, satellite remote sensing, and weather station
              data.  Antarctica has been problematic from the point of view of large-scale
              paleoclimate reconstruction because of the paucity of long-term instrumental
              data, and the relatively low resolution of most ice cores.  Several new
              developments, particularly the network of shallow (~100 meter) ice cores from
              the ongoing International Trans-Antarctic Scientific Expedition (ITASE) project
              will yield broad spatial coverage of annually resolved ice core physical
              properties, chemistry, and stable isotope data over more than a hundred years.
              Second, there are now over twenty years of microwave and infrared brightness
              temperatures available from satellites covering virtually all of Antarctica
              with seasonally resolved information that has been demonstrated to record the
              ice surface/near surface temperature with very reasonable precision and
              accuracy.  Finally, higher quality microwave emission data from Advanced
              Microwave Scanning Radiometers (AMSR) with much finer spatial resolution and
              radiometric fidelity than those from previous sources will offer an improved
              view of longer term mean temperatures in Antarctica.
The 40-year instrumental
              record and the shorter but spatially more comprehensive Automatic Weather
              Station network will be combined with seasonally-resolved 37-gigahertz
              satellite-based ice surface temperature estimates to reconstruct Antarctic-wide
              temperature patterns during the past forty years.   The sparser Antarctic
              instrumental surface temperature data available back nearly to the beginning of
              the century will be added for longer-term, though quite spatially-restricted,
              cross-validation of these reconstructions. This cross-validation procedure has
              been used successfully with roughly century-long instrumental records at
              locations primarily in the Northern Hemisphere. The longer time scale will be
              approached through a cross-validation of the proxy-based pre-20th century
              surface temperature reconstructions using information on thermal emission from
              deeper in the firn that is contained in low-frequency passive microwave
              satellite measurements.  The low-frequency estimates, supplemented by borehole
              thermometry, will provide important independent verification of the long-term
              averages of the annual surfac
