Title       : Collaborative Research: Affinity Directed Mobility for Location Independent Data
               Access
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0126341

Award Number: 0126341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346995             (Estimated)
Investigator: John K. Bennett jkb@cs.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Information is currently accessed and manipulated using a variety of fragmented
              tools. The researchers use a desktop computer as our primary information tool,
              a server, network of servers, or an ISP to provide file system support,
              computationally intensive computing, and other system support functions. They
              use a notebook computer, which may or may not have network access, when they
              desire a portable information tool. When  information needs are modest, and 
              mobility needs most apparent, the researchers use a variety of other devices
              such as handheld computers, personal digital assistants, cellular telephones,
              and pagers. Software version management in this situation is inefficient, and
              licensing is complex. Ensuring that the same (and latest) version of each
              desired application program is installed on a large number of computers can
              consume a significant amount of system support staff resources, even if these
              computers are accessible from the same network. The protection of information
              from unauthorized access is similarly difficult.

The result of this
              fragmentation of data, applications, and devices is an increasingly complex and
              unmanageable collection of information tools that communicate with each other
              ineffectively. The convergence in time of substantial need, substantial
              communication infrastructure, and high performance, low power computing
              resources challenges the researchers to explore a better alternative. The
              Bifrost location independent computing project seeks to provide a flexible and
              comprehensive information access environment. The function of Bifrost is to
              provide location and device independent access to data. Data in Bifrost
              encompasses both information and the applications used to manipulate that
              information. Bifrost uses affinity between data, and between users and data, to
              make appropriate decisions about when and where to move data. We refer to this
              approach as affinity directed mobility.

The core research issues of the
              project are mobility management (how we move data and threads to support user
              and device mobility), data management (how we represent, access, update, and
              protect information), and application management (how we provide a common
              applications base across a variety of devices). In contrast to previous
              approaches to mobile data management, Bifrost anticipates that in 3-5 years
              network connectivity will be the norm, even for highly mobile computing
              devices. In this situation, the problem of how users can access remote personal
              data, regardless of location or computing device, becomes at least as important
              as planning for a possible disconnection.

The researchers propose to design,
              implement, deploy and evaluate a two-campus prototype of the Bifrost location
              independent computing system. The Bifrost design represents a new paradigm for
              information access and manipulation. We propose to integrate the way in which
              information is managed with the way in which the applications that access this
              information are managed. One of the design principles of Bifrost is that the
              ability to access data should be consistent across all platforms, including
              portable computing devices. This approach is in stark contrast to the stripped
              down operating system plus stripped down applications plus limited data set
              computing model currently associated with most hand-held computing
              devices.

In addition to the educational benefits to the students directly
              involved in the project, the researchers intend that this project contribute in
              broader ways to the academic community. They will incorporate this research
              into the operating systems and distributed systems classes taught at the
              University of Colorado and Cornell University. All software and other research
              products of this project will be made readily available via the world wide web.
