Title       : Developing and Assessing Impact of Problem-Based Learning Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2001  
File        : a0126671

Award Number: 0126671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74984              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sudhir I. Mehta Sudhir_Mehta@ndsu.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Mechanical (56)
The latest reports from the National Research
              Council, the Carnegie Foundation, and the National Science Foundation recommend
              that faculty use the problem-based learning (PBL) method of instruction in
              undergraduate education. The literature claims that the PBL method has inherent
              potential to foster problem-solving, teamwork, and communication skills and,
              therefore, it is superior to the traditional (subject-based) learning method.
              As a consequence, the goal of this project is to develop a prototype PBL set of
              course materials that is based on the PBL model, and use this model to formally
              test this claim. To accomplish this goal, the PI uses established
              characteristics of a "good" PBL problem along with proven processes for writing
              PBL problems to do the following: (a) develop PBL materials for a engineering
              measurements course in the mechanical engineering curriculum at North Dakota
              State University (NDSU); (b) evaluat, using both formative and summative
              assessment methods, the enhancement in student learning and skills development
              from this PBL course ; (c) evaluate the project outcomes using the results from
              five independent institutions; and (d) disseminate the tested PBL educational
              materials through a web site, CD-ROM, and several workshops to the academic
              community. 

In summary, we are developing PBL course materials using proven
              pedagogical concepts with the assistance of partners from leading
              instrumentation industry. An independent five-member committee is evaluating
              all aspects of the project. These committee members are experienced engineering
              educators from five different institutions. They are providing assessment data
              during the development phase of the project and testing the PBL modules at
              their own sites. The dissemination plan includes workshops scheduled for K-12
              school teachers, regional colleges and university faculties, and tribal college
              faculties. 

Key words: Problem-based learning, inquiry-based, PBL problems.
