Title       : Authigenic smectite in Cape Roberts Project cores, Antarctica: implications for
               environmental, basin and tectonic history
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a0126218

Award Number: 0126218
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166981             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherwood W. Wise wise@gly.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0126218
Wise

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a study of clays
              (specifically smectite) in cores from the Ross Sea, Antarctica, toward an
              understanding of the age and origin. One of the most surprising discoveries of
              the recently concluded geological drilling of the Cape Roberts Project (CRP) in
              the eastern Ross Sea, Antarctica, was the presence of authigenic smectite clays
              in lower Oligocene (or older) sandstones in the lower portion of Hole CRP-3,
              which was diamond-cored continuously to 941 meters below sea floor with 98%
              recovery. This is the first confirmed report of authigenic smectite in
              sandstones from the Antarctic continental margin. Situated along the eastern
              margin of the Victoria Land Basin, adjacent to the rising Transantarctic
              Mountains, CRP-3 was drilled to elucidate the paleoclimatic and tectonic
              history of the region; however, the base of the Cenozoic section is poorly
              dated, with limited constraints from biostratigraphy and paleomagnetics. This
              project is designed to shed additional light on the spatial extent, source,
              timing, and mode of emplacement of the authigenic smectite, which were probably
              emplaced shortly after deposition of the host sediments. This will help
              constrain the age of the basal Cenozoic sediments and the environment in which
              the smectite formed. This in turn will lead to a better understanding of the
              tectonic processes at work during the early history of the basin.

Because
              this serendipitous discovery was not anticipated prior to drilling, only a
              pilot study could be undertaken within the time and funding constraints
              dictated by the science plan for the project. Work to date allows the
              definition of three multiple working hypotheses to account for the source and
              mode of emplacement of the authigenic smectite: 1) Burial diagenesis with
              necessary components sourced from volcanogenic materials and heavy minerals
              within the Cenozoic sequence or from a dolerite intrusion in the Paleozoic
              sandstones below; 2) Precipitation from hydrothermal waters associated with
              possible igneous intrusion(s) and nearby faults; 3) Mobilization and injection
              of fluids along a nearby fault that bounds a major graben parallel to the
              Transantarctic Front. The data gathered form the preliminary study was
              insufficient, however, to arbitrate among these three possibilities.

This
              award supports work to test, to the extent possible, these three hypotheses and
              to allow completion of the study through: 1) a thorough examination of the core
              by scanning electron microscope/energy-dispersive microprobe analysis to
              determine the extent of the smectite in CRP-3 and the nearby CRP-2 core (also
              predominantly of Oligocene age), and 2) radiometric dating of the authigenic
              clays and potential source rock(s) by the 40Ar/39Ar method. Completion of the
              study will help answer fundamental tectonic an paleoenvironmental questions
              posed by the CRP project, will help guide future exploration of the Antarctic
              margin (such as by the ANDRIL, SHALDRIL, and IODP projects), and will impact
              major Antarctic initiatives such as ANTEC, MARGINS, and STRATAFORM.

