Title       : Discovering Science through Microbiology: Biology for Majors, Non-science
               Majors, and High School Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2001  
File        : a0126955

Award Number: 0126955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144813             (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra L. Wohl dwohl@richmond.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia Reed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paula Lessem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Richmond
	      
	      Richmond, VA  23173    804/289-8100

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
Through implementation of investigative and
              collaborative learning, using
pedagogy established by BioQUEST, our goal is
              developing critical thinkers in three
populations: biology majors, and
              non-science majors at the University of Richmond, and
high school students
              from the Richmond area, particularly underrepresented minorities.
To realize
              these goals, we are using microbiology as the subject with the
              laboratory
component focused on antibiotic resistant bacteria isolated from
              freshwater sources. We
are teaching not only what we know from science (i.e.,
              content), but more importantly how
that knowledge is acquired (the process of
              science) and its relevance to real-world
problems. We are adapting BioQUEST's
              inquiry-based model for our Biology major's
Microbiology course, the
              development of two new courses, Unseen Life (non-science
students) and
              Microbes: Life's Small Beginnings (high school students), and a
              research-based
course, Exploring the Basics of Biotechnology: Teaching
              Investigative and Deductive Experimentation (EBBTIDE), which is an
              investigative experience designed for high school students. The goals of these
              microbiology courses, regardless of the student population, differ only in
              regard to science literacy (e.g., understanding primary literature versus
              review articles). Through investigative and collaborative learning experiences,
              using currently available technology, we are teaching students critical
              thinking, how to: (1) ask questions, (2) solve problems, and (3) articulate
              their findings. These courses culminate in opportunities for scholarly
              activities for undergraduates and some high school students. By engaging
              students in independent investigations with connection to current events,
              students should leave the academic setting as life-long learners, excited about
              science and their environment.
