Title       : A Search for Extrasolar Planets from the South Pole
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0126313

Award Number: 0126313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vladimir Papitashvili                   
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254642             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas Caldwell dcaldwell@mail.arc.nasa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zoran Ninkov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Showen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laurance R. Doyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Borucki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SETI Institute
	      2035 Landings Drive
	      Mountain View, CA  940430818    415/961-6633

NSF Program : 5115      ANTARCTIC AERONOMY & ASTROPHYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will operate a small optical telescope at the South Pole to search
              for and characterize extrasolar planets, by continuously following a southern
              Galactic star field with a Charge-Coupled Device photometer, searching for the
              periodic dimming that occurs as a planet transits its parent star.  The recent
              discovery of many close-in giant exoplanets has expanded our knowledge of other
              planetary systems and has demonstrated how different such systems can be from
              the Solar System.  However their discovery poses important questions about the
              effects of such planets on the presence of habitable planets. To date only one
              extrasolar planet - HD  209458b - has been observed to transit a parent star. 
              This project has the potential for a tenfold increase in the number of
              extrasolar planets for which transits are observed.  The South Pole is an
              excellent location to detect such planets because of the long winter night,
              during which randomly-phased transits can most efficiently be detected.  Also,
              the constant altitude of a stellar field at the pole avoids large daily
              atmospheric extinction variations allowing for higher photometric precision and
              a search for smaller planets.
Specifically, the project will establish an
              automated planet-finding photometer at the South Pole for two austral winter
              seasons.  Based on the statistics of planetary systems of nearby solar-type
              stars, about ten to fifteen extrasolar planets should be detected. There is
              also a possibility of finding lower mass planets that have not previously been
              detectable. Combining the transit results (which give the size of the planet)
              with Doppler velocity measurements (which give the planetary mass) will allow
              determination of the planetary density, thus indicating whether the planet is a
              gas giant like Jupiter, an ice giant like Uranus, or a rocky planet like the
              Earth.  These data will provide basic observational information that is vital
              to theoretical models of planetary structure and formation.

