Title       : Investigating Geochemical Variability and Timing of Holocene Climatic Changes in
               Productivity and Terrigenous Input on the East Antarctic Margin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a0126110

Award Number: 0126110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132097             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Murray rickm@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Dunbar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0126110
Murray

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a paleoceanographic
              and paleoclimate study of recently acquired marine sediment cores from the
              continental shelf of East Antarctica. The goal of this work is to develop a
              better understanding of Holocene climate change on the East Antarctic Margin
              (EAM) via geochemical studies of ultra-high resolution sedimentary sequences
              recovered during the Coring Holocene Antarctic Ocean Sediments (CHAOS) program
              conducted in early 2001. A diverse suite of geochemical analyses will be
              carried out that will provide indicators of nutrient utilization, surface and
              export production, terrigenous flux, and terrigenous provenance by developing
              an integrated database of d15N, d13C, opal, TOC, and a diverse suite of 17
              major and trace elements. This project has two mutually reinforcing components:
              inorganic proxy work at Boston University, and complementary isotopic studies
              at Stanford University. The work will target important hypotheses and questions
              relating to East Antarctic Margin (EAM) climate variability over decadal-,
              centennial-, and millennial-scale time scales, as well as assess the impact of
              global climatic events such as the Little Ice Age, Holocene climatic optimum,
              Medieval Warm Period, and Younger Dryas. This work will compare and contrast
              records from the EAM (a terrestrial ice sheet) to the Palmer Deep record off
              the West Antarctic Peninsula (a predominantly marine-based ice sheet). It will
              examine relative timing of events between the EAM, Palmer, and Northern
              Hemisphere Holocene records, and compare the relative timings of climatic
              change in both the biologic (nutrients and export) and physical (terrigenous)
              systems acting along the Antarctic continental margin. Integrating biological
              and physical studies allows for a comprehensive assessment of the combined
              marine-terrestrial Antarctic system. Documenting changes in export production
              through inorganic chemical means will be an important independent approach from
              that taken by researchers focusing on the paleontological record (e.g. diatom
              assemblages), and will provide quantitative information regarding the frequency
              of change in the sequestering of atmospheric CO2. In addition, variations in
              nitrogen isotope ratios can either reflect differences in relative utilization
              of nitrate in the photic zone or can be used to track the exchange of nutrients
              between deep and surface waters. Carbon isotope records track bloom events,
              which reflect productivity in the surface waters. Each of the isotope proxies
              (d15N, d13C, TOC, biogenic opal, major/trace elements, etc.) responds to
              different aspects of the biogeochemical cycle, and only by synthesizing them
              can a more complete picture of the region's systematics be achieved. Changes in
              the terrigenous flux and chemical provenance may indicate variations in the
              weathering patterns of bedrock and soil on the EAM, delivery of ice-rafted
              debris, the strength of ocean currents, or behavior of different glacial
              regimes on the margin. Interpreting these results within the context of other
              studies will allow an assessment of the response of local glaciers to changes
              in climate and precipitation on the margin. These issues have been targeted
              with similar methodologies and integration of data sets with great success in
              the Palmer Deep, West Antarctic Peninsula. The sediments from the East
              Antarctic Margin are of comparable resolution and integrity to allow for future
              comparisons of the response of both the East Antarctic Ice Sheet and West
              Antarctic Ice Sheet to climate change.

