Title       : Acquisition of an FTNMR Spectrometer for the Transition to an Investigative
               Laboratory Program in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a0126478

Award Number: 0126478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170721             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. A. Schedler dschedle@bsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura K. Stultz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Birmingham Southern Col
	      900 Arkadelphia Road
	      Birmingham, AL  35254    205/226-4600

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

At the Chemistry Department of Birmingham-Southern College, we
              are enriching the learning experience of our students by developing a new
              chemistry curriculum which includes more experiential, investigative laboratory
              exercises across the chemistry program. FT-NMR and other instruments in the
              department are used to demonstrate scientific problem solving through the use
              of modern instrumentation. Our goal is to improve students critical thinking
              skills by adapting and developing laboratory experiments that require them to
              develop protocols, collaborate in groups, and defend results in oral
              presentations. To accomplish this, we are adapting a number of experiments form
              the chemical education literature and implementing them as collaborative
              laboratory projects into the Organic, Physical, Biochemistry, Inorganic, and
              Advanced Analytical courses. Our department has already made significant
              progress in incorporating investigative laboratories into our curriculum and
              developing an active undergraduate research program. A second goal is to
              further continue this trend. An NMR spectrometer is critical for fulfilling
              this goal since it has become an essential tool in chemistry. Our students are
              exposed to NMR spectroscopy at all levels beginning with organic chemistry and
              culminating with independent research. With the completion of the Elton B.
              Stephens Science Center in the spring of 2002, and its significantly enhanced
              teaching and research facilities that better reflect our new way of teaching,
              we expect to see an increase in the number of students involved in the sciences
              and thus impacted by the new chemistry curriculum. We are also making the
              instrument available to Miles College, a small, historically black college in
              Fairfield, Alabama, for use in both teaching and research.

