Title       : Promoting Undergraduate Research through the Development of Two
               Interdisciplinary Research Methods/Statistics Courses and Increased Support of
               Student Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0126435

Award Number: 0126435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197975             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathy S. Silgailis silgailisk@wpunj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vishwa K. Bhat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Paterson Universit
	      300 Pompton Road
	      Wayne, NJ  074702103    201/595-2000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
This project increases students' involvement in
              undergraduate research by developing two team-taught interdisciplinary research
              methods statistics courses. The interdisciplinary team approach is adapted from
              the approaches developed by Donovan at Kean University and Peaslee at Hope
              College. The project also provides faculty development opportunities to foster
              greater inclusion of active learner methodologies in courses, and creates a
              centralized program to promote and support undergraduate research activities.
              The unique configuration of the nine basic and applied sciences and health
              sciences programs in the College provides team-teaching and student-faculty
              research opportunities across disciplinary boundaries. 

Project activities
              include: (1) Development of a team-taught interdisciplinary two-course sequence
              on research methods/statistics courses that is offered for sophomore students
              majoring in Biology, Nursing, Mathematics, Computer Science, Environmental
              Science and Geography, and Exercise and Movement Sciences. During the first
              course, students working in interdisciplinary research groups complete the
              first two sections of a research report including the introduction and review
              of literature. Labs are conducted and instructions on statistical computer
              programs are also provided. The second course covers additional statistical
              procedures and computer applications in addition to writing the method,
              results, and discussions sections of a research report. Labs and research
              presentations provide student-active learning opportunities. The proposed
              courses are adapted from undergraduate research courses at several institutions
              (such as Hampshire College, Portland State University Samford University and
              Spellman College among others). (2) Faculty development activities include
              workshops and seminars on student-active learning and the effective use of
              students in research. (3) The promotion of student involvement in research
              includes the tracking and encouragement of students who complete the two-course
              sequence, expansion of paid summer research opportunities, and development of a
              part-time position to oversee and promote student involvement in research.

