Title       : Studies of Fault Fabrics and Earthquake Mechanics from the Precise Relative
               Locations of Microearthquakes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0126184

Award Number: 0126184
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan M. Rubin arubin@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1576,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Microearthquakes (earthquakes smaller than magnitude ~3) that have similar
              hypocenters (locations) and focal mechanisms (fault planes and slip directions)
              produce ground motions at a given seismic station that appear very similar.  By
              comparing the recorded seismic waveforms of these earthquakes, it is possible
              to obtain very accurate estimates of the relative arrival times of the seismic
              waves, and ultimately very accurate estimates of the relative locations of the
              earthquakes.  Errors in relative location obtained using this method are tens
              of meters for events separated by hundreds of meter, and, after correcting for
              time-dependent station changes, meters for events separated by tens of meters
              or less.  These errors are a factor of 10-100 smaller than those in the
              published US Geological Survey Northern California Seismic Network (NCSN)
              catalog.  This increase in resolution has led to significant new insights in
              two different areas of fault studies.  First, structures internal to the fault
              zone that previously could not be seen have been imaged.  Second, because the
              relative location errors between the nearest microearthquakes are much smaller
              than the rupture dimensions (tens to hundreds of meters), this resolution
              allows studies of earthquake interaction using datasets of many thousands of
              events.  In the area of fault structure, microearthquake relocation shows that
              the seismicity along many creeping faults is organized into slip-parallel
              "streaks", tens to a few hundred meters tall and up to kilometers in length. 
              In the area of rupture interaction, it has been observed that the distribution
              of aftershocks of microearthquakes along the central San Andreas fault is very
              asymmetric, with many more of the nearest aftershocks (in space and time)
              occurring to the northwest of a prior mainshock than to the southeast.  This is
              attributed to the contrast in material properties across the fault and how this
              contrast affects the dynamics of the mainshock (preferential propagation to the
              southeast).  If this explanation is correct, it is relevant to seismic hazards
              because directivity of large earthquakes concentrates ground shaking in the
              direction of propagation.

Current research is devoted to developing catalogs
              of thousands of precisely-located microearthquakes in regions of geologic
              interest, interpreting these catalogs in terms of their implications for fault
              mechanics, and improving the relocation method.  More time-dependent
              corrections are being determined for NCSN stations and made available to the
              seismological community.  The more precise locations obtained with the station
              corrections are being used to search for (1) subtle changes in fault dip
              associated with the observed microseismic lineations and (2) short lineations
              on faults believed to have little slip, to distinguish between competing ideas
              for the origins of the lineations.  In the area of asymmetric aftershock
              distributions, the dataset is being extended to smaller mainshock sizes using
              the Parkfield HRSN catalog, the relocation code (with time-dependent station
              corrections) is being modified to routinely determine the local across-fault
              P-wave and S-wave velocity contrasts, and numerical modeling of rupture on the
              interface between dissimilar materials is being undertaken to test the
              explanation proposed for the origin of the symmetry.  Finally, the statistics
              of aftershock sequences of microearthquakes on different faults are being
              compared to the predictions of analytic models of rate-and-state friction, and
              to numerical models of rupture interaction on planar faults.  The goals are to
              test models of rate-and-state fault friction and to determine differences in
              loading rates and/or surface properties of the various faults.  Because for
              some faults the earliest portion of the aftershock sequences might have been
              "lost" because of the network "blind" time following a triggering event
              (perhaps a few tens of seconds), the nearly 100 s archived waveforms of all
              cataloged events are being processed to identify and locate events that would
              ordinarily have triggered the network.  These studies will lead to further
              insights into the mechanics of earthquakes.
