Title       : Developing a Practice-Based Theory of Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a0126237

Award Number: 0126237
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1147306            (Estimated)
Investigator: Hyman Bass hybass@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah L. Ball  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks to examine what it is about mathematics that elementary
              teachers need to know and appreciate, and where and how in teaching such
              understandings and appreciation are used. Two enduring questions are at the
              heart of contemporary efforts to improve mathematics instruction:

o What
              mathematical knowledge is entailed by the work of teaching mathematics?  
o
              Where and how is mathematical knowledge entailed, and how would it be useful
              and used, within the work of teaching mathematics?  How is mathematical
              knowledge intertwined with other knowledge and sensibilities in the course of
              that work?

Within the term "knowledge" the project includes content (e.g.,
              topics, theorems, definitions, algorithms)  as well as practices and
              sensibilities. What it might mean, and what it would take, for elementary
              teachers to teach in ways that are respectful of both students and the
              mathematics. What could it mean to have "mathematical integrity" as an
              elementary teacher?  The project will also seek to locate the mathematical
              aspects of elementary teaching -- the tasks, moments, and challenges -- where
              what a teacher can hear, see, do, and say depends on mathematical
              knowledge.

Rather than asking these questions by examining curriculum
              frameworks or standards of what teachers are supposed to teach, the project
              works in and from practice. Our investigations take us first into
              investigations of the practices of teaching and learning mathematics, as well
              as into the practices of mathematics itself. 

Central to this work is a
              large longitudinal NSF-funded database, documenting an entire year of Ball's
              third grade public school teaching during 1989-90.  By analyzing these detailed
              records of practice, we seek to develop theory of mathematical knowledge as it
              is entailed by and used in teaching, to consider instruction over time,
              examining the work of teachers in developing mathematics and their students
              across the school year.   

Products of this project will include detailed
              analyses of the mathematics entailed in elementary school teaching, as well as
              grounded theory about the nature and uses of mathematical content, practice,
              and sensibilities in the day-to-day work of teaching.   Written products will
              target different audiences with interests in this work.  
 
 





