Title       : Dissertation Grant: Evaluating Levantine Early Upper Paleolithic Prismatic Blade
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2001   
File        : a0126043

Award Number: 0126043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Kuhn skuhn@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kristopher W. Kerry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Steven L. Kuhn, Mr. Kristopher W. Kerry will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. This research will quantitatively examine
              relationships between several different Early Upper Paleolithic stone-tool
              assemblages associated with the Early Ahmarian lithic tradition. Found
              throughout most of the eastern Mediterranean region known as the Levant, the
              Early Ahmarian ranges in age from 25-40,000 years ago, and represents one of
              the earliest Upper Paleolithic industries in the world and perhaps the earliest
              example of prismatic blade production in Eurasia. This specific method of
              stone-tool production, used to produce numerous elongated removals (blades)
              from a single piece of stone, differs significantly from earlier stone-working
              techniques, and is contemporaneous with broad-scale changes in human behavior
              and population dispersal argued to occur throughout Eurasia circa 30-40,000
              years ago. 

Despite this distinction, the Early Ahmarian tradition was not
              recognized until the early 1980s, when it was distinguished from another Upper
              Paleolithic technological tradition. This separation, centering on the high
              percentage of blade elements, was a significant contribution in characterizing
              Levantine Upper Paleolithic variability. However, over the past two decades the
              Ahmarian has become a designation for many, highly variable assemblages whose
              only common denominator is a "bladey" appearance. Understandably, such a
              classification scheme has made the taxonomic use of the Early Ahmarian somewhat
              cumbersome. While prismatic blade technology defines the Early Ahmarian,
              descriptions based on quantitative measures associated with the manufacture of
              blades are rare. This research will examine relationships between eight
              different Early Ahmarian assemblages by evaluating blade production strategies
              using quantitative measures. These assemblages form a transect through
              south-central Sinai, southwest Jordan, the Negev, central Lebanon, and
              south-central Turkey and represent various environmental and site settings.
              Additionally, three "out-group" assemblages will also be examined. These
              out-group assemblages are included in attempts to identify common themes in
              Early Ahmarian blade production strategies by comparing them with prismatic
              blade manufacture from southeast Europe and other stone-tool production
              techniques considered quite distinct from the Early Ahmarian within the Levant
              itself. In quantitatively describing blade production strategies associated
              with these eleven assemblages a consistent method of comparison may help
              distinguish regional distinctions associated with local environment and site
              location, as well as identify common themes within the Early Ahmarian. Only
              after Early Ahmarian technological variability is better defined can questions
              relating to the dispersal of prismatic blade production throughout Eurasia
              within the broader context of behavioral and demographic changes often
              associated with the Upper Paleolithic period be explored.

Archaeologists
              know that the earliest anatomically modern humans first appeared in Africa and
              that they subsequently spread throughout both Old and New Worlds. Although one
              might assume that cultural attributes such as stone tools spread the same way,
              the archaeological evidence is far from clear. Mr. Kerry's research will
              provide relevant data. It will also assist in training a promising young
              scientist.














