Title       : The Children's Research Initiative: Integrative Approaches - CRI: Center for
               Research on Culture, Development and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0126557

Award Number: 0126557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine S. Tamis-LeMonda ct1@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Niobe Way  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diane Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joshua M. Aronson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hirokazu Yoshikawa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1358,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

New York University: Center for Research on Culture, Development and
              Education

Joshua Aronson, Diane Hughes, Catherine Tamis-LeMonda, Niobe Way &
              
Hiro Yoshikawa

Despite thousands of research studies, hundreds of remedial
              programs, and decades of being considered a crisis for American society, the
              chronic academic underachievement of numerous ethnic minority groups continues
              to perplex educators, social scientists, and policy makers. Three trends add
              weight to the crisis. First, within the next 50 years, people identified
              currently as "minority" will comprise half of the U.S. population. Second,
              particularly in large urban centers like New York, new waves of immigrants are
              arriving, ensuring fundamental, but unknown changes to the structure and
              dynamics of schools and other contexts. Third, the U.S. continues to evolve
              into a "knowledge-driven" economy, making a solid education vital for an
              increasingly large sector of the workforce. More than ever, a sizable
              proportion of our nation's children are at risk of academic failure and
              economic hardship. 
Faculty from multiple scientific disciplines at New York
              University will use NSF funding to support planning activities over a 6- to
              9-month period pertaining to research that will be pursued under the proposed
              Center for Research on Culture, Development and Education.  The central aim of
              the Center will be to examine how homes, schools, peers, work, and the media
              jointly contribute to the engagement, learning, and school performance of
              children from diverse cultures. 
Three steps are needed to accomplish this
              mission. First, we propose to describe the experiences of minority children
              within each of the educationally relevant contexts. Many social scientists
              focus on determining the predictors of children's academic outcomes without a
              deep understanding of children's everyday experiences. Such descriptive work is
              notably absent in research focused on ethnic minorities. We need systematic
              knowledge regarding how contexts such as home, peers, school, parents' work,
              and the media differ or are experienced differently by children from different
              cultures, ethnicities or social classes. Second, we seek to understand how
              these experiences shape children's engagement, learning and performance in
              school, and whether and how such connections may vary by culture, ethnicity,
              and social class. Third, our ultimate goal is to advance an understanding of
              how home, peer, school, work, and the media work together in explaining
              children's academic achievement. 
The second mission of the Center is
              educational: to transmit its research findings, through training and
              dissemination, to three communities: (1) a new generation of scholars of
              diverse backgrounds who are engaged in research on culture and its role in
              child learning, engagement, and performance; (2) the broader research
              community; and (3) policy makers and practitioners in education. This will
              occur through an intensive and rigorous training program and a variety of
              dissemination strategies of both research findings and lessons for policy and
              educational practice.
The proposed Center is situated within a School of
              Education, in the vibrant, incomparably diverse context of New York City,
              making it an unparalleled locale for studying culture and schools, and an ideal
              place to establish a think tank capable of attracting additional scholars and
              students of the highest quality. Through the work of the Center, we aim to
              bring about a deeper understanding of the interplay of culture, development and
              education, and thereby enhance the nation's response to the academic
              underachievement of ethnic minority children. 


