Title       : Investigating the Kinematic History of the Kongur Shan Normal Fault System,
               Western Tibet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a0126122

Award Number: 0126122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213230             (Estimated)
Investigator: An Yin yin@ess.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig E. Manning  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A first-order feature of the Tibetan Plateau is its triangular geometry on map
              view with its
north-south width increasing from ~500 km in the west to >1500
              km in the east. This asymmetry
has been explained by either eastward extrusion
              of Tibet or partitioning of north-south shortening
in the Tian Shan and
              northern Tibet across the strong Tarim block. To quantify the role of
              lateral
extrusion in accommodating intracontinental deformation during the
              Indo-Asian collision, we
must know the timing and magnitude of slip along
              major Cenozoic strike-slip faults in Asia. This
goal may be achieved by
              examining the termination structures of the strike-slip faults where
              their
motion is transferred to dip-slip structures. In this proposal, we plan
              to investigate the temporal
and spatial evolution of one of such structures:
              the 220-km long, north-trending Kongur Shan
extensional system in the eastern
              Pamirs. In the lateral-extrusion model, the Kongur Shan
extensional system is
              the northern termination of the ~1000-km long right-slip Karakorum
              fault,
which is thought to have assisted Tibet to extrude hundreds of
              kilometers eastward. Because the
southern end of the Kongur Shan system is
              assumed to link with the right-slip Karakorum fault,
the extrusion model
              requires that the extensional system has progressively lengthened
              northward
and its total magnitude of extension decreases from south to north.
              Alternatively, the oroclinal-bending
model suggests that the development of
              the north-trending Kongur Shan system may
have been related to pure bending of
              the Pamir-Nanga Parbat syntaxis system during Cenozoic
northward indentation
              of the Pamir promontory. This hypothesis not only explains coeval
              east-west
extension in the Pamirs and east-west contraction in the Nanga
              Parbat region in the western
Himalayan orogen, but also predicts specifically
              that the Kongur Shan extensional system should
have lengthened progressively
              southward and its total magnitude of extension decreases along
strike to the
              south. The distinctive predictions regarding the extensional-magnitude
              distribution
and propagation direction of the Kongur Shan extensional system
              by the two competing models
form the basis of this proposal. We plan to
              conduct field mapping across the extensional system
in four different
              transects, each is about 20-40 km wide, which will allow us to construct a
              series
of cross sections for estimating the magnitude of extension along
              individual segment of the
system. Field mapping will focus on the question of
              whether the Kongur Shan extensional
system is actually linked with the
              Karakorum fault. We will integrate field mapping with
thermobarometric, 40
              Ar/39 Ar thermochronologic, and U-Th-Pb ion-microprobe geochronologic
analyses
              to constrain the P-T-t paths for both the hangingwall and footwall of the
              extensional
system. The results of this study will provide two important
              constraints on the tectonics of the
western Himalayan orogen: (1) the timing
              and magnitude of eastward extrusion of Tibet, and (2)
the dynamic cause for
              the initiation and development of coeval east-west extension and
contraction
              in the western syntaxis system.
