Title       : Deciphering the Tectonic History of Slowly Cooled Precambrian Polymetamorphic
               Terranes in the American Southwest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a0126148

Award Number: 0126148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26607              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher L. Andronicos chris@geo.utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Proterozoic tectonic history of the American southwest is the subject of
              considerable controversy. Controversy revolves around the nature of ~1.4 Ga
              plutonism and tectonism and its relationship to Paleoproterozoic (1.8-1.6 Ga)
              crustal accretion. To help resolve this question The P.I. will investigate the
              Cimarron Mountains of northern New Mexico and the Needle Mountains of
              southwestern Colorado. These two regions preserve deformation and plutonic
              histories that record both Paleoproterozoic accretion and subsequent
              Mesoproterozoic reactivation. 1.4 Ga metamorphism has erased the
              Paleoproterozoic thermal signature in most of northern New Mexico and southern
              Colorado. Therefore, these two proposed study areas may provide the only
              opportunity to decipher the Paleoproterozoic metamorphic and cooling history in
              northern New Mexico and southern Colorado.

The Cimarron Mountains contain an
              upper amphibolite grade block and a greenschist grade block separated by the
              Fowler Pass Shear Zone (FPSZ). Metamorphic mineral assemblages across the shear
              zone suggest up to 10 km of vertical separation. Cooling ages from the
              high-grade block suggest high-grade metamorphism occurred at ~1.4 Ga. In
              contrast, rocks in the low-grade block record a 1678 Ar 40 /Ar 39 cooling age:
              this is the oldest cooling age reported in northern New Mexico. Detailed
              structural analysis of the two blocks and the F.P.S.Z. will be undertaken to
              clarify the deformation history and tectonic significance of this structure and
              its relationship to the metamorphic evolution of the region.

The Needle
              Mountains record a much different history. Paleoproterozoic supracrustal rocks
              in this region are divided into two packages. The Uncompahgre Formation,
              consisting of quartzites and schists, is regionally metamorphosed to the
              greenschist facies. These rocks rest on a sheared unconformity above the second
              package, which is composed of amphibolite facies gneiss, migmatite, and schist.
              The 1.46 Ga Eolus granite intrudes both packages and has a well-developed
              contact aureole with peak metamorphic assemblages including sillimanite and
              K-feldspar. However, many of the rocks far from the granite have assemblages
              that appear to be unaffected by 1.4 Ga metamorphism. This situation may provide
              the opportunity to determine the thermal structure of the crust during
              Paleoproterozic orogenesis as well as during the 1.4 Ga overprint. In order to
              better understand the role of 1.4 Ga tectonics in the evolution of southwest
              North America, the P.I. will undertake a structural, metamorphic, and
              geochronologic study of the two ranges. Both of these areas are similar in
              having 1.4 Ga metamorphic features and Paleoproterozoic thermal and metamorphic
              signatures. These regions are therefore well suited to determine which
              deformational and metamorphic features belong to each of the two events. The
              preservation of Paleoproterozic metamorphic features makes these areas ideal
              for testing of models for slow cooling and long-term residence in the middle
              crust in newly formed lithosphere.

