Title       : Cryptic Sexual Conflict in Gift-Giving Insects: Chasing the "Chase-Away"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a0126820

Award Number: 0126820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239908             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott K. Sakaluk sksakal@ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Lay Abstract of Proposed Research

Principal Investigator: Scott Kitchener
              Sakaluk

Project Title: Cryptic sexual conflict in gift-giving insects:
              chasing the "chase-away"

Conventional models for the coevolution of
              exaggerated male sexual ornaments and female mating preferences posit that
              females derive material benefits or indirect genetic benefits by preferentially
              mating with the most conspicuous males. The chase-away sexual selection model,
              however, suggests that elaborate male sexual displays can arise because they
              exploit pre-existing biases in females' sensory systems, inducing females to
              mate in a sub-optimal manner. An essential element of this hypothesis is that
              such manipulation should quickly lead to female resistance or decreased
              attraction to male display traits. Although anecdotal evidence in certain taxa
              appears to provide support for the evolution of female resistance, the
              hypothesis has not been directly tested. Nuptial food gifts, an integral
              feature of the mating systems of a wide variety of insects, may be a frequent
              conduit by which males attempt to influence the mating behavior of females
              against females' own reproductive interests. Recent work in my laboratory
              suggests that the food gifts offered by male decorated crickets contain
              substances that at one time inhibited the sexual receptivity of females, but
              that females have evolved resistance to these substances. The proposed research
              seeks to establish the receptivity-inhibiting properties of these food gifts by
              offering them to females of several non-gift-giving species, and measuring
              their effect on female fitness. These studies may lead to the identification of
              male-derived hormonal substances that inhibit female mating behavior, which
              ultimately could furnish a safe, but effective means of biological control of
              insect pest species.

