Title       : New Course Development - Introduction to Bioinformatics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0126767

Award Number: 0126767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99948              (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Christmann james.christmann@sonoma.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara S. Chapman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eileen Thatcher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sonoma State University
	      1801 East Cotati Avenue
	      Rohnert Park, CA  949283609    707/664-2156

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
There is a well-documented national need for
              development of curricula in bioinformatics, especially at the upper-division
              undergraduate level. This project is establishing a foundation course in
              bioinformatics for third-year undergraduates, articulated with the biological
              science major, and available as an elective course for chemistry, computer
              science, and physics majors interested in bioinformatics. Materials available
              through the California State University Program in Education and Research in
              Biotechnology (CSUPERB) Bioinformatics Consortium and the National Center for
              Biotechnology Information are being adapted for use in the course. The project
              also addresses the need to identify students having inadequate preparation for
              bioinformatics instruction and to provide just-in-time review materials. The
              objectives are: 1) to assemble, implement and field test a computer-based
              module for diagnostic pretesting and remediation for enrolling students, 2) to
              develop a set of problem-based instructional units to be used in a
              discussion/laboratory format with laptop computers and web browsers 3) to
              implement and evaluate an introductory course in bioinformatics using these
              materials, and 4) to share the results with faculty at other undergraduate
              institutions. The objectives are being accomplished using a systems approach to
              design, create and test materials appropriate for undergraduate bioinformatics.
              These materials are used with problem-based learning, enabling students to
              apply the strategies and tools of bioinformatics to topical problems drawn from
              current academic and commercial research. Basic computation, chemistry,
              biology, analytical and problem-solving skills are emphasized. The project
              involves several campuses of the California State University (CSU) system with
              the support from the CSU Program in Education and Research in Biotechnolgy
              (CSUPERB)Bioinformatics Consortium, which is committed to integration of
              technology and faculty development in the area of bioinformatics education.
