Title       : Online Weather Studies: National Dissemination and Collegial Professional
               Development Activity With Undergraduate Faculty in Minority-Serving
               Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0126032

Award Number: 0126032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365675             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ira W. Geer geer@dc.ametsoc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph M. Moran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Weinbeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Meteorological Soc
	      45 Beacon Street
	      Boston, MA  021083631    /   -

NSF Program : 7429      CCLI-NATIONAL DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Atmospheric Sciences (41)
The American Meteorological Society (AMS) in
              cooperation with the US National
Weather Service and the Department of the
              Geosciences of North Carolina's Elizabeth
City State University is providing
              professional development opportunities for 100 faculty at
minority
              institutions with the goal of increasing minority student participation
              in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Over a 4.5-year
              period, this
project will attain this diversity-enhancing goal by making
              available to minority-serving
colleges and universities Online Weather
              Studies, an existing AMS-developed distance-
learning course on the basics of
              atmospheric science partially delivered via the Internet.
Greater minority
              student participation in STEM requires greater access to
scientific learning
              experiences that engage student interest and develop their critical
thinking
              skills. Critical thinking and associated reasoning skills are considered
              essential
for student success in STEM. Online Weather Studies is designed to
              meet this goal
through electronic delivery of highly motivational
              investigations written to current
weather conditions. To facilitate adoption
              and implementation of Online Weather
Studies, the project provides
              professional development experiences for faculty (25 per
year for 4 years) via
              a 5-day summer workshop at the National Weather Service Training
Center
              (NWSTC) at Kansas City, MO plus a series of two-day workshops treating
science
              content, pedagogical, and diversity issues as a regular feature of the AMS
              Annual
Meeting held each January.
