Title       : CCLI: Raman Microscopy throughout the Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2001  
File        : a0126807

Award Number: 0126807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72632              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean Johnston DJohnston@otterbein.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph R. Sachleben  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Otterbein College
	      
	      Westerville, OH  43081    614/890-3000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

We are integrating Raman spectroscopy, a specialized tool
              commonly seen only in advanced research laboratories, throughout all four years
              of the undergraduate chemistry curriculum and also into some Physics and Life
              and Earth Science courses at Otterbein College. Our immediate goal is to
              enhance our chemistry curriculum by including activities that will carefully
              build students' understanding of vibrational spectroscopy throughout their four
              years of training. To achieve our goal, we are adapting and implementation
              inquiry- and project-based laboratory exercises that utilize the Raman
              microscopy into the General, Organic, Analytical, Inorganic and Physical
              chemistry courses. These activities draw on a variety of NSF-funded projects on
              forensic chemistry, modern instrumentation, and Raman spectroscopy. We are also
              using the Raman spectroscope in ongoing faculty-student research projects. In
              addition to chemistry students, this instrument is also being used by students
              in the Physics and Life and Earth Sciences departments. In total, approximately
              110 students annually are being impacted by this curricular reform project. We
              anticipate the student outcomes of this project will include: (1) a greater
              understanding of the fundamental theories and applications of vibrational
              spectroscopy and (2) the further development of critical-thinking and research
              skills. Our long term goals are to develop multidisciplinary programs in the
              sciences and the development and dissemination of a national model for the
              implementation of Raman spectroscopy throughout the undergraduate science
              curriculum. 

