Title       : Food, Hair, Beverages and Water: Analytical Biochemistry Across the Curriculum.
               A Case Study Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2002   
File        : a0126165

Award Number: 0126165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70016              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Schaber schaber@ccvmsa  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Corso  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Grebenok  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Szczepankiewicz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Canisius College
	      2001 Main Street
	      Buffalo, NY  142081035    716/883-7000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
This project is an interdisciplinary effort between the
              Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, and the Biology Department. New
              Supercritical Fluid Extraction (SFE) and Capillary Electrophoresis (CE)
              Instrumentation is being integrated into the laboratory component of several
              analysis oriented chemistry, biology and biochemistry courses using modern
              teaching methodologies. The focus of the plan is to develop an
              analytical/biochemistry cluster of experiments that runs through the current
              Sophomore and Junior/Senior laboratory courses. Experiments within this cluster
              are based upon the Case Study method, with students working in small groups;
              involve the use of one or both of the proposed instruments; and focus on issues
              of biochemical relevance. Experiments and protocols from the Journal of
              Chemical Education and from primary research journals are being combined and
              adapted in order to create the Case Studies. This approach better prepares
              chemistry, biology, and biochemistry students by involving them in the
              consideration of "real world" problems, and by providing hands-on experience
              using modern analytical instrumentation and techniques. As a result of this
              experience, students are expected to become more efficient learners, retain
              what they learn longer, exercise their critical thinking skills, and involve
              themselves in more interesting and challenging experiments than were available
              in the past. Case Studies are being written in a manner that will allow other
              colleges and universities, similarly equipped, to readily adapt these methods.
              Results of the project will be reported at national and regional meetings and
              published in appropriate college science teaching journals. 

