Title       : Student and Instructor Centered Electronic Textbooks in the Computer Science
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a0126486

Award Number: 0126486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74967              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ryan L. McFall mcfall@cs.hope.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/395-7190

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31)

The goal of this project is to increase the
              effectiveness of textbooks in the undergraduate science curriculum. Our
              experience at Hope College and the literature indicates there are several
              problems with current textbooks, including difficulty in matching texts to
              course needs in the areas of emphasis, breath, depth and level. These problems
              are addressed by developing a new textbook model. The effectiveness of the
              model will be determined by its application in our general education course,
              Introduction to Computer Science. 

This project develops a prototype of an
              electronic textbook where the instructor determines the content of the
              textbook. Traditional textbook content as well as supplemental materials
              provided by the instructor or determined by the student is used. Students
              augment the material supplied by the instructor with other resources, including
              resources created by the student. The textbook integrates previously
              disconnected resources in the learning experience, such as homework assignments
              and laboratory experiments, into a single environment. Both student and
              instructor have the ability to annotate any of the materials used or referenced
              in the textbook. Integrating all of these features creates a textbook that is
              customizable by both student and instructor and provides a single location that
              students can use to organize the learning resources available for a course.
              

An important feature of our model is that it is designed to run on handheld
              computers, allowing the textbook to be portable and convenient for students to
              use.

