Title       : The Seagrass History of Florida Bay Reconstructed from Integrating
               Micropaleontological and Geochemical Proxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a0126024

Award Number: 0126024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154340             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurel S. Collins collinsl@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rudolf Jaffe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Fourqurean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The Seagrass History of Florida Bay Reconstructed from Integrating
              Micropaleontological and Geochemical Proxies

Laurel S. Collins, Rudolf
              Jaffe, James W. Fourqurean, William T. Anderson
Florida International
              University


How much of the variation in coastal environmental conditions
              is naturally occurring and how much has been caused by humans?  This question
              is addressed with the historical record of seagrass abundance, which today is
              highly correlated with environmental water quality. The study is set in Florida
              Bay, part of the environmentally challenged Everglades National Park.  The main
              objective is to collect cores of Florida Bay sediment and use proxies of
              seagrass abundance contained therein as indicators of the environmental water
              quality for the past few hundred years. Proxies are used because seagrass
              itself is not preserved in sediments. The geochemical proxies are measures of
              organic matter (organic carbon, nitrogen, molecular biomarkers, stable isotopes
              - d13C, d15N, dD) and micropaleontological proxies are abundances of seagrass
              indicator species (foraminifera, diatoms). Hypersalinity has recently been
              linked to large seagrass die-offs in Florida Bay.  Several proxies will also be
              used to determine the correlation between historical salinity and seagrass
              changes. 

This grant funds the pilot project to extract sediment cores from
              Florida Bay, conduct sedimentologic analyses, determine radiometric ages, and
              calibrate the proxies to modern seagrass abundances and salinities. The
              investigators will subsequently collect geochemical and micropaleontological
              data from the cores, integrate the data in statistical analyses, and interpret
              the results. 

Knowledge is advanced by incorporating the results in geology,
              biology and chemistry classes taught by the investigators, and providing the
              basis for three graduate student theses. FIU is a federally recognized minority
              university.

