Title       : Microcontroller/Mechatronics Education of Non-Electrical Engineering Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0126966

Award Number: 0126966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor Giurgiutiu   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jed S. Lyons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David N. Rocheleau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Mechanical (56)
The project is adapting educational materials,
              concepts, and methodologies from successful mechatronics/microcontroller
              courses developed at Georgia Institute of Technology (GIT) and Ohio State
              University (OSU). The components of these courses regarding manufacturing
              applications of mechatronics systems, and controls and Actuators are being
              adapted to the specifics of South Carolina industry. The adapted course
              components will be incorporated into the engineering curriculum in the form of
              updated and enhanced laboratory equipment/procedures, advanced programming and
              simulation software, and state-of-the-art instruction delivery/training
              methods. Mechatronics/Microcontroller teaching laboratory is being equipped
              with new 16-bit microcontroller hardware, state-of-the-art microcontroller
              programming and simulation software, Digital Signal Processor (DSP) development
              kit, mobile robots hardware, and PC-based data acquisition and process control
              functioning units. All these result in offer state-of-the-art educational and
              instructional environment to the USC students.

Self-teaching instructional
              modules are being developed around the programming and simulation software.
              These modules, consistent with web-based delivery, are going to greatly enhance
              teaching and education productivity in the area of
              Mechatronics/Microcontrollers. These activities complement the current USC
              effort to introduce information technology across the campus. The University of
              South Carolina has formed a campus-wide task force on "informatics" under the
              leadership of the College of Library and Information Science. The self-teaching
              modules to be developed through this project support the campus-wide initiative
              and have the potential for being extended to other campuses. The project
              targets a special audience consisting of a large proportion of women (22%) and
              minorities (30%). 



