Title       : Community Dynamics in a Polar Ecosystem: Benthic Recovery From A Large Scale
               Organic Enrichment in the Antarctic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0126319

Award Number: 0126319
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388649             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stacy L. Kim skim@mlml.calstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Kim
0126319

Antarctic marine ecosystems differ from other polar, temperate
              and tropical systems at the level of individuals, populations and communities.
              The environment is characterized by extreme seasonality in light and food
              availability, along with cold stenothermal conditions. Additionally, human
              impacts are more limited in Antarctica than in highly populated or exploited
              areas. A unique research opportunity will occur in 2003 with the installation
              of a sewage treatment plant at McMurdo Station. This will allow for the conduct
              of a large-scale experiment on community recovery from organic enrichment and
              physical disturbance. This research will test whether major hypotheses related
              to community structure and disturbance recovery, which were formulated and
              demonstrated in more accessible marine communities, applies to Antarctic
              ecosystems. This research will build on a ten-year time-series that follows
              benthic community degradation resulting from emplacement of a sewage outfall. A
              complicating factor in the local McMurdo ecosystem is the input of fecal matter
              from the abundant populations of marine mammals and large fishes. Sampling will
              span the implementation of sewage treatment and the data will be incorporated
              in a meta-analysis of community recovery from organic disturbance in a variety
              of habitats, to test the generality of recovery patterns. Experimental
              manipulations will compare the potentially complex roles of burial and patch
              size in recovery dynamics. The knowledge gained from this research can be
              applied to other examples of high organic loading in polar habitats.
              Significant anthropogenic inputs in high latitudes include pulp mills and
              increases in human occupation and visitation as well as natural sources
              including woody debris in river outputs and carcass-falls from the productive
              surface waters above also present significant carbon inputs to high latitude
              environments. This study will significantly further the understanding of
              anthropogenic impacts in polar environments using an integrated approach to
              evaluate the recovery of the infaunal and epifaunal assemblages after a
              substantial carbon-loading perturbation sustained over ten years.
