Title       : Establishment of a Regional NMR Site at Trinity University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2001  
File        : a0126417

Award Number: 0126417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103710             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy S. Mills nmills@trinity.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Shanklin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  78212    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

With the purchase of a Varian Mercury 300 MHz NMR
              spectrometer, we have created a regional NMR site by which six two- and
              four-year colleges and universities in the San Antonio region with no previous
              access to NMR instrumentation have easy and effective access to one which is
              housed at and maintained by Trinity University. To overcome the access
              limitation to use of NMR at a remote site, we have designed a process in which
              samples from the participating institutions are delivered to Trinity
              University, are prepared for analysis by a student worker, run automatically
              with a sample changer, and the data (free induction decays, FID's) downloaded
              to a Trinity University server. Students at the participating institutions
              transfer the FID's to a local computer to be processed using free software.
              Each of the six institutions have thoughtfully chosen a set of experiments from
              the chemical education literature to use in their curricula. The participating
              institutions pay only for the time of the student worker and a nominal fee for
              deuterated solvents. They are therefore able to control and incorporate as much
              NMR access as they can afford. The pedagogical advantages are several. First,
              students process their own spectra and learn to make decisions about
              integration or expansion of the various regions of the spectrum. Second, since
              the FID is retrievable from a server, they can return to the spectra for
              reprocessing if necessary. Third, by running spectra on real samples, they have
              opportunities to deal with impurities and develop greater sophistication in
              interpretation. Finally, being able to acquire spectra of real samples allow
              students to identify unknown products of chemical reactions.
