Title       : Planning Grant Proposal: A Virtual Center for Child Language Acquistion Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a0126546

Award Number: 0126546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82588              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Lust bcl4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1358,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

A Virtual Center for Child Language Acquisition Research:  A
              Planning Grant
Proposal

Barbara C. Lust

	We aim to create a Virtual
              Center through the use of the internet to exchange materials and data across
              laboratories currently concerned with the study of language acquisition.  The
              purpose of this Planning Grant is to initiate planning to develop the
              Infrastructure for this Virtual Center.  In the planning stage, six US
              laboratories at six institutions that are concerned with children's first
              language acquisition, including childhood bilingualism, will form the core of
              this Virtual Center.  The Cornell Language Acquisition Lab, as the lead
              institution, is in turn linked to the Sackler Institute for Developmental
              Psychology at the Cornell University Weill Medical College.

	The proposed
              infrastructure is to be executed through the development and dissemination of
              new World Wide Web materials to support and develop collaborative
              cross-linguistic scientific primary research in all areas of language
              acquisition.  These materials comprise a Virtual Linguistics Lab (VLL) which
              will include a set of internet-available materials to guide primary linguistic
              research in the area of language acquisition through a web-based graphical user
              interface.  These materials provide the basis for exchange of knowledge and
              data across laboratories leading to collaborative research and educational
              initiatives which can allow each individual laboratory at each institution new
              power and scope through interaction with the Center.

	Ultimately, the
              proposed Virtual Center will be extended to networking with other labs which
              focus on second or multi-language acquisition in the adult, and to other labs
              which are practicing neuroscientific methods of study of language acquisition. 
              In addition, it will be networked with several international labs in India,
              Peru and Taiwan, as well as other countries, which will allow a wide expansion
              of the exchange of knowledge (including both data and scientific methods)  in
              the field.

	The Virtual Center is designed to allow infinite and open-ended
              dissemination of materials and data.  The Planning Grant is intended to
              establish the prototypes for the required infrastructure and the necessary
              preliminary interaction among collaborators in order to design and construct
              this infrastructure.


