Title       : Implementation of Tutorials in Large Introductory Physics Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0126919

Award Number: 0126919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99856              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Endorf Robert.Endorf@UC.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Gass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Sokoloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) This project is adapting and implementing the Tutorials in
              Introductory Physics, by
Lillian McDermott, Peter Shaffer and the Physics
              Education Group at the University of
Washington, in the recitation sections of
              the large introductory calculus-based physics
courses taught at the University
              of Cincinnati. The goal of this proposal is to improve the
performance of the
              science, math and engineering students taking introductory calculus-
based
              physics courses, which have been a barrier for many science and
              engineering
students at the University of Cincinnati. The students in these
              courses come from a
diverse background and include many at-risk students. The
              tutorials have been pilot tested
at the University of Cincinnati, and students
              using tutorials have shown improvement
over non-tutorial students. A Tutorial
              Coordinator is helping the department completely implement the tutorials, and
              peer instructors helping as facilitators in the tutorial recitation classes.
              The Coordinator will coordinate all tutorial recitations and manage the
              recitation instructors'
tutorial training sessions, under the supervision of
              the Principal Investigators. Innovative
features of this implementation of the
              tutorials are the pairing of a graduate teaching
assistant with an
              undergraduate peer student, the testing and selection of an effective set
of
              tutorials for less well-prepared students, and the use of checkpoints and
              grading based
on recitation performance to motivate students and guide the
              recitation instructors. The
University of Washington Physics Education Group
              will be involved in observing and
advising on the implementation of the
              tutorials.
