Title       : LC/MS to Enhance Project-Based Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2002    
File        : a0126135

Award Number: 0126135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85238              (Estimated)
Investigator: George D. Bennett gbennett@mail.millikin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millikin University
	      1184 West Main Street
	      Decatur, IL  625222039    217/424-6211

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

The objectives of this project are to promote student
              understanding of tandem chromatography-spectrometry as a problem-solving
              technique that takes advantage of methodology common to all sciences, to
              discourage student compartmentalization of chemical ideas, to facilitate
              student understanding of structure-property relationships, to increase student
              access to modern instrumentation, to improve faculty collaboration, and to
              effect evolution in the chemistry curriculum to include more problem-based
              laboratory activities. These objectives are being accomplished by implementing
              the same instrumental technique in multiple courses throughout the strata of
              the chemistry curriculum. Thus, all chemistry majors and most biology majors
              are using the LC/MS in courses over multiple years covering several of the
              sub-disciplines of chemistry.

The Department is using the liquid
              chromatograph/mass spectrometer to adapt and implement exemplary laboratory
              experiences originally developed at Duquesne University. Adaptation of other
              laboratory experiments and projects from the educational literature are also
              being implemented. These adapted experiments and projects are being implemented
              into at least seven project-based laboratory courses, including Organic
              Chemistry, Instrumental Analysis, General Chemistry, Biochemistry, and
              undergraduate research in both Chemistry and Biology. The enhanced
              project-based laboratories are aiding students make connections across the
              sub-disciplinary boundaries of chemistry.

Once this project is fully
              implemented, nearly 200 Millikin University undergraduate students will feel
              its impact each year.


