Title       : Adaptation and Implementation of an Electrophysiology Laboratory for
               Undergraduate Psychology and Physics Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0126984

Award Number: 0126984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12689              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Moes pmoes@calvin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Loren Haarsma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Tellinghuisen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Calvin College
	      3201 Burton, S. E.
	      Grand Rapids, MI  49546    616/957-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Psychology - Biological (71)
Students in psychology and physics need
              inquiry-based experiences to prepare them for the 
increasing use of
              technology in graduate research and clinical work. Students at Northwest
              
Nazarene College in Idaho have used electrophysiological recording equipment
              in an undergraduate laboratory that has successfully fostered hands-on student
              learning and faculty-student research. This project is adapting this laboratory
              and creating a joint-use electrophysiological recording laboratory for students
              in the Psychology and Physics departments at Calvin College. This laboratory is
              based on The Neurodata Model 15 Amplifier made by Grass Instruments -- designed
              for recording electroencephalograph (EEG) data and event-related potentials
              (ERP). We are revising and expanding the laboratory courses beyond the initial
              adaptation in psychophysiology to include undergraduate research in cognitive
              and motivational psychology. The lab is also being used to study the physical
              properties of physiologically generated electrical potentials.
              Electrophysiological recording has become an essential element in many medical,
              human service, and research settings. 
Physics and biology students are being
              introduced to the laboratory through the study of physics for the health
              sciences. Students will continue to use the laboratory in advanced
              research
courses, and through student-faculty research projects. Our goals are
              to foster greater technical competency and enhance the learning of theory and
              applications in the classroom. Specific outcomes include revised laboratory
              manuals, Web-based dissemination of laboratory exercises, student research
              presentations, and student-faculty publications.
