Title       : Collaborative Research: Improved Cenozoic Plate Reconstructions of the
               Circum-Antarctic Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a0126334

Award Number: 0126334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200393             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joann M. Stock jstock@gps.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a project to make use of
              ship-repositioning transit cruises to gather geophysical information relating
              to plate tectonics of the Southern Ocean and to support student training
              activities. Well-constrained Cenozoic plate reconstructions of the
              circum-Antarctic region are critical for examining a number of problems of
              global geophysical importance. These problems include, e.g., relating the plate
              kinematics to its geological consequences in various plate circuits
              (Pacific-North America, Australia-Pacific); a dynamical understanding of what
              drives plate tectonics (which requires well-constrained kinematic information
              in order to distinguish between different geodynamic hypotheses); and an
              understanding of the rheology of the plates themselves, including the amount of
              internal deformation they can support, and the conditions leading to the
              formation of new plate boundaries through breakup of existing plates. By
              obtaining better constraints on the motion of the Antarctica plate with respect
              to these other plates, and by better quantifying the internal deformation
              within Antarctica (between East and West Antarctica), contributions will be
              made to solving these other fundamental problems.

In this project, existing
              data will be analyzed to address several specific issues related to plate
              motions involving the Antarctic plate. First, work will be done on four-plate
              solutions of Australia-Pacific-West Antarctica-East Antarctica motion, in order
              to most tightly constrain the rotation parameters for separation between East
              and West Antarctica for the time period from about 45 to 28 Ma (Adare Basin
              spreading system). This will be done by imposing closure on the four-plate
              circuit and using relevant marine geophysical data from all four of the
              boundaries. The uncertainties in the resulting rotation parameters will be
              determined based on the uncertainties in the data points. These uncertainties
              can then be propagated in the plate circuit for use in addressing the various
              global geodynamic problems mentioned above. Second, rotation parameters for
              Pacific-West Antarctica during Tertiary time will be determined using recently
              acquired well-navigated Palmer transit data and any additional data that can be
              acquired during the course of this project. These parameters and their
              uncertainties will be used in assessments of plate rigidity and included in the
              plate circuit studies.

In the framework of this project, new collection of
              marine geophysical data will be accomplished on a very flexible schedule. This
              will be done by collecting underway gravity, magnetics, and swath bathymetric
              data on Palmer transit cruises of geological importance. This has been
              successfully done on eight previous Palmer cruises since 1997, the most recent
              four of which were funded under a collaborative OPP grant to CalTech and
              Scripps which is now expiring. On one of the suitable transits, a formal class
              in marine geophysics will be conducted that will afford an opportunity to 12 or
              more graduate and undergraduate students, from CalTech and Scripps as well as
              other institutions. In this way, educational activities will be integrated with
              the usual scientific data collection objectives of the research project.

