Title       : Discovery-based Laboratory in Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2001  
File        : a0126469

Award Number: 0126469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: E Jane Albert Hubbard jane.hubbard@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
This project develops a new discovery-based laboratory
              course, "Laboratory in Genetics", adapted from a course at Santa Clara
              University. Targeted to upper-class undergraduates, the course permits students
              to experimentally explore concepts of classical and modern genetics, including
              genomics. Two inquiry-based research projects are initiated and carried out by
              the students; both projects generate novel data. This approach offers students
              the opportunity to explore a unique genetic problem, acquiring related concepts
              and information in the context of that exploration. The course makes use of the
              nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, taking advantage of the ease and
              practicability with which relatively sophisticated genetics experiments can be
              carried out with this organism. For example, the second project incorporates a
              new experimental technology that enables genomic sequence information to be
              transferred to a functional assay in this organism. A pilot offering of the
              course demonstrated the feasibility of the course plan and enabled the
              sharpening of course goals. The pilot helped identify specific equipment needs
              that are necessary to meet the course objectives. Project outcomes are: (1) to
              refine the syllabus and course materials to increase student capacity and make
              the course exportable, (2) to provide the means for students to explore a wider
              array of genotypes and phenotypes, and (3) to give each student the opportunity
              to become proficient at utilizing the available literature and post-genomics
              databases and tools. In this way, the larger goals of improving acquisition of
              scientific knowledge and skills, including analytical, technical and
              communication skills, can be achieved.
