Title       : Pathways through Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0126582

Award Number: 0126582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary T. Teegarden tteegard@sdccd.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wade Ellis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret D. Hovde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wei-Jen Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : San Diego Mesa College
	      7250 Mesa College Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921114902    619/388-2795

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21)

This project is addressing national and statewide
              needs to improve the mathematics skills of undergraduate students, particularly
              for 'at risk' members of 'special populations'. The project goal is to increase
              the retention and successful completion rates of community college algebra
              students by developing a collaborative, research-based approach to the
              improvement of teaching and learning mathematics. Project partners, Mesa,
              American River and West Valley Colleges are supported by both professional
              state mathematical organizations and the Center for Student Success.

Project
              objectives include adapting, pilot testing and evaluating three recommended
              approaches to increasing student success:
1) adapting/refining a specialized
              mathematics study skills course developed at Manatee and Valencia Community
              Colleges in Florida;
2) adapting/refining a teacher specific peer tutoring
              approach, Beacon; and
3) supplementing the course with computer-aided
              instruction using ALEKS.

This project is designed to adapt, implement,
              investigate and determine which of these strategies are effective with specific
              groups of 'at risk' community college students. Project objectives also include
              the development of a virtual resource center, regular partner meetings and a
              summer institute that is facilitating contact, communication and exchange of
              information among mathematics faculty members. The Project Resource Center is
              also being used as a clearinghouse for information regarding current research,
              available curriculum, instructional resources, and best practices for teaching
              Elementary Algebra. Project-produced educational materials, evaluation
              instruments, pilot test results and lessons learned are being disseminated.

