Title       : Cosmogenic Isotopes Produced In Situ in Terrestrial Rocks: Quantifying the
               Effect of Altitude and Depth on the Production Rates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2001  
File        : a0126209

Award Number: 0126209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264876             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marek G. Zreda marek@hwr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Zreda
EAR-0126209

Although the general systematics of in-situ produced
              cosmogenic isotopes has been understood based on theoretical and experimental
              work, new quantitative information in several areas is needed to refine
              cosmogenic dating methods. Recent research on experimental production rates and
              effects of paleomagnetic intensity has shown that the production rates
              determined at one location and time cannot be transferred to other locations or
              times without introducing systematic errors that are estimated to be on the
              order of twenty percent. There are many specific reasons for these
              uncertainties, all revolving around a fundamental general problem of the
              distribution of the cosmic-ray intensity on earth. To improve our understanding
              of the distribution of neutrons, we started a neutron monitoring program, under
              which we are measuring the neutron intensity and cosmogenic isotope production
              rates as a function of latitude and elevation. The currently-funded one-year
              project will determine the attenuation lengths in the air for fast neutrons and
              for cosmogenic 36Cl (produced by fast and thermal neutrons) and 3He (produced
              by fast neutrons). These measurements are three out of eight that are necessary
              for a full characterization of altitude and depth dependence of cosmogenic
              production rates. The proposed project will provide the remaining five: the
              attenuation length in the air for thermal neutrons, and attenuation lengths in
              the rock for fast and thermal neutrons and for cosmogenic nuclides produced by
              fast and thermal neutrons. The goal of this proposal is to determine the
              relationships between the attenuation lengths obtained from measurements of
              cosmic-ray neutrons and of cosmogenic nuclides accumulated in rocks. This goal
              will be achieved by conducting the following measurements. (1) The thermal
              neutron intensity as a function of elevation, from sea level to 4000 m (top of
              Mauna Kea). To avoid the air-ground boundary, which affects thermal neutrons,
              the measurements will be conducted 300 m above the ground using bare neutron
              detector attached to a small pressure balloon. (2) The fast and thermal neutron
              intensity as a function of depth, from 0-100 cm in the rock. These measurements
              will be conducted in horizontal access holes drilled into the rock and by
              shielding the top of the instrument by slabs of basalt. (3) Cosmogenic 14C,
              36Cl and 3He concentrations in shallow (100 cm) vertical cores. Two cores will
              be studied, with 15 samples per core; sampling will concentrate in the top 20
              cm. Three specific objectives are: to determine the attenuation length for
              cosmogenic isotopes produced by fast neutrons; to define the depth function for
              thermal-neutron-produced isotopes; and to determine whether
              fast-neutron-produced isotopes are affected by the air-ground boundary.
              Isotopic and neutron data will be compared in order to define the relationship
              between the neutron intensity and cosmogenic production rates. This assessment
              is critical for developing the ability to calculate reliable cosmogenic
              production rates for locations where isotopic data are lacking. The results of
              this work will be used to construct an improved altitudinal scaling formulation
              for cosmogenic production rates, which will be an important contribution to the
              improvement of all cosmogenic dating methods.

