Title       : A Challenge for the New Millennium: Incorporating Hands-on Robotics into a
               Computer Science Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0126676

Award Number: 0126676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63306              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles N. Winton cwinton@unf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Florida
	      4567 St Johns Bluff Rd S
	      Jacksonville, FL  322242646    904/646-2666

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31)
Advances in microtechnology have increased the
              possibility for providing robotics
instruction emphasizing computing
              requirements rather than hardware requirements.
Curricula for a first course
              in robotics have been published to take advantage of this
technology. The
              purpose of this project is to take advantage of the existing work, adapting
it
              as necessary to produce an effective, hands-on course in robotics within the
              computer
science curriculum at the University of North Florida. To realize
              this objective, an
appropriate robotics laboratory is needed and a set of
              robotics laboratory projects must be
developed.
No general standards have as
              yet been developed for robotics technology. A major
inhibitor for introducing
              robotics courses within computer science has been the uniqueness
of the
              fabrication requirements, which has largely confined the subject to
              engineering-
related programs with resources for robotics construction needs.
              Corresponding software
has been in short supply, and generally has relied on
              base-level programming in C or in
machine language. Existing robotics
              curricula for computer science that have been
developed have been constrained
              by the need to develop a lab and produce a viable lab
maintenance plan, all
              complicated by the fabrication issues. On the other hand, significant
progress
              has been made in reducing the complexity of electro-mechanical
              requirements,
allowing software issues for producing effective autonomous
              robots to receive increased
attention.
Robotics kits developed by the KISS
              Institute for Practical Robotics (KIPR) and
incorporated into this proposal at
              least partly redress the logistical issues and form the
basis for a robotics
              lab suitable for supporting a first course in robotics. To conduct the
course
              of instruction, an incremental series of hands-on exercises using the
              laboratory
facility must be developed and tested. The KISS Institute will be
              called upon to both
evaluate overall project outcomes and to promulgate
              materials developed for the project
(the Institute is a non-profit national
              corporation that among its objectives seeks to
advance the state of robotics
              education).
