Title       : Digital Field Mapping using Pocket PC Computers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2002  
File        : a0126785

Award Number: 0126785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85564              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph P. Frizado frizado@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt S. Panter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Onasch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42)
Digital technology has revolutionized all of science and
              engineering. Nowhere has the impact been greater than Geosciences where immense
              quantities of spatial data, common to the discipline, can now be collected,
              manipulated, and analyzed using a powerful GIS. Digital mapping has grown from
              a convenience to a necessity and it is imperative that students be exposed to
              this technology at an early stage in their education. We are integrating
              digital technology into a traditional Geology summer field camp curriculum by
              adapting an inexpensive Pocket PC computer, GPS receiver, and widely available
              software for use as a complete digital field mapping system. Our goal is to
              enhance the basic skills necessary for fieldwork with digital technologies to
              bring students to the forefront of the digital revolution. To accomplish this
              goal, we are adapting existing exercises (Onasch and Frizado, 1996; Brimhall,
              2000) and developing new ones for our summer field course. This project builds
              on the successes of our pioneering effort in integrating technology in a field
              course funded by NSF six years ago. We believe the new curriculum is making
              fieldwork more efficient and accurate, extending what can be accomplished in
              the field, and reinforcing important concepts and methodologies. Our curriculum
              can be implemented by other schools through the use of digital products of the
              project including mapping exercises in GIS format, templates for various field
              exercises, references sources in eBook format, and a roadside geology GIS, all
              of which are available on CD-ROM or from our website.
