Title       : Motivating Geometry through Computation and Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0126687

Award Number: 0126687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Calvin L. Williams                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73654              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Finn david.finn@rose-hulman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21)

The standard undergraduate geometry courses are
              principally designed for pre-service teachers and prospective research
              mathematicians. Such courses are normally not of interest to students in the
              technical oriented fields of engineering, computer science, and the applied
              mathematical sciences. This proof of concept proposal develops course materials
              for an applied geometry course for students pursuing degrees in engineering,
              computer science, and the applied mathematical sciences. Also, interactive
              course materials that can be used in such an introductory geometric modeling
              course and that can be used in the pre-requisite calculus courses are
              developed.

Effective courses utilize the current skills and abilities of the
              students in developing new skills and in developing an understanding of new
              concepts. In geometry, the crucial abilities tend to be somewhat intuitive, as
              geometry is similar to a language. The current generations of students tend to
              have an underdeveloped geometric intuition, possibly because they have played
              more with virtual reality than physical reality. However, there is a geometric
              intuition in virtual reality, which is not equivalent to geometric intuition of
              physical reality. In order to use their virtual geometric intuition, this
              project develops materials aimed at unifying these two diverse varieties of
              geometric intuition, by using both modern technology (computers and the
              internet) together with the traditional tools of geometry (compass,
              straightedge and physical models). In addition, the materials are interactive,
              as it is important to engage the students with the material. 



