Title       : Comprehensive and Coordinated Curriculum Development of Molecular Biology and
               Biochemistry Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2002      
File        : a0126789

Award Number: 0126789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon K. Lawrance SLawrance@otterbein.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph R. Sachleben  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Otterbein College
	      
	      Westerville, OH  43081    614/890-3000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61) This project is a collaborative effort of biology and
              chemistry faculty to develop curricula in Molecular Biology and Biochemistry.
              Objectives are to: 1) enhance the complementary nature of these two programs
              via team teaching and the utilization of state-of-the-art equipment for DNA and
              protein analysis, thereby effecting reform and refinement of courses throughout
              the four years of the programs; 2) integrate problem solving investigative
              approaches to learning in a developmental fashion throughout the four years,
              and in so doing encourage student research; 3) bring curricula into the 21st
              century of genomics and proteomics. To accomplish these goals the project is
              adapting successful approaches of several NSF funded projects. The activities
              in this proposal include development of new courses including an integrated
              Molecular Biology and Biochemistry senior seminar, implementation of new
              inquiry based laboratory experiences in a variety of courses across the
              curricula, team teaching, enhanced coordination of the two programs,
              acquisition of state-of-the-art equipment for teaching and research. A major
              focus is to promote undergraduate research in these areas, encouraging students
              to participate in interdisciplinary projects that involve faculty from
              chemistry and life sciences. Workshops to disseminate the results of the
              project include one for a general audience of high school teachers and college
              faculty, and one for a specialized audience of science students and faculty.
              The expected outcomes include complementary state-of-the-art curricula that
              encourages and enables excellence in student research in Molecular Biology and
              Biochemistry and fosters the development of students who will go on to graduate
              work and employment in the burgeoning fields of Molecular Biology and
              Biochemistry.
