Title       : ROLE Proposal: Understanding in Science: Eyetracking Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0126265

Award Number: 0126265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregg E. Solomon                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $849586             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer Wiley jwiley@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan R. Goldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur C. Graesser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Habits of mind that support the analysis, evaluation, synthesis, and
              integration of information are increasingly important in the information age. 
              This project focuses on how, when, and why such habits of mind might be
              acquired and developed. Prior research has shown that inquiry-based learning
              environments can support deeper understanding of science content, but there is
              little systematic work thus far on the process by which students achieve deep
              understanding in these contexts.  Even less is known about how to support the
              development of a critical stance.  A critical stance supports the active
              evaluation of information and the detection of inconsistencies that in turn
              help direct deeper processing of information through explanatory reasoning.
              

This project explores the role of learning environment and task in
              supporting a critical stance toward scientific information. We go beyond
              current efforts by employing a variety of processing measures that tap on-line
              representation and understanding, including verbal reports (gathered by having
              students think out loud as they read and write) and eye movement patterns
              (monitoring the fixations of the eye on different parts of texts as students
              read). In combination, these measures along with a number of comprehension
              measures will provide a particularly rich set of data as we pursue two lines of
              research. Our goal in the first line of research is to examine when people
              develop a critical stance toward scientific subject matter, and the specific
              behaviors that promote better understanding. In the second set of studies, we
              are interested in whether the adoption of a critical stance toward scientific
              subject matter can be supported through a computerized collaborative
              tutor.

These studies represent an important first step in identifying the
              cognitive processes that are enabling understanding as students read scientific
              web pages, and the contexts and tasks that will allow novice readers to become
              critical consumers of scientific communications in both formal and informal
              learning contexts.

