Title       : Integration of Stable Isotopes across the Sciences (ISIS): Instrumentation for
               BioGeoChemistry and Environmental Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a0126706

Award Number: 0126706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90360              (Estimated)
Investigator: Renate L. Gebauer rgebauer@keene.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven D. Bill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy T. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Keene State College
	      229 Main
	      Keene, NH  034350001    603/352-1909

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
This project is a multidisciplinary effort to integrate
              stable isotope analytical techniques into the science curriculum at Keene State
              College as a means to (1) motivate student learning; (2) involve them into the
              process of scientific investigation and develop their scientific and technical
              skills; and (3) increase their understanding of important concepts in the
              biological, geological, and environmental field. The project is designed to
              promote science education for students who at Keene State College are composed
              of a large proportion of first generation students, and in Biology, Geology,
              and Environmental Studies have 54 % women. Adapting exemplary models from
              several other institutions (Dartmouth College, Saint Louis University, and
              University of Utah) and the literature, student centered inquiry-based field
              and laboratory exercises are being designed that use stable isotopes to address
              scientifically interesting questions and highlight the interconnection between
              classes such as Ecology and Evolution, Environmental Geology, Glacial Geology,
              Stratigraphy, Hydrogeology, Paleontology, Geochemistry, Physiological Ecology,
              and Community and Ecosytems Ecology. In addition, stable isotope analysis is a
              critical component in student-faculty cooperative research projects through
              Independent Study and the Environmental Studies Junior/Senior Seminar. The
              acquisition of an isotope ratio mass spectrometer along with vacuum sample
              preparation lines is necessary because it allows us to complete the stable
              isotope analysis within the timeframe of a course (commercial analysis can take
              4-12 months) and enables students to participate in the entire process of the
              investigation. The project is being evaluated using a combination of pre- and
              post-course questionnaires as well as a team of experienced external
              evaluators.
