Title       : Instrumental Methods Across the Chemistry Curriculum with Emphasis on
               Macromolecular Structure Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0126715

Award Number: 0126715
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52166              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela Artz partz@alb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frieda Texter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Scheirer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christian Hamann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albright College
	      13th & Exeter Sts.
	      Reading, PA  19604    215/921-2381

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

We are enhancing our undergraduate curriculum by adapting and
              implementing into our chemistry and biochemistry courses projects which make
              use of our newly acquired CD spectropolarimeter. Our primary emphasis is to
              develop an integrated biophysical chemistry laboratory course that involve a
              series of projects focused on the investigation of macromolecular structure and
              function using the CD instrumentation. We are also integrating CD
              instrumentation into our sophomore and higher level laboratories and in ongoing
              student-faculty research projects. The project-based biophysical laboratory
              represents a forum for investigation of macromolecular structure and function
              by instrumental means. Aspects of polypeptide and DNA structure are being
              examined using the CD spectrometer. In sophomore Organic chemistry, students
              use the CD instrumentation to determine the absolute configuration of chiral
              compounds. Additionally, we are adapting a project-oriented experiment from the
              J. Chem. Educ. in which our students in advanced organic chemistry use the CD
              instrumentation to determine the absolute configuration of alpha amino acids
              following completion of an organometallic synthesis. Coupled with our 200 MHz
              NMR and the UV/vis spectrophotometer, students in the biophysical chemistry
              course investigate the thermodynamics of protein and DNA structures. The
              overarching goal of our project is to enhance our students' problem solving
              skills in chemistry and biochemistry through incorporation of modern
              instrumentation and to enable them to seek varied approaches to the solution of
              scientific problems. 

