Title       : Validities of Standards-Based Science Inquiry Assessments: Implementation Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2002  
File        : a0126352

Award Number: 0126352
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1824999            (Estimated)
Investigator: Edys S. Quellmalz edys.quellmalz@sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Geneva D. Haertel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
               
To gather evidence about large-scale assessment practices, SRI International
              proposed a research study to NSF to examine the validities of standards-based
              science inquiry assessment. In response to negotiating questions from the REPP
              program, SRI restructured the scope of work of the originally proposed study
              into two phases:  Design and Implementation.  

SRI was funded to conduct the
              Design Study in July, 1999. Teams of nationally recognized experts studied the
              validities of science item formats used in three of the nation's most
              influential large-scale science assessments-NAEP, TIMSS, and New Standards. 
              The research teams conducted three distinct, but coordinated, studies including
              an Alignment Study, a Cognitive Analysis Study, and an Empirical Study.  When
              completed, the Design Study will integrate methodologies and preliminary
              findings from the three studies.  Results of the Design Study have contributed
              to the design and methodologies of the proposed Implementation Study.  
The
              Implementation Study will permit an intensive analysis of science items and
              tasks that have been used in large-scale science assessments at the national,
              as well as the state level; an in-depth examination of the performances of a
              large and diverse sample of students; and the application of powerful
              methodologies that were refined during the Design Study.  The specific goals of
              the Implementation Study are to: (1) develop a framework for characterizing the
              design features of item/task formats that aim to elicit different types of
              science learning, (2) conduct a study of the alignment of selected assessment
              questions and exercise formats from existing reference and extended
              investigation assessments with the National Science Education Standards, (3)
              conduct analyses of the cognitive demands placed on learners when solving
              different types of items/tasks,  (4) conduct an empirical study of the
              validities of different types of assessment formats, in particular, the
              instructional sensitivity of the different assessment formats, and (5) develop
              prototype designs of multi-level assessment systems that would provide more
              comprehensive measures of students' science knowledge and inquiry strategies. 
              

Benefits that are likely to flow from the Implementation Study will include
              robust methodologies and procedures to support the conduct of future studies of
              inquiry-based science assessment. Procedural pitfalls and item and test design
              considerations will be identified that can guide the research community and
              state and local education agencies in the design of better validity studies. In
              addition, we will draw implications of student learning opportunities for the
              design of science inquiry achievement studies. The Implementation Study will
              provide confirmatory evidence of what particular items and item/task formats
              intend to test and student's actual reasoning and explanations of how
              assessment formats call on different kinds and levels of science knowledge and
              inquiry. Finally, we intend to integrate these findings to develop guidelines
              for how educators may combine reference exam results with data from other exam
              formats to communicate science achievement levels and make policy decisions
              about professional development, curriculum, and assessment reforms.


