Title       : Laboratory Adaptations for an Undergraduate Optics Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a0126825

Award Number: 0126825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42726              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew S. Walhout mwalhout@calvin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Van Baak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Calvin College
	      3201 Burton, S. E.
	      Grand Rapids, MI  49546    616/957-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) A new optics initiative at Calvin College is providing students
              with marketable technical
training in the optical sciences and introduces an
              optics concentration and an optical-
technology minor into the physics
              curriculum. The programs target students in physics
and engineering, as well
              as pre-service teachers preparing to teach science in high school.
Curricular
              changes include the reconfiguration of several physics courses and
              the
introduction of an intermediate-level course entitled Phys 246: Waves,
              Optics, and
Optical Technology. Based on a mentor/apprentice pedagogical
              model, this course will
make use of a fully integrated lab-plus-lecture
              format, an approach with which Calvin's
science-education specialists have
              already had great success in courses for pre-service
elementary school
              teachers. The new pedagogical method will also influence the way in
which
              students are mentored in a new upper-level lab course, Phys 383-384:
              Advanced
Optics Laboratory. The project involves adaptations of labs for both
              the intermediate
and the advanced courses, so that the optics initiative can
              effectively address its two-fold
goal of cultivating technological knowledge
              and skill and providing a fresh model of
teaching by hands-on inquiry.
The
              labs are adapted from labs used at other institutions and from the
research
              projects of the PI and Co-PI. The curriculum for Phys 246 is taken largely
              from
a course at the University of Maryland taught by Dr. Wendell T. Hill, who
              is
providing advice on a continuing basis. Certain individual labs (at both
              intermediate and
advanced levels) are based on existing experiments and input
              from faculty at Caltech,
Harvard, Harvey Mudd College, and the National
              Institute of Standards and Technology.
Still others are a natural outgrowth of
              the PI's research on laser-cooled and trapped
atoms and plasma diagnostics and
              the Co-PI's research on diode-laser applications and
spectroscopy.

