Title       : A Multidisciplinary Control Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a0126709

Award Number: 0126709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Demetriou mdemetri@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59)
This project is establishing a multidisciplinary,
              laboratory based undergraduate control curriculum across engineering
              departments at Worcester Polytechnic Institute. The lab is being shared by
              students in Electrical and Computer Engineering, Biomedical Engineering,
              Mechanical Engineering, Manufacturing Program and Aerospace Program. Due to its
              flexibility stemming from the modular nature of the instrumentation comprising
              the four work stations requested here, the multidisciplinary
              controls/mechatronics laboratory borrows and adapts pedagogical elements that
              have been successfully implemented at other institutions. Prevalent themes
              include controlling physical devices as was implemented at the University of
              Urbana-Champaign, and controlling of smart structures as tested at Virginia
              Polytechnic Institute. A major influence comes from a paper by D.S. Bernstein
              where the important aspects of enhancing undergraduate control education at the
              University of Michigan at Ann Arbor were laid out. 

The curriculum is being
              redesigned to incorporate an extensive laboratory component using the requested
              equipment. This allows students to become proficient in state-of-the-art
              real-time data acquisition and processing instrumentation, digital control
              implementation, and vibration testing. The physical devices that are controlled
              change every two years and are designed by WPI students pursuing their Major
              Qualifying Project (MQP). The MQP is a WPI degree requirement that is
              equivalent to a three course workload that leads to a written report and oral
              presentation and which is equivalent to a Bachelor's thesis.

Project results
              are being disseminated at the Project Presentation Day in which graduating
              seniors present their MQP projects to the WPI community; during the annual
              campus visits of local (inner city) K-12 students which WPI already has
              established a leadership in encouraging K-12 students to pursue careers in STEM
              disciplines; through presentations/proceedings at control and engineering
              education conferences.

