Title       : Discovering rRNA and Homeobox Genes by DNA Sequencing and Bioinformatics in an
               Undergraduate Molecular Biology Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2001  
File        : a0126409

Award Number: 0126409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81328              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chester Fornari cfornari@depauw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DePauw University
	      313 South Locust Street
	      Greencastle, IN  461350037    765/658-4800

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
 
This project is adapting a laboratory model
              presented by Dr. Adele Wolfson at a PKAL workshop. In an attempt to look at
              questions on how sequence data is obtained, and how can it yield new knowledge
              and understanding about the structure, function, organization, and evolution of
              genes and proteins while providing a genuine research experience for students,
              this project will: (1) enhance a mid-level Molecular Biology course for
              undergraduate biology and chemistry majors by developing an inquiry-based,
              project-driven series of five laboratory modules in Recombinant DNA technology
              and Bioinformatics; and (2) create a Molecular Genetics and Bioinformatics
              (MGB) laboratory facility for Biology and Chemistry students engaged in
              collaborative research projects. Each laboratory module consists of linked
              experiments, and the modules constitute a semester-long project in the
              isolation and analysis of rRNA genes and homeobox genes from 3 sources: the
              nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, the closely related microscopic invertebrate
              Brachionus plicatilis (a rotifer), and an unknown organism for identification
              by rRNA gene sequence homology. The modules include specific experiments in DNA
              isolation, primer design and optimization, polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
              cloning and sequencing PCR products from rRNA and homeobox gene families, and
              comparative bioinformatic analysis of sequenced DNA for both molecular
              phylogeny (rRNA genes) and function (homeobox genes). A final module includes
              formal reports and presentations in multimedia formats (talks and posters). The
              simultaneous use of model and non-model experimental organisms gives students
              an experience in how new knowledge is systematically generated through
              controlled experimentation. The objective is to offer students the opportunity
              not only to explore documented concepts in a model organism, but also to apply
              these concepts and experimental practices to discover new knowledge about other
              organisms through testing of specific hypotheses. The proposed MGB facility
              will contribute not only to the biology departmen's curriculum, but also to a
              newly developed curriculum in the chemistry department and an anticipated major
              in Biochemistry. This plan also initiates a curricular and programmatic shift
              toward interdisciplinary interactions between the two departments.

