Title       : Oligocene and Lower Miocene Calcareous Nannofossil Biostratigraphy and
               Paleoceanography of the Ross Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0126170

Award Number: 0126170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90242              (Estimated)
Investigator: David K. Watkins dwatkins1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,9150,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0126170
Watkins

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a study of
              calcareous nannofossils in cores from the Ross Sea. Much of the direct evidence
              of the early history of Cenozoic glaciation on Antarctica comes from cores that
              were drilled in the waters of the Ross Sea. One set of these cores was drilled
              by rigs mounted on the fast ice that rings the southern part of the Ross Sea,
              just to the north of the Ross Ice Shelf. These include the CIROS-1 hole and
              Cape Roberts Project (CRP) holes 2 and 3, which cored thick sections of
              Oligocene and lower Miocene sedimentary rocks deposited within about 15 km
              offshore of the glaciated coast of Victoria Land. These clastic rocks include
              sandstones, siltstones, mudstones, conglomerates and diamictite that indicate
              glaciers reached sea level by the Oligocene and were very close (or actually on
              top of) the site of deposition for all or part of the Oligocene and early
              Miocene. A second set of cores, drilled by the Deep Sea Drilling Project (DSDP)
              drilling vessel Glomar Challenger includes Site 270, located at the same
              latitude (77 degrees) as CIROS and CRP, but more than 300 km away from the
              nearest source of glacial sediment. The Oligocene - lower Miocene sedimentary
              sequence at this site is thinner and more fine-grained, but contains abundant
              evidence of nearby ice in the form of ice rafted debris (IRD). A second DSDP
              Site (274), located some 8 degrees latitude north, contains a Oligocene and
              lower Miocene dominated by diatomaceous sediment including mud and ooze,
              reflecting its largely open oceanic position. These four drill-holes form a
              latitudinal and paleoenvironmental transect to investigate the surface water
              history of the Ross Sea using calcareous nannofossils.

Calcareous
              nannofossils, the fossil remains of coccolithophorid algae that secrete calcite
              skeletal plates, will be used in two ways to examine the Ross Sea: 1)
              Paleoceanographic reconstruction - The distribution of the coccolithophorid
              algae is strongly controlled by the thermal structure of the surface water
              mass, making their fossils sensitive indicators of past water mass temperature.
              This is especially useful in an area that is dominated by sediments with too
              little calcite to use isotopic methods of estimating water temperatures.
              Analysis of the calcareous nannofossils by statistical paleoecologic methods
              will provide a temperature history of the Ross Sea surface waters for a period
              of geological time characterized by fluctuating ocean temperatures and partial
              or ephemeral continental ice sheets. In addition, because of the sensitivity
              these phytoplankton are known to have to abnormal salinity, the analysis of the
              assemblages from deep ocean to the mouths of the Victoria Land glaciers may
              provide a new way to estimate the meltwater outflow of the evolving East
              Antarctic Ice Sheet. 2) Biostratigraphy - The rapid rate of evolution of the
              coccolithophorid algae through the mid-Cenozoic, coupled with their widespread
              distribution in the oceans, provides the means of age dating the sediments that
              contain their fossils. The numerical ages of extinction and speciation events
              have been well documented, providing a means to accurately and precisely date
              the sedimentary sequences in the Ross Sea and, thus, the events responsible for
              the deposition. Because of the excellent calibration of calcareous nannofossil
              biostratigraphy to the time scale, these fossils offer the possibility of
              constraining the paleomagnetic stratigraphy and other fossil biostratigraphies
              (such as the largely endemic Antarctic shelf diatoms) that occur in these
              Oligocene and lower Miocene sections. If successful, this work will have
              important, and wide reaching ramifications to paleoceanographic research that
              seeks to understand the role of the Antarctic ice sheet in global systems.

