Title       : Success by Design: Building Faculty Capacity to Improve Curriculum and
               Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0126969

Award Number: 0126969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome E. Haky hakyj@fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Bleicher  (Principal Investigator former)
              R. G. Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Brooks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diane M. Baronas-Lowell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
Faculty in the Colleges of Science and Education at
              Florida Atlantic University (FAU) have been working collaboratively for three
              years to address problems of student achievement and retention in first
              semester courses in Chemistry, Biology, and Physics. Through this work they
              have recognized the need to improve the design of course, curriculum, and
              alignment of course components. This project is now entering a phase where
              further development is likely to have benefits for a number of universities in
              the US. We are engaged in (1) conceptualizing a "Curriculum Design Model" (CDM)
              to serve as a framework for the development of instructional modules; (2)
              applying this CDM to the development and trial of 5 prototype instructional
              modules in chemistry, biology, and physics; (3) evaluating the CDM in terms of
              student achievement in these 5 modules, improved student motivation, and
              stronger student interest in science; (4) institutionalizing a process of
              faculty professional development; and (5) designing, running, and evaluating
              undergraduate peer leader training. 
There are three main design features of
              the CDM for introductory science courses, summarized as:
1. "Less is more:"
              Faculty should cover the most important topics in greater depth, emphasize
              relationships between core concepts, and design instructional activities to
              give learners practice in representing their understanding of core concepts.
              
2. "Scaffolding learning:" Novice learners cannot be expected to direct their
              attention to core concepts in a discipline, rather, they require extensive
              guidance from faculty to deepen their thinking and understanding. Curriculum
              should be designed to provide a "scaffold" on which to promote this kind of
              learning.
3. "Peer learning:" The learning environment should allow and
              encourage students to engage in mutual discussion in order to construct and
              deepen their own conceptual understanding. 

The modules and this
              instructional practice are being field tested with Florida Atlantic University
              and Palm Beach Community College students. Based on the evaluation of these
              field tests, the Curriculum Design Model is being refined, and further
              development of the prototype instructional modules undertaken. Mechanisms for
              extensive collaborations have been established with community colleges in the
              area through the Region V Area Center for Educational Enhancement, which is a
              local office of the Florida Department of Education. 

