Title       : Integrative Studies of Cognition in Development: Planning for a Research Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0126065

Award Number: 0126065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91637              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Berndt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Kail  (Principal Investigator former)
              Lynn Okagaki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1358,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Integrative Studies of Cognition in Development: Planning for a
              Research Center 

Robert Kail, Thomas Berndt, & Lynn Okagaki

	The aim of
              this project is to plan a Center for Integrative Studies of Cognition in
              Development. The Center is intended to bring together experts in cognitive
              development, family relations, social development, and childhood socialization
              for the purpose of conducting research that integrates these diverse
              theoretical and research perspectives. The Center's research will focus on the
              development of children's understanding of mathematics and science in the
              context of their relationships with parents and peers. The Center is needed
              because scientists who study basic cognitive processes rarely consider the
              social context of children's lives. Conversely, scientists who study children's
              social contexts either ignore cognitive processes or examine forms of thinking
              specific to the social domain while giving little attention to basic cognitive
              processes. Consequently, a scientific knowledge base of children's development
              and learning is fragmented and incomplete.  The goal of the Center will be to
              increase understanding of children's learning, particularly of math and
              science, by supporting multidisciplinary studies of children's cognition and
              social relationships. To specify the plan for the Center, a workshop will be
              conducted at which researchers from several institutions will discuss
              strategies for the integrative study of cognition in development. Some of the
              workshop participants will be invited to join the Center's core research group,
              while others will be asked to serve on an Advisory Board. With the guidance of
              the Advisory Board, the core scientific group will prepare a complete proposal
              for the Center for submission to the NSF in 2002. 


