Title       : Children's Research Initiative: Infant Perception Of Referencing Through Dynamic
               Gestures During Early Lexical Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0126594

Award Number: 0126594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174036             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia Zukow-Goldring zukow@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1358,1698,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Collaborative Proposal: Infant Perception of Referencing through
              Dynamic Gestures
 During Early Lexical Development

Patricia Zukow-Goldring,
              University of Southern California


The main objective of this proposal is
              to test hypotheses from a perceptually-based theory to determine how infants
              initially learn to understand what words mean. Underlying this approach is
              careful, longitudinal observation of both English- and Spanish-speaking
              caregiver practices in ecologically valid environments, an often unacknowledged
              but indispensable step in determining hypotheses worthy of testing. These
              caregivers pattern what they say and do to mark the correspondence between
              words and what they represent as they interact with their infants during very
              early stages of word learning. The goal of this investigation is to pinpoint
              the relation between this perceptual information and the infants' emergent
              abilities crucial to early word learning through a set of experimental studies.
              These studies will test the hypothesis that the types of perceptual structure
              or information that caregivers present in gesture and speech attract attention
              by making the link between a word and its referent perceptually accessible and
              easy to notice. This research will examine a set of semantic functions typical
              of infants' earliest word learning that includes nouns (objects), verbs (object
              motions), and adjectives (object attributes). The sample of Spanish-speaking
              families will be comprised of infants whose mothers have received a high school
              diploma or a college education. Such a sample will extend the generality of
              this theory beyond the usual English-speaking, middle-class population.
              Students assisting with the project should gain an appreciation of a scientific
              approach to psychology and a greater interest in pursuing graduate studies. For
              the Latino student-assistants, this proposal offers the additional opportunity
              to contribute their cultural knowledge and native language expertise to the
              realization of this research. Findings from this research would have important
              implications for theories of language development as well as great potential
              for practitioners. A better understanding of how children learn that words
              refer to aspects of ongoing events can serve as a basis for refining teaching
              methods and enhancing student comprehension in early educational settings. Not
              only first and second-language learners might benefit, but language-delayed and
              perceptually impaired children as well. 	


