Title       : Integrating High-Field NMR Spectroscopy throughout the Undergraduate Chemistry
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0126758

Award Number: 0126758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121834             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith B. Cain CainJB@mail.vmi.edu.  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tappey H. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daren Timmons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanton Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Military Inst
	      
	      Lexington, VA  24450    703/463-6311

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
The purpose of this project is to introduce modern multinuclear
              Fourier Transform Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy experiments
              throughout the undergraduate chemistry curriculum. Experiments are drawn from
              pedagogical and research literature and are adapted to specific courses. They
              are designed to present students with a breadth of hands-on NMR experiences to
              illustrate the power and variety of NMR techniques. Laboratory experiments
              begin with an introduction to 1H NMR spectroscopy in the freshman year. The
              sophomore year uses a more rigorous treatment of 1H and 13C NMR and, in the
              junior year, students receive an introduction to the power of NMR as a method
              to study kinetics, nuclear spin relaxation mechanisms, and multiple pulse
              experiments, and they explore instrumental factors. In their senior year,
              students use a variety of sophisticated one and two-dimensional NMR techniques
              (COSY, HETCOR, DEPT, INADEQUATE) to determine the structure and properties of
              spectrally complex molecules. This project is designed to positively impact the
              science education of all chemistry and biology majors. In addition, the NMR is
              being used extensively by students involved in undergraduate research. Students
              from nearby Southern Virginia University also are making use of the instrument
              in several of their courses and through their participation in undergraduate
              research.

