Title       : Regional Enhancement of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Instruction in Eastern
               Kentucky Undergraduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2001  
File        : a0126712

Award Number: 0126712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53757              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Blankenbuehler m.blanken@morehead-st.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harold W. Cain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Hunt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ann Macintosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Herb Hedgecock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Morehead State University
	      University Boulevard
	      Morehead, KY  40351    606/783-2221

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
The effective instruction of Fourier Transform Nuclear Magnetic
              Resonance (FT-NMR) theory and its applications is dependent upon the
              availability of modern and reliable instrumentation. The goal of this project
              is to enhance the understanding and mastery of current FT-NMR applications and
              theory at the undergraduate and community college level in Eastern Kentucky
              through multiple hands-on experiences. Following the acquisition of an
              Anasazi-upgraded NMR, students are operating the FT-NMR instrument as well as
              interpreting the data individually and in group experiments. The students are
              learning to apply their knowledge of FT-NMR to a variety of standard and
              advanced FT-NMR techniques. The level of FT-NMR education is being increased
              for students at Maysville and Prestonsburg Community Colleges in Eastern
              Kentucky by hosting visits/experiments by those students who in the past did
              not have routine access to NMR instrumentation. These students are involved in
              group experiments with current Morehead State University students. Students'
              education at all levels, freshman to senior, is being impacted by the new
              instrumentation, with use of the instrument in organic chemistry courses for
              both science majors and nonscience majors, inorganic chemistry, analytical
              chemistry, and advanced courses including independent research. Experiments are
              being adapted from both the educational literature and the research
              literature.

