Title       : Architecture and Evolution of an Accretionary Orogen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a0126004

Award Number: 0126004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130083             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott E. Johnson johnsons@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Much of Earth's continental crust comprises Precambrian through Cenozoic
              orogens,
where preexisting rocks have been variably modified by metamorphism
              and deformation. Owing
to the association between collisional tectonic events
              and mountain building, this long record of
orogenesis provides the most
              accessible means of reconstructing paleotectonic settings and
events that have
              shaped our planet. Although the Appalachian mountains are widely used
              to
illustrate Earth's tectonic evolution and associated orogenesis,
              collisional processes and events
that drove the Ordovician Taconian orogeny in
              the Quebec Maine segment of the northern
Appalachians remain enigmatic.
              Deformational features in this region cannot be satisfactorily
related to a
              specific convergent setting or collisional event(s) because the nature of the
              eastern
(present coordinates) Laurentian margin during the early Paleozoic is
              poorly understood.
Interpretations are divided as to whether the orogeny was
              caused by ophiolite emplacement,
island-arc collision, or microcontinent
              collision. Because the Taconian orogeny initiated the
Appalachian
              mountain-building cycle, understanding its architecture and evolution is
              essential
for understanding the Appalachians as a whole.

The PI proposes to
              investigate structural, metamorphic, and temporal relationships among the
rock
              units that make up the Chain Lakes massif and Boil Mountain ophiolite in order
              to test
competing models and hypotheses for the Taconian orogeny in the
              northern Appalachians. Their
multidisciplinary approach incorporates mapping,
              structural, microstructural, metamorphic, and
geochronological studies.
              Integrating field and laboratory studies, the PI will establish: (a)
              the
relative and absolute timing of metamorphic and deformational events
              within the Chain Lakes
massif, (b) the crystallization age of the mafic
              portion of the Boil Mountain ophiolite, (c) the age
and kinematics of
              ophiolite emplacement, (d) whether mafic volcanic rocks near the
              ophiolite
represent a genetic part of the ophiolite, and (e) the age of
              possibly rift-related mafic dikes in the
Chain Lakes massif. The geochronology
              portion of the project will include in-situ U-Pb analyses
of monazite to
              provide high temporal resolution for metamorphic events,
              small-number
multigrain U-Pb analyses of zircon or baddeleyite from gabbro to
              determine the crystallization
age of the ophiolite, U-Pb analyses of zircon to
              establish the age of the dikes, and laser step-
heating 40 Ar- 39 Ar analysis
              of muscovite to determine the minimum ophiolite emplacement age.
The PI will
              compare his results with existing interpretations of the Thetford Mines
              ophiolite and
overlying units in southern Quebec, the Maquereau Dome in the
              Gaspe Peninsula, and the
Dashwoods Subzone in Newfoundland in order to
              evaluate temporal and spatial relationships
among these potentially
              correlative units. Because the extents and boundaries of terranes
              are
fundamental components of the tectonic models, testing the terrane
              relationships will test the
models. The work will clarify the nature of the
              Taconian orogeny in the northern Appalachians,
and will bear on conceptual
              models describing Iapetan paleogeographic reconstruction and
collisional
              accretionary processes.
