Title       : Integrated Laser and Computer Exercises for Physical Chemistry Lab Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2002  
File        : a0126761

Award Number: 0126761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27353              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean M. Standard standard@ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Quandt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Laser and computer technologies have revolutionized modern physical chemistry
              research over the past few decades as lasers now allow molecular processes and
              chemical reactions to be probed in unprecedented detail. Current research in
              computational chemistry provides a wealth of information related to molecular
              structure, energetics, and reactivity. Integrated laser experiments are being
              adapted and implemented into the physical chemistry laboratory sequence.
              Further, to bring relevance to the subject, the exercises are based on
              processes that are important in atmospheric chemistry. The specific exercises
              being adapted from the educational and research literature include studies of
              the reaction of oxygen atoms with propene and the reactions of hydroxyl radical
              with halocarbons. In the exercises, students are employing laser technology to
              make experimental measurements of the reactions followed by computational
              exercises and molecular modeling studies of the processes. These integrated
              laser, computational, and molecular modeling exercises merge research and
              teaching by utilization of the skills and research strengths of the principal
              investigators, specifically laser kinetics of environmentally important
              compounds and ab initio computational chemistry. Undergraduate students are
              employed to test the exercises and to provide feedback.

