Title       : The French Creek Watershed Research Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0126808

Award Number: 0126808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166449             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel O'Brien robrien@allegheny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Bowden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott A. Wissinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Allegheny College
	      520 North Main Street
	      Meadville, PA  16335    814/332-5380

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
Training undergraduate students to examine the complex
              interrelationships within our natural earth system requires improved
              collaboration across academic disciplines. In this project, Allegheny College
              faculty from the Departments of Biology, Chemistry, Environmental Science, and
              Geology are developing the French Creek Watershed (FCW) Research Program to
              provide an interdisciplinary approach to undergraduate natural science
              coursework and research. The instrumentation acquired is enabling solid and
              solution-phase analysis of critical biotic and abiotic watershed components.
              The FCW Research Program: 1) is using new analytical equipment to strengthen
              field investigations in undergraduate science classes at all instructional
              levels; 2) enhancing the caliber of student/faculty research within the College
              by markedly improving analytical capability and accuracy; 3) creating a program
              website, linked to a geographic information system (GIS), to serve as a
              centralized, institutional database for watershed information collected in
              courses and from student/faculty research efforts at Allegheny. The effort is
              an adaptation of a similar program at Shippensberg University. This program is
              enhancing the intellectual vigor of both undergraduate students and faculty by:
              1) improving analytical capability for coursework and research; 2) developing
              critical thinking and scientific skills within a regional watershed setting;
              and 3) fostering an interdisciplinary perspective in coursework and research
              via collaboration among disciplines. Dissemination of program design and
              results via the website, conference presentations, and publications will
              facilitate similar cooperative, interdisciplinary approaches at other
              institutions.
