Title       : Quantitative Biochemistry Laboratory Experiments: Introduction of Isothermal
               Titration Calorimetry and Real Time PCR in the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0126642

Award Number: 0126642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy K. Pogozelski pogozels@geneseo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lihua Jin  (Principal Investigator former)
              David K. Geiger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Boiani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Geneseo
	      
	      Geneseo, NY  14454    716/245-5211

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
The Department of Chemistry at the State University of New York
              College at Geneseo is modernizing its Biochemistry, Inorganic, Physical, and
              Analytical Chemistry laboratory curriculum with the purchase of an Isothermal
              Titration Calorimeter (ITC) and a Real-Time PCR Thermalcycler/Sequence
              Detector. The motivation stems from our strong desire to broaden our students'
              experience with modern biochemistry instrumentation, increase inquiry- and
              discovery-based laboratory experiments for active learning, and to improve
              participation in undergraduate research projects that we believe are an
              integral part of a chemistry or biochemistry education. Our ultimate goal is to
              produce students who are excited about science and who possess the necessary
              skills and problem-solving abilities to solve timely and important
              problems.

A number of discovery-based experiments utilizing the ITC and the
              Real-Time PCR Thermalcycler/Sequence Detector are being adapted from the
              research and/or education literature. Experiments utilizing the Real-Time PCR
              Thermalcycler are being carried out in the biochemistry laboratory. ITC
              experiments are being done in the Biochemistry, Inorganic and
              Physical/Analytical Laboratories. For example, ITC experiments on the study of
              molecular interactions, developed by Professor Lawrence Kaplan at Williams
              College (NSF DUE 9850820) and Professor Timothy Elgren at Hamilton College, NY
              (NSF-DUE 9951375), are being implemented into our biochemistry laboratory. Both
              Professor Kaplan and Professor Elgren have kindly shared their programs with us
              and have agreed to serve as test sites for our inquiry-based laboratories. We
              believe that inclusion of experiments using these instruments are significantly
              enhancing the education of our students at Geneseo.

