Title       : Multidisciplinary Use of an Atomic Absorption Spectrometer at an Undergraduate
               Women's College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0126982

Award Number: 0126982
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54239              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Granger granger@sbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Orvos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca K. Ambers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sweet Briar College
	      
	      Sweet Briar, VA  24595    804/381-6100

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99) Chemistry (12)

This project is implementing the use of
              atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) in the chemistry and environmental science
              curricula. Recent internal and external assessments of the chemistry program as
              well as the recent implementation of the environmental sciences program have
              demonstrated a gap in curricula as a result of students not using AAS in the
              laboratory. AAS has been established as a fundamental technique in the
              quantitative determination of trace metals. In order to implement AAS into six
              courses of the chemistry curriculum and one course of the environmental science
              curriculum, a number of experiments are being adapted and modified from the
              educational literature. Students are using AAS in general chemistry laboratory,
              environmental analytical chemistry laboratory, and then the intermediate
              laboratory I/II and advanced laboratory I/II sequence. In the ES program, AAS
              is used in the advanced environmental science laboratory. In addition, seniors
              are able to use AAS in their senior research projects that are required for
              graduation. Students learn the theoretical basis of AAS and also have extensive
              hands-on experience. This ensures proper training in AAS for chemistry and
              environmental science majors who go on to graduate school or are employed in
              the private or public sector.
