Title       : Paleoclimate Inferred from Lake Sediment Cores in Taylor Valley, Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0126270

Award Number: 0126270
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99790              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter T. Doran pdoran@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fabien Kenig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven L. Forman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Polar Programs, provides funds for a study of sediment cores from the McMurdo
              Dry Valley lakes. The Dry Valley lakes have a long history of fluctuating
              levels reflecting regional climate change. The history of lake level
              fluctuations is generally known from the LGM to early Holocene through 14C
              dates of buried organic matter in paleolake deposits. However, the youngest
              paleolake deposits available are between 8000 to 9000 14C yr BP, suggesting
              that lake levels were at or below current levels for much of the Holocene.
              Thus, any information about the lake history and climate controls for the
              Holocene is largely contained in bottom sediments. This project will attempt to
              extract paleoclimatic information from sediment cores for a series of
              closed-basin dry valley lakes under study by the McMurdo LTER site. This work
              involves multiple approaches to dating the sediments and use of several climate
              proxy approaches to extract century to millennial scale chronologies from
              Antarctic lacustrine deposits. This research uses knowledge on lake processes
              gained over the past eight years by the LTER to calibrate climate proxies from
              lake sediments. Proxies for lake depth and ice thickness, which are largely
              controlled by summer climate, are the focus of this work. This study focuses on
              four key questions: 1. How sensitively do dry valley lake sediments record
              Holocene environmental and climate variability? 2. What is the paleoclimatic
              variability in the dry valleys on a century and millennial scale throughout the
              Holocene? Especially, is the 1200 yr evaporative event unique, or are there
              other such events in the record? 3. Does a mid-Holocene (7000 to 5000 yr BP)
              climate shift occur in the dry valleys as documented elsewhere in the polar
              regions? 4. Is there evidence, in the dry valley lake record of the 1500 yr
              Holocene periodicities recently recognized in the Taylor Dome record?  Core
              collection will be performed with LTER support using a state-of-the-art
              percussion/piston corer system that has been used successfully to retrieve long
              cores (10 to 20 m) from other remote polar locations. Analyses to be done
              include algal pigments, biogenic silica, basic geochemistry, organic and
              inorganic carbon and nitrogen content, stable isotopes of carbon, nitrogen, and
              oxygen, carbonate phases, salt content and mineralogy, and grain size. In
              addition this project will pursue a multi-chronometer approach to assess the
              age of the core through optically-stimulated luminescence, 226Ra/230Th ,
              230Th/234U, and 14C techniques. New experimentation with U-series techniques
              will be performed to allow for greater precision in the dry valley lake
              sediments. Compound specific isotopes and lipid biomarkers , which are powerful
              tools for inferring past lake conditions, will also be assessed. Combined,
              these analyses will provide a new century to millennial scale continuous record
              of the Holocene climate change in the Ross Sea region.



