Title       : Advanced Microscopy Center for Undergraduate Course Development and Improvement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a0126505

Award Number: 0126505
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121388             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. J. Cosentino james.cosentino@millersville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry N. Reinking  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millersville University
	      PO Box 1002
	      Millersville, PA  17551    717/872-3820

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
Recent advances in microscopic techniques have
              provided scientists with new tools to understand cells and the tissues they
              comprise. A wide variety of fluorescent labels are now available to study
              cellular structure and function in both living and preserved cells. In
              addition, contrast enhancing optics and computerized image analysis provide
              advanced microscopy tools needed to prepare, observe and analyze the
              organization and function of tissues and cells. These techniques provide the
              opportunity to completely reinvent undergraduate courses that involve
              microscopy (e.g. Functional Histology) in such a way that will provide for
              cooperative, inquiry-based, learning and critical thinking among all students
              while giving them an experience in discovery-learning. The knowledge of tissue
              and cellular architecture thus gained will be particularly important to
              students planning to enter medical school, graduate school, or work as
              technicians in most biological laboratories. This project is incorporating
              these teaching techniques in a centralized advanced microscopy center that
              provides students with the facility and, through training in microtechniques
              and image analysis, the skills needed for more critical observation of
              biological phenomena by using the microscope as a tool of inquiry. In this way
              students are encouraged to develop research interests and are able to design
              and evaluate experiments in a scientifically meaningful way. This is being
              accomplished by incorporating experimentally advanced microscopic techniques
              across the undergraduate curriculum and in our undergraduate research programs
              for biology majors. The techniques are adapted from successful programs
              established at Kent State University (DUE grant # 9551341) and Fort Lewis
              College (DUE grant # 9980815), both of which have been established through NSF
              funding. These exemplary programs are being adapted so as to integrate these
              powerful teaching techniques with advanced microscopy technologies into our
              curriculum which is being modified for: 1) the establishment of a new
              "functional histology" course; 2) specific laboratory exercises across the
              biology curriculum; 3) two faculty workshops on advanced microscopy techniques
              and modern image analyses; 4) our pre-college teacher training programs and; 5)
              our academically talented minority high-school program.
