Title       : Seeing the Big Picture: Linking the Sciences and the Humanities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2002   
File        : a0126788

Award Number: 0126788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199952             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen Goldey goldeyes@wofford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Moss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles G. Bass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven B. Zides  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cecile McAninch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wofford College
	      North Church Street
	      Spartanburg, SC  29301    803/585-4821

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)
This institutional initiative for curriculum improvement
              is establishing freshman residential learning communities (LC) for non-science
              majors. Two sets of existing freshman courses, laboratory science for
              non-science majors (Science-104) and humanities seminar (Humanities-101), are
              being linked by a common theme to create multidisciplinary learning
              experiences. The project is an adaptation of several noteworthy educational
              innovations:
(1) Learning communities, such as the type described by the
              Association of American Colleges and Universities (AAC&U), "Use of Learning
              Communities in General Education." 
(2) The Wagner Plan (of Wagner College in
              NY), which stresses the general education program of a college as its learning
              keystone, and provides interdisciplinary, experiential learning in learning
              communities during the freshman year to help students integrate their knowledge
              and develop their academic priorities. 
(3) Multidisciplinary courses bridging
              science and the humanities. Some of these are derived from earlier NSF-NEH
              joint awards made under a program known as "Science and Humanities: Integrating
              Undergraduate Education." An example is courses developed and taught at Holyoke
              Community College under a 1993 grant "Interdisciplinary Learning Communities in
              the Humanities, Social Sciences, and Natural Science Courses." Others are
              derived from course materials being taught at SENCER workshops sponsored by the
              AAC&U. (SENCER = Science Education for New Civic Engagements and
              Responsibilities.)
A total of six learning communities (representing 12 new
              courses) are being developed and implemented during the two-year grant period.
              The "teaching team" for each LC consists of a scientist, a humanist, and two
              undergraduate teaching assistants. The three learning communities offered in
              the Fall of 2002 are "The Nature and Culture of Water (taught by faculty in
              biology and English), Cosmology and Ultimate Questions (physics and
              philosophy), and The Impact of Breakthroughs in Science and Medicine (biology
              and philosophy). Three new learning communities are being offered in the Fall
              of 2003. Two of these are Madness: Scientific and Literary Perspectives (taught
              by faculty in psychology and English), and Scientific Sleuthing and the Social
              Impact of Crime (chemistry and philosophy). A sixth learning community is being
              planned. Each LC will include open-ended scientific inquiry, experiential
              learning (emphasizing outreach to K-12 students), and extensive use of
              educational technology.
The program objectives are to 1) dispel the
              discipline-specific compartmentalization of knowledge and help students
              integrate information across disciplines, 2) acknowledge and further develop
              the creativity and teaching skills of gifted upperclassmen by including them as
              teaching partners, 3) inspire the freshmen to be active learners and the
              instructors to provide a more interactive learning environment, 4) emphasize
              the importance of the General Education program, 5) help first-year students
              focus their academic priorities, and 6) integrate student and faculty use of
              technology throughout the program. Each teaching team is participating in a
              two-week summer workshop followed by six weeks of collaborative course
              development. The workshops guide the teams in building successful learning
              communities and using the program evaluation plan. Each LC is maintaining a
              continuously evolving web page documenting the development, implementation, and
              evaluation of the program.
