Title       : Haptics-Augmented Undergraduate Engineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  2002    
File        : a0126739

Award Number: 0126739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74935              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Williams williar4@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Teresa Franklin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This CCLI-EMD Proof-of-concept has as its primary goal the integration of
              haptics technology into required undergraduate engineering courses to improve
              learning and teaching in the engineering program at the Ohio University.
              Haptics indicates force and touch feedback to the human from a computer.
              Commercially available haptic interfaces can greatly augment education: "
              feeling is believing". Teaching and learning can be more compelling, fun, and
              engaging with better student retention via the integration of haptics
              technology. Specifically, we are developing haptics-augmented software
              activities and Internet-based tutorials, and integrating these tools into
              undergraduate engineering physics and statics/dynamics courses. The PI has
              delivered similar products in the K-12 arena, sponsored by NASA.

Though this
              proof-of-concept haptics technology development and evaluation is taking place
              at Ohio University, we have a nationwide focus with a goal of systematic
              changing the nation's undergraduate engineering programs via integrated haptics
              technology and curriculum. The College of Engineering personnel are performing
              the haptics technology, software, and tutorial development. The College of
              Education personnel are leading the integration of the resulting technology
              into the undergraduate engineering curriculum, the transfer of project results
              to K-12 science and technology teacher preparation, and the project evaluation
              efforts at Ohio University. 

The deliverables for this project include
              prototype haptics-augmented PC software learning activities, HTML-based
              tutorials, and integrated curriculum for physics and statics/dynamics courses.
              Pilot tests on each of these courses will be conducted to evaluate project
              results. The dissemination of the results of this project will consist of
              conference papers and a journal article. Also, we will study the potential of
              commercially disseminating the products of the project nationwide. We will
              submit a full development proposal to NSF CCLI-EMD at the project
              conclusion.

Keywords: Haptics, haptics-augmented software, haptics
              technology

