Title       : Creating a Learning Community in a Freshman Design Course through Curriculum
               Coordination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a0126776

Award Number: 0126776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53770              (Estimated)
Investigator: Teodora Rutar Shuman teodora@seattleu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory S. Mason  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Adamson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Seattle University
	      900 Broadway
	      Seattle, WA  98122    206/626-6200

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Mechanical (56)
The importance of developing learning
              communities, where students interact with those outside their class, has
              recently been emphasized by NSF-DUE initiatives, which encourage interaction
              between high schools, community colleges and universities. The proposed project
              is designed to develop a learning community in a freshman engineering design
              course. The design course is being adopted from an established design
              curriculum, which emphasizes hands-on learning. Enhanced teamwork/communication
              components is being added by coordinating with a high school technology
              program, and a freshman engineering graphics course. Curriculums from all three
              courses are being coordinated, creating a learning community. Students from
              each course are participating in the design process at different levels. The
              primary design responsibility remains with the design class, however, design
              teams include students and facilities from the other courses.

The primary
              objectives of the coordinated curriculum are to: 
1. Develop communication
              skills necessary for meaningful technical interaction between colleagues with
              diverse educational backgrounds.
2. Develop students' awareness that material
              taught in one course is related and applied in other courses.
3. Develop
              communication and research skills within the design process early in students'
              careers.
4. Encourage high school students to pursue careers in science or
              engineering by engaging them in the design process.

An implementation of a
              unique short-term assessment process enables quick curricular changes in
              response to student needs. The project had generated much interest with local
              community colleges. Dissemination involves presentations at the regional
              meeting of universities and colleges, and local workshops.

