Title       : Integration of Research into Behavioral Neuroscience Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0126422

Award Number: 0126422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29886              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Siviy ssiviy@gettysburg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gettysburg College
	      North Washington Street
	      Gettysburg, PA  17325    717/337-6000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Psychology - Biological (71)
This project is enhancing learning experiences in
              behavioral neuroscience at the undergraduate level by providing opportunities
              for students to conduct sophisticated empirical research projects from the
              introductory level through senior-level independent research. This project is
              adapting an approach successfully developed in an NSF-funded project and used
              by Dr. Michael Kerchner of Washington College. Dr. Kerchner teaches students
              how to use an acoustic startle system in their projects, and makes research
              experiences more accessible at several levels of instruction. The goal of the
              current project is to provide the means by which students collect behavioral
              data efficiently and objectively. Students are able to collect more data in
              less time and focus more on the process of doing hypothesis-driven systematic
              research. By actively engaging in the scientific enterprise, students better
              understand concepts being covered in class and are better prepared for
              conducting advanced research in behavioral neuroscience. Two behavioral assays
              that are more commonly used in dedicated research environments are being
              adapted for use in several undergraduate courses in behavioral neuroscience.
              One of these systems allows for the video-tracking of individual animal
              movements as well as social interactions among pairs of rats (BM Spruijt, T
              Hol, & J Rousseau, "Approach, avoidance, and contact behavior of individually
              recognized animals automatically quantified with an imaging technique,"
              Physiology and Behavior, Vol. 51: 747-752, 1992). The other assay assesses
              pre-pulse inhibition of the acoustic startle response. These systems allow
              students in courses with and without a dedicated laboratory component to
              actively engage in the research process, working in small groups. Examples of
              research topics are age-related differences in social interactions and
              responsiveness to novelty (see LP Spear, "The adolescent brain and age-related
              behavioral manifestations," Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, Vol. 24:
              417-463, 2000); the role of brain monoamine systems in sensorimotor gating (see
              C Johansson, DM Jackson, J Zhang, & L Svensson, "Prepulse inhibition of
              acoustic startle, a measure of sensorimotor gating: Effects of antipsychotics
              and other agents in rats," Pharmacology Biochemistry and Behavior, Vol. 52:
              649-654, 1995); and assessing animal models of schizophrenia (MA Geyer, K
              Krebs-Thomson, DL Braff, & NR Swerdlow, "Pharmacological studies of prepulse
              inhibition models of sensorimotor gating deficits in schizophrenia: a decade in
              review," Psychopharmacology, Vol. 156: 117-154, 2001). Each of the pieces of
              equipment used to support this project are linked to the campus network and
              students take advantage of a web-based classroom support environment to load
              their data directly into a course web-site, where it is shared by the entire
              class. Creation of individual web-sites and on-line discussion about the data
              also occurs in this support environment. As students progress through the
              curriculum, they become increasingly familiar with the behavioral assays
              supported by this grant and the experiments that they work on become more
              open-ended and are more likely to yield novel findings. Consequently, students
              are more likely to experience the excitement associated with scientific
              discovery. The project is leading to changes in other courses in the curriculum
              and provides a model for other institutions that plan to integrate research
              experiences into undergraduate training in behavioral neuroscience. 

