Title       : The Scotia Arc GPS Project: Focus on the Antarctic Peninsula and South Shetland
               Islands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0126472

Award Number: 0126472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49833              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick W. Taylor fred@utig.ig.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian W. Dalziel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, provides funds and field support to continue a study
              of plate motions in the Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Sea region. The
              principal aim of the original "Scotia Arc GPS Project (SCARP)" was to determine
              motions of the Scotia Plate relative to adjacent plates and to measure crustal
              deformation along its margins with special attention to the South Sandwich
              microplate and Bransfield Strait extension. The focus of the present proposal
              is confined to the part of the SCARP project that includes GPS sites at
              Elephant Island, the South Shetland Islands and on the Antarctic Peninsula. The
              British Antarctic Survey provides data from two sites on the Scotia arc for
              this project. The northern margin of the Scotia Plate is not included herein
              because that region is not covered under Polar Programs. A separate proposal
              will request support for re-measuring SCARP GPS stations in South America. With
              regard to the Antarctic Peninsula area, continuously operating GPS stations
              were established at Frei Base, King George Island (in 1996) and at the
              Argentine Base, South Orkney Islands (in 1998). A number of monumented sites
              were established in the Antarctic Peninsula region in 1997 to support
              campaign-style GPS work in December 1997 and December 1998. Because of the
              expected slow crustal motion in the Bransfield Strait and expiration of the
              initial grant, no further data collection will be done until enough time has
              passed so that new measurements can be expected to yield precise
              results.

The primary aim of this work is to complete the measurements
              required to quantify crustal deformation related to opening of the Bransfield
              Strait, the South Shetland microplate, and to identify any other independent
              tectonic blocks that the GPS data may reveal. The measurements to be completed
              under this award will be done using ship support during the 2002-2003 season.
              This would be five years after the first measurements and would provide quite
              precise horizontal velocities. This project will complete the acquisition,
              processing, and interpretation of a single data set to continue this initial
              phase of the NSF-funded project to measure crustal motions along the southern
              margin of the Scotia plate. A principal investigator and one graduate student
              from the University of Texas will perform fieldwork. A graduate student from
              the University of Hawaii will process the new data consistent with previous
              data, and all of the SCARP investigators (Bevis, Dalziel, Smalley, Taylor: from
              U. Texas, U. Hawaii, and U. Memphis) will participate in interpreting the data.
              The British Antarctic Survey (BAS) and Alfred Wegener Institute (AWI) also
              recognized the importance of the Scotia plate and the Bransfield system in both
              global and local plate tectonic frameworks. They, too, have used GPS to measure
              crustal motions in this region and duplicate a number of our sites. They began
              earlier than we, have taken data more recently, presumably will continue taking
              data, and they have published some results. The collaboration between SCARP,
              BAS, and AWI begun earlier, will continue into this new work. Joint and
              separate publications are anticipated. The existing SCARP network has several
              advantages that justify collection and analysis of another set of data. One is
              that SCARP has established and measured GPS sites on Smith, Low, and Livingston
              Islands, where other groups have not. These sites significantly extend the
              dimensions of the South Shetland microplate so that we can determine a more
              precise pole of rotation and recognize any sub-blocks within the South Shetland
              arc. Smith and Low Islands are near the end of the Bransfield Basin where
              relative motion between the South Shetland Microplate must somehow terminate,
              perhaps by faulting along an extension of the Hero fracture zone. Another
              advantage is that measurements under SCARP were made using fixed-height masts
              that eliminate all but a fraction of a millimeter of vertical error in exactly
              re-occupying each site. Vertical motion associated with postglacial rebound
              should be on the order of several mm/yr, which will eventually be measurable.
              Mid-Holocene shorelines that emerged to more than 20m on some South Shetland
              arc islands suggest that vertical motion is significant. Thus, this work will
              contribute to understanding both plate motions and post-glacial rebound from
              ice mass loss in the region.



