Title       : Cognitive, Sociolinguistic, and Psychometric Perspectives in Science and
               Mathematics Assessment for English Language Learners
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0126344

Award Number: 0126344
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Finbarr C. Sloane                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1062237            (Estimated)
Investigator: Guillermo Solano-Flores wsolano@wested.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WestEd
	      730 Harrison Street
	      San Francisco, CA  94107    415/565-3070

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This two-year proposed project will investigate the cognitive and
              sociolinguistic influencesthat shape the performance of English language
              learners [ELLs] on science and mathematicsassessments. It will address the fact
              that performance of ELL students in science andmathematics is inconsistent both
              across test items and across languages. The knowledge gainedfrom this project
              will inform practitioners, researchers, and policy makers about new
              approachesfor attaining equitable testing and obtaining valid measures of the
              achievement of ELLs in science and mathematics. It will provide valuable
              information relevant to both classroom-basedtesting and the inclusion of
              linguistic minorities in large-scale testing.
We will compare the inferred
              cognitive activities of ELL students, the problem solutionstrategies they use,
              and the scores they obtain on the same set of science and mathematics
              itemsadministered both in English and their native languages. In addition, we
              will investigate whether and how performance differences across languages and
              items are reduced when students are tested with locally-adapted versions of
              tests that reflect their first languages dialects.
We will examine the
              performance of ELLs across languages and items from three
perspectives:
              cognitive, psychometric, and sociolinguistic. These perspectives will allow us
              to:
(1) determine how the language in which ELL students are tested influences
              their cognitive activities and the problem solution strategies they use on
              science and mathematics items; (2)determine whether ELL students perform better
              on local dialect than standard dialect versions of tests; and 
(3) examine the
              inconsistency of ELL student performance across items and across
languages as
              an interaction of three sources of score variability: student, item, and
              language (i.e., a given ELL student performs better in his/her native language
              than in English for some items but better in English than in the native
              language for other items).

We expect to improve our understanding of the
              cognitive and sociolinguistic processes that operate below the surface as ELL
              students interpret and solve problems. We also expect to gain knowledge on how
              these processes are reflected in the performance of these students and the
              variability of their scores across languages and items. This knowledge will
              contribute to improving both classroom-based and large-scale assessment
              practices.

Goals

Ultimately, our goal is to contribute to attaining more
              valid measures of ELL academic
achievement and more equitable testing
              practices by offering a fresh approach to the testing of linguistic minorities.
              This approach recognizes the complex relationship between language and
              cognitive phenomena, and the social nature of language. From the knowledge we
              gain in this investigation we expect to be able to formalize a set of
              recommendations for improved testing policies for ELLs.

