Title       : Using Discovery-Based Learning to Explore the Lean Design of Global Supply
               Chains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2001  
File        : a0126672

Award Number: 0126672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49969              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon A. Johnson sharon@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joe Zhu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Amy Z. Zeng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59)
An introductory course in "Supply Chain Management and
              Lean Design" is being developed. Lean design is a systematic approach to
              identifying and eliminating waste - through continuous improvement by flowing
              the product at the pull of the customer. Lean ideas have transformed process
              design. The challenge now is to make use of Internet-enabled information to
              link processes across global organizations. Lean design is guided by general
              principles, which are translated into practice using tactics such as creating
              manufacturing cells. The primary objective is to develop students' ability to
              apply lean design principles in global, multi-stage processes. The design
              process is complicated because in reality not all waste can be eliminated. To
              be effective designers, students need to understand how variability affects
              process dynamics and to combine this knowledge with analysis of process data.
              To accomplish our objective, we are developing this introductory course, which
              uses hands-on activities to assist students in discovering theory. It is
              followed by experiments in later courses that expand on and reinforce this
              theory. A variety of existing manufacturing and supply chain simulations are
              being adapted, as well as physical experiments in quality and variability, to
              the lean design framework. One contribution of this implementation is the
              integration of these activities into a more holistic experience, starting early
              in an undergraduate career. The plans are being guided by significant industry
              interaction and support faculty development in active-learning pedagogical
              methods.
