Title       : GC/MS for Chemistry and Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2001  
File        : a0126763

Award Number: 0126763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47438              (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Smith dsmith@doane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara J. Clement  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Doane College
	      
	      Crete, NE  68333    402/826-2161

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

At Doane College, we use a gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer
              (GC/MS) to significantly increase the opportunities for students to acquire
              sophisticated data in its chemistry and microbiology courses, as well as in
              undergraduate research in those areas. The students are learning to critically
              evaluate the data from this instrument and to integrate that data with other
              data from currently available instruments and techniques to solve progressively
              more difficult problems in their coursework and research. The goal is to help
              our students develop deductive reasoning and problem solving skills and gain
              hands-on experience with common modern instruments. We are adapting a number of
              experiments from the J. Chem. Educ. and from the microbiology literature such
              as the J. Microbiol. Methods for inclusion into our chemistry and biology
              curriculum to achieve our goal.
The instrument gets its greatest use in
              organic chemistry and in microbiology courses and research. In most organic
              chemistry experiments, each student gets a unique set of starting materials and
              has to determine the outcome of the reaction by analyzing the often-complex
              product mixtures. In Bacteriology and in Environmental Microbiology, the
              phospholipid fatty acid (PLFA) method of analysis is used to explore mixtures
              and consortia of bacteria form both laboratory and field samples. In both
              areas, the GC/MS provides information that allows more complex and meaningful
              experiments to be performed. We are also developing new undergraduate
              experiments that will be used in both chemistry and biology courses. 

