Title       : Toward a Descriptive Science of Learning Practices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0126104

Award Number: 0126104
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregg E. Solomon                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $417635             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy D. Koschmann tkoschmann@siumed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : S Illinois Univ Sch of Med
	      P.O. Box 19616
	      Springfield, IL  627949616    217/545-3318

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
               
Rigorous understanding of teaching and learning practices requires the
              development of a descriptive science that captures multiple cognitive and
              social aspects of complex learning situations.  This project builds upon
              available micro-analytic methods, both cognitive and sociological, with a
              careful regard for the established standards of rigor applied within these
              traditions. We will explore the promise and limitations of these methods by
              analyzing a particular set of practices (referential practices) in a particular
              learning situation. Reference is a fundamental feature of all human
              communication. It is the means by which we initiate and achieve a common
              orientation to objects in our shared environment and as such is an integral
              part of learning. By providing an account of how interactants accomplish
              reference in a particular situation, we hope to contribute to our developing
              understanding of how people do learning. Our intent is to study learning
              practices in the operating room (OR) of a busy teaching hospital, focusing on
              medical students' early experiences with endoscopic surgery. In such surgeries,
              surgeons use fiber-optic lenses to view and operate within the patient's body.
              This poses multiple perceptual challenges, particularly to newcomers. Pilot
              work shows that this is a rich site for examining referential practices as they
              relate to learning. Furthermore, these surgeries represent an analytically
              compact cycle of activity, helping to make manageable the highly ambitious task
              of describing the content and methods of learning.  Preliminary investigations
              have revealed that establishing shared reference is not always easily
              accomplished. Participants may proceed as if a common reference has been
              established even though they are orienting to different aspects of the scene.
              Post-surgical interviews highlight some of the complexities of studying how
              participants display their understandings in natural settings.  This project
              will consist of a series of six sequential studies, each involving phases of
              fieldwork, participant interviews, and analysis. Standard methods for
              ethnographic fieldwork will be employed when taping in the OR. Post-surgical
              interviews will be conducted with the participants, using the video from the
              surgery as an object for discussion. These interviews will serve both to
              augment our interpretations of the referential practices utilized in the OR and
              to document the forms of anatomical and professional expertise displayed.
              Biannual project teams meetings will be conducted to do collaborative analysis
              of the data. These data sessions will be structured to encourage a disciplined
              form of noticing.  Community building activities are planned to foster the
              development of descriptive skills by other researchers working in other
              learning settings.
 

