Title       : The Children's Research Initiative: Integrative Approaches - CRI: The North
               Carolina Child Development Research Collaborative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0126475

Award Number: 0126475
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha J. Cox martha_Cox@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Steven Reznick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1358,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

NORTH CAROLINA CHILD DEVELOPMENT RESEARCH COLLABORATIVE

Martha J.
              Cox, Principal Investigator
J. Steven Reznick, Co-Principal Investigator

              
The North Carolina Child Development Research Collaborative (CDRC) proposed
              here builds upon ongoing multidisciplinary activities across departments at the
              University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and neighboring institutions of
              Duke, University of North Carolina at Greensboro and North Carolina State. 
              Investigators from disparate areas of developmental inquiry-from behavioral
              genetics and developmental neuroscience to life-course sociology, anthropology,
              public health, nursing, social work, education and developmental
              psychology-will participate in the research and training at the CDRC.  The
              CDRC's efforts are informed by an interdisciplinary approach to understanding
              the development of youth that includes investigation of cultural and societal
              factors studied by anthropologist and sociologists to the neural and genetic
              levels studied by biologists and neuroscientists.  The work of the CDRC will
              transcend a "main effect" model of development that sees each influence as an
              independent contribution and will embrace a model in which influences from
              various levels (the community, the family, neural and genetic factors etc.) are
              seen as working together. 
The CDRC will increase the capacity of faculty and
              students to conduct interdisciplinary research.  This will be accomplished by
              launching a new longitudinal, collaborative research study focusing on early
              childhood.  From birth to school entry, children show remarkable linguistic,
              intellectual, emotional and social change while going through successive
              transitions between social contexts such as from family to day care or nursery
              school, annual changes from one peer group to another, and later changes from
              preschool to kindergarten.  This study will tap levels of analysis relevant for
              understanding early development, extending beyond the individual and dyad to
              include assessments of biological functioning, cognitive competence,
              personality and emotion, social relationships, neighborhood, community, and
              culture in which persons and interactions are embedded.  Beginning in the first
              year of life, we will track these multiple levels of analysis during periods of
              transition to elucidate both the constraints posed by the child's environment
              as well as illustrating the ability of the child to adapt to new environments
              and conditions.  A representative sample of 200 children born during a 3-month
              period will be recruited into the study from birth records in Durham, North
              Carolina.  Durham is a mid-size city with typical characteristics of cities
              around the United States: a diverse population in terms of family ethnicity,
              income, and education; a declining city center with large pockets of poverty
              and limited employment opportunities; and wide variation in the quality of
              child care and school settings.  Durham has an almost equal representation of
              African-American and Euro-American families and a rapidly increasing Hispanic
              population.  Moreover, Durham has a large African-American middle class
              population, thus making it possible to study ethnicity disentangled from
              socioeconomic status among both African-American and Euro-American groups. 
              Children will be tested initially within a 2-week period on either side of
              their first birthday and followed longitudinally through their fourth birthday.
               Additional assessments will be conducted at the second and third birthday and
              midway between birthdays (i.e., at 18, 30, and 42 months).  
Integrated
              working groups of researchers will implement multiple levels of measurement. 
              Six working groups focus on: biological processes; temperament and emotional
              regulation; memory, language, and literacy; peer relations as contexts; family
              and intergenerational relationships; child care, community, and culture.  A
              seventh working group provides expertise on quantitative approaches to
              longitudinal analyses.   
The CDRC will also initiate and support other linked
              endeavors including: 1) conducting workshops, seminars and course development
              to increase cross-disciplinary knowledge, 2) developing new methods for
              interdisciplinary research, and 3) training a diverse cadre of young scholars
              who are equipped to pursue collaborative interdisciplinary research.  

