Title       : Algorithm for Networked Peer-to-Peer Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0126347

Award Number: 0126347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279939             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashish Goel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ramesh Govindan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A Peer-to-peer networked system is a collaborating group of Internet nodes which
              overlay their own special-purpose network on top of the Internet. Such a system
              performs its own application-level routing on top of IP routing. These systems
              share some of the same characteristics as the Internet in that they can grow to
              be quite large, need to utilize distributed control and configuration, employ a
              naming scheme that allows them to address a node without knowing its exact
              whereabouts, and possess a routing mechanism that allows each node to
              meaningfully communicate with the rest of the system. Typically a peer-to-peer
              network performs a very specific purpose such as distributed data storage,
              cache replication, multicasting etc. and uses normal Internet functionality for
              all other purposes. These systems are diverse enough that it would not be
              desirable to make modifications to the IP routing/naming protocols to support
              each instance of such a system.

Peer-to-peer systems such as Napster and
              Gnutella have, of late, received a fair amount of
attention in the
              non-technical literature. More importantly, several research groups have
              recently
designed a variety of peer-to-peer systems as infrastructure for
              flexibly evolving the Internet, for
large-scale network storage, for anonymous
              publishing, and for application-level multicasting. At
the core of many of
              these systems lie innovative and novel distributed algorithms for
              disseminating
content. The principal investigators classify these systems into
              structured systems where there is
global consensus on where a document is
              stored, and unstructured systems where no such consensus
              exists.

Peer-to-peer systems have a rich theoretical structure, and
              sophisticated algorithmic techniques
have been employed in the systems
              currently under development. In preliminary work, the princi-
pal
              investigators use the small-world model to improve the performance of a
              specific unstructured
system called Freenet. Motivated by their preliminary
              work, this proposal plans to take a principled
look at the properties of
              various algorithms proposed in the peer-to-peer literature. Some of
              the
specific questions that the principal investigators intend to address are
              understanding the funda-
mental bounds on the performance of peer-to-peer
              systems, designing algorithms that allow these
systems to perform at peak
              availability and minimum latency, studying the impact of topology and
caching
              on latency, and understanding the role that the small-world model might play in
              improving
the performance of these systems.

The overall attention that the
              peer-to-peer technology has garnered in the recent past, and the
various
              proposed businesses based on this model, point to the potential broad impact
              that this work can have. The principal investigators hope that this work will
              provide the systems community with the theoretical tools necessary to
              rigorously understand the behavior of some of their designs as well as rules of
              thumb to choose between alternative architectures, protocols, and
              algorithms.

The principal investigators intend to integrate some of this
              material into a graduate course
on \Algorithmic Issues in Communication
              Networks". Their classroom treatment of these topics
will be formal, but with
              clearly indicated motivations from and applications to real systems.
              The
lecture notes and course projects developed by the principal investigators
              will be made publicly
available.
