Title       : Adaptation and Implementation of Inquiry-Based Genomics Into the Undergraduate
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a0126640

Award Number: 0126640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123709             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Kass David.Kass@emich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel L. Clemans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth R. Butch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven J. Pernecky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Michigan Univ
	      Office of Research Development
	      Ypsilanti, MI  48197    734/487-3090

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
The Biology and Chemistry departments at Eastern
              Michigan University (EMU) are dedicated to pedagogical innovation and the
              development of inquiry-based learning. Genomics is a rapidly advancing
              interdisciplinary science with highly projected applicability in the local and
              global job markets presenting a unique opportunity for the development of new
              pedagogical strategies in this area. This is particularly true at EMU, as many
              graduates are subsequently employed at local biotechnology firms. This project,
              therefore, adapts from a James Madison University funded NSF award "Integration
              of genomics into the undergraduate curriculum" (award #9981099), and implements
              new inquiry-based investigations at Eastern Michigan University. This project
              promotes new integrative pedagogical strategies in genomics through the
              development of a Genome Analysis course and the design of investigative
              projects in Biochemistry, Recombinant DNA Technology, Microbial Physiology, and
              newly-developed, inquiry-based core courses. Additionally, computational and
              technical skills are being developed with the acquisition of new equipment. The
              developed courses and modules resulting from this project provide model
              pedagogical advancements for universities and colleges nationwide, coinciding
              with a national emphasis in genomics and bioinformatics and a need for
              individuals knowledgeable in these areas.
