Title       : Early Salamanders from Northern China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2002   
File        : a0126451

Award Number: 0126451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil H. Shubin nshubin@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Keqin Gao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Salamanders are one of the major groups of living amphibians.  Unfortunately,
              very little is known about their early evolution because early salamander
              fossils have not been recovered.  Indeed until now, only two species from the
              relevant time was known.  We are now presented with an unusual opportunity to
              investigate major questions of salamander evolution and diversity. Over the
              past three years, we have recovered more than 800 superbly preserved salamander
              specimens from the earliest parts of salamander history.  These sites, from
              northern China, contain a highly diverse and well preserved fauna of
              salamanders.  Access to these sites has been granted and they can readily be
              quarried in an effort to recover even more specimens.  The importance of these
              sites and this material lies in its age (these are among the earliest known
              salamanders), its abundance (hundreds of articulated skeletons can be collected
              from each site), its taxonomic diversity (several different families are
              present), its life-history diversity (many different parts of the life cycle
              are are all preserved), and its exceptional preservation (soft-tissue
              impressions are often present).  Major goals of this project include: 1. to
              collect new fossils from and assess the relative age of the exceptional
              fossil-bearing units northern China, 2. to describe new fossil salamanders and
              revise known taxa, 3. to access the evolutionary and geographic history of
              fossil and Recent salamanders, and 4. to use the exquisite preservation of the
              new salamander material to address how morphological variation has evolved.


