Title       : ANIMATION AND VISUALIZATION IN ENGINEERING
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2001  
File        : a0126874

Award Number: 0126874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75081              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard Turner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary C. Hudspeth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward C. Hohmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francelina Neto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly Pomona Fdn, Inc
	      
	      Pomona, CA  91768    /   -

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Civil (54)
Visualization and animation are areas of increasing
              importance in civil engineering practice. The goal of this project is to adapt
              concepts developed in the Graphics, Visualization and Usability Center at
              Georgia Institute of Technology, and to implement a modification of these
              concepts into the civil engineering curriculum at Cal Poly Pomona. The first
              objective is to introduce static visualization into lower division courses. A
              second concurrent objective is to introduce real-time 3-D visualization and
              animation into upper division courses.

Rhinoceros, a 3-D NURBS solid
              modeling and static visualization tool, is being utilized to accomplish the
              first objective. Static visualization concepts are being introduced into CE 127
              CAD Engine Concepts, a freshman computer graphics class. More advanced concepts
              and basic animation are being addressed in CE 134 Elementary Surveying, CE 220
              Advanced Surveying, and CE 222 Highway Design. Objective two is being
              accomplished by acquiring 20 graphics accelerated SCSI workstation with static
              and dynamic visualization software. This equipment is going to be used to
              modify the spatial positioning systems, photogrammetry and GIS classes. Data
              are being collected in these classes by global positioning systems and softcopy
              photogrammetry. These data are going to be used to build computer models with
              visualization and animation software currently applied in industry.
              Concurrently, this equipment is being used in senior projects and the
              comprehensive civil engineering design classes. Students are developing terrain
              fly-throughs, building walk throughs, earthquake simulations and civil
              engineering equipment simulations. The visualization and animation techniques
              are being integrated throughout the curriculum. Students are incorporating
              these techniques into most senior projects. These senior projects are presented
              to faculty, students, and industry on College Symposium Day. The impact of
              visualization and animation techniques on these audiences will assure their
              inclusion.

The project is expected to reach 3,700 enrolled engineering
              students. This project addresses both upper and lower division student
              audiences and integrates new technology into the curriculum of the Department
              of Civil Engineering enabling student learning and understanding of
              three-dimensional space. In addition, based on current enrollment statistics
              approximately 33% or 175 students who are underrepresented minorities are going
              to be impacted by this project. Finally, the College of Engineering works with
              a consortium of high schools, and Metropolitan Transit Authority Foundation
              transportation academies. Through these avenues, the project promises to reach
              several hundred high school students.


