Title       : Integrated Study of Environmental Effects on Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2002  
File        : a0126817

Award Number: 0126817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74812              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher F. Sacchi sacchi@kutztown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wendy L. Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol C. Mapes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anne E. Zayaitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kutztown University
	      
	      Kutztown, PA  19530    215/683-4000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
The interaction of organisms with their environment is
              manifested in biological responses at many scales, from the biochemical to the
              ecosystem level. The relationships of organisms and their environments has been
              of concern to ecologists in the context of natural environmental variation and
              is of growing importance in light of the effects on organisms of
              human-influenced environmental change. In this project eight laboratory classes
              offered in the Biology department at Kutztown University are being adapted to
              introduce students to study of the physiological responses of organisms to
              natural environmental variation or to human-influenced environments. The
              efforts are an adaptation of and based on the experiences of faculty at
              Bloomsburg University, Cornell University, the University of Delaware, and the
              University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign. Laboratory exercises focus on
              measurement of effects of environments on organisms from the physiological to
              the whole organism scale of response. The organisms to be studied include
              bacteria, protists, plants, and selected marine invertebrates. The
              environmental factors are being studied in controlled environments in the
              laboratory or greenhouse as well as under conditions of natural environmental
              variation in field sites. In this project: 1) Students are working
              cooperatively to examine the relationship between organisms and environment in
              inquiry-based laboratory exercises, 2) Students, working in groups, use
              computer-interfaced physiological equipment to quantify response to selected
              environmental factors, 3) Students examine how selected environmental factors
              impact organisms at the level of individual performance, population numbers, or
              in competitive interactions among species, 4) Students analyze physiological
              and whole organism data using comparative quantitative methods from graphical
              representation to basic inferential statistics and 5) students present results
              in manuscript-style laboratory reports, in posters, or in oral presentations
              patterned after those typical of a professional meeting.

