Title       : Integrating Research with Undergraduate Education through a Petrotectonic Study
               of Casco Bay, Maine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2002  
File        : a0126234

Award Number: 0126234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38158              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel J. Beane rbeane@bowdoin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowdoin College
	      5700 College Station
	      Brunswick, ME  04011    207/725-3000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42)
The Casco Bay project brings research into the classroom. Recent
              pedagogical studies and reports recommend that undergraduate courses create
              opportunities for students to "do" science by engaging in research that
              provides them with life-long learning skills in problem-solving, quantitative
              reasoning, and communication. In essence, science and the skills learned by
              "doing" science are integral to everyone's life, regardless of background or
              (future) occupation. The Casco Bay region of Maine is readily accessible to
              Bowdoin College and it lends itself to multi-disciplinary studies, because the
              region includes felsic and mafic volcanics, pelites, and limestones that have
              undergone deformation and been variably metamorphosed from chlorite to
              sillimanite grade. Research on the Casco Bay region is being integrated into
              undergraduate geology courses and student thesis research. This project adapts
              and implements the successful practices of other educators by using regional
              geologic studies and by integrating research into courses. The Casco Bay
              project incorporates petrological, geochemical, structural, and geochronologic
              research in four undergraduate courses: Introduction to Physical Geology,
              Structural Geology, Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology, and Mountain Belts. Data
              are shared between students using a Geographical Information System's (GIS)
              database. Through the project, students become familiar with the geology that
              surrounds them and engage cooperatively in multidisciplinary research. In so
              doing, students make connections between geologic disciplines, recognize the
              benefit of approaching problems from different angles, and improve their field,
              quantitative, and communication skills.
