Title       : RUI: Crystal Growth Speedometry, Micro-Fourier Transform InfraRed (FTIR)
               Spectroscopy of Minerals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0126285

Award Number: 0126285
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164466             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip D. Ihinger ihinger@uwec.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Eau Claire
	      Park & Garfield
	      Eau Claire, WI  54701    715/836-2637

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
EAR-0126285
Ihinger
University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire

The
              primary objective of this proposal is to use H-species defects, incorporated
              into hydrothermal crystals during crystallization, to determine the relative
              growth rates of different crystallographic faces, which in turn may be used to
              derive the absolute time for in situ crystal growth, with appropriate
              experimental calibration.  Quartz and kyanite will be investigated.  The
              timescales involved in crystal growth processes are poorly constrained and the
              absolute time involved in the growth of crystals from either igneous or
              metamorphic environments is not known.  This is a first order problem in
              petrology and few new approaches have been proposed to attack it.  Although the
              theory describing reaction kinetics in the crustal environment is sound, few
              quantitative studies exist and the mechanisms responsible for the variation in
              size and shape of individual crystal  faces  are still not  well understood. 
              Published data on natural euhedral quartz crystals obatined in our laboratory
              allow quantitative determination  of  the  relative  growth  rates  of  their
              growth  faces  throughout  their  growth  histories.  The concentration of
              water molecules and metal hydroxyl impurities incorporated into the crystal
              structure at the time of growth serve as "speedometers" that directly reflect
              the growth kinetics of active growth faces.  These measurements provide a new
              means of imaging the shape and absolute dimensions of crystals throughout their
              growth history. A partnership with commercial quartz production company will
              provide synthetic samples for experimental calibration of fluid parameters,
              which are necessary to quantitatively interpret H-defect data from natural
              hydrothermal quartz crystals.

