Title       : Incorporation of Problem-Based Learning into Two Courses -- Technology
               Foundations II-Materials and Bioprocessing -- in the Integrated Science,
               Business and Technology Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2001  
File        : a0126565

Award Number: 0126565
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111537             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Jones jones@lasalle.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Weaver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marsha Timmerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La Salle University
	      1900 West Olney Avenue
	      Philadelphia, PA  19141    215/951-1831

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary (99)

LaSalle University is enhancing student learning by
              incorporating Problem-Based Learning (PBL) into two courses that are integral
              components of its new Integrated Science, Business and Technology (ISBT)
              Program. Modeled after a very successful program at James Madison University,
              ISBT is an interdisciplinary, undergraduate major that draws on LaSalle's solid
              traditions in science, technology, and business education to develop graduates
              that are uniquely qualified to take active leadership roles in arriving at
              scientifically and economically informed solutions to real-world problems.
              Funds are being used to purchase two UTMs, one Gas Chromatograph with auto
              sampler, and two, 5-liter B. Braun B Fermentation Systems, and to support
              faculty and curriculum development for Technology Foundations II-Materials
              (sophomore-level) and Bioprocessing (junior-level). Materials are designed
              around student use of a Universal Testing Machine (UTM) and students are
              learning to use the UTM to test ferrous and non-ferrous metals, polymers and
              elastomers, ceramics, composites, and adhesives and to perform tensile,
              compression, shear, and flexure testing. This laboratory-intensive approach
              affords the investigation of a broad range of material types within a
              one-semester course and permits each student to discover a valid taxonomy of
              material type and physical behavior. Bioprocessing is designed to integrate
              concepts introduced in previous courses and imparts an understanding of
              fermentation system fundamentals, knowledge of several different mammalian and
              microbial biochemical systems, and an appreciation of the unique requirements
              of each system. Students manipulate and use real-time data to keep fermentation
              systems under control. PBL is being delivered through facilitated small student
              groups and utilize the new equipment.
