Title       : Adaptation and Implementation of Modern NMR Techniques throughout the
               Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2001   
File        : a0126470

Award Number: 0126470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125847             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Nalli tnalli@vax2.winona.msus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sara Hein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jamie L. Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Kopitzke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charla S. Miertschin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Winona State University
	      8th and Johnson Streets
	      Winona, MN  55987    507/457-5000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

With the acquisition of a 300 MHz high-field Fourier Transform
              nuclear magnetic resonance (FT-NMR) spectrometer we are implementing modern NMR
              techniques, including variable temperature, multinuclear, and two-dimensional
              methods, in both teaching laboratories and undergraduate research projects. The
              main goal of the project is to update and improve the chemistry lab experiences
              afforded to both chemistry and non-chemistry majors. Other objectives are to
              improve undergraduate research experiences, to provide a regional NMR resource,
              and to provide opportunities for professional improvement to WSU chemistry
              faculty. To achieve our objectives, we are adapting and implementing a set of
              experiments from the chemical education literature into our Biochemistry,
              Organic, Inorganic, Polymer, and Physical chemistry courses, and into two
              advanced laboratories; the Advanced Organic Chemistry and the Instrumental
              Analysis laboratory courses. In conjunction with NMR, we are also using
              molecular modeling in organic chemistry to enhance the quality of the
              experiments. The chemistry students' experience with the FT-NMR techniques
              begins with the second-year course in organic chemistry and culminates in
              capstone research guided by the chemistry faculty. Students use laptop
              computers for off-line data processing, thus allowing time-efficient use of the
              NMR. We are using standardized student, faculty, and alumni surveys and course
              evaluation forms to assess our project. Classroom assessment techniques from
              the Field-tested Learning Assessment Guide (FLAG) project are being used to
              assess student learning. Project results will be disseminated through
              presentations at national professional conferences, submissions to
              peer-reviewed journals, and publication on the project web site.

