Title       : Introducing Indivisibles into Calculus Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0126141

Award Number: 0126141
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399954             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bronislaw Czarnocha bczarnocha@hostos.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vrunda Prabhu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hostos Community Col
	      475 Grand Concourse
	      Bronx, NY  104515307    718/518-6660

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The PI's Bronislaw Czarnocha and Vrunda Prabhu, will conduct two year-long
              cycles of
teaching experiments to introduce the intuition of "indivisibles"
              into calculus instruction and
integrate it with standard ways of instructing
              via Riemann construction. They plan to study
closely the conceptual and
              computational development of students who receive this instruction. It
As part
              of this project, the PI's will investigate:
(1) What is the process of
              transformation and development of the intuition of lines (the
indivisibles)
              into a precise, mathematical concept?
(2) Does the introduction of the W-C
              construction based on indivisibles, the interplay of that
construction with
              the standard Riemann construction, and the instruction that integrates
              both,
strengthen students' understanding of the concept of the definite
              integral?
In the proposed project, they will conduct and coordinate Calculus
              instruction at six
institutions, assess students' performance via tests,
              essays and clinical interviews, collect data
resulting from the different
              assessment and analyze the data in preparation for a refinement of
              the
teaching strategy. As a general framework they will adopt Vygotsky's
              theory with its emphasis
on the cognitive processes in the zone of proximal
              development, which dictates important
consequences on the instruction and
              assessment. Students will be guided by the activities of the
class to enable
              them to experience the process of mathematical thinking and to reveal its
              content
to the teacher. The role of the instructor will be to provide
              systematization of their spontaneous
development grounded in the precise
              mathematical understanding of the concept in question. The
directions their
              spontaneous thought processes take, will be under investigation during the
              course.

The project is a balance between various aspects: (1) the natural
              intuition of the learner vs.
the academic instruction, (2) computational
              mastery vs. conceptual understanding, (3) teaching
and research.
