Title       : Shared Eye-tracking Laboratory for Undergraduate Research and Education in
               Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0126922

Award Number: 0126922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13619              (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Crawford lcrawfor@richmond.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ping Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Berry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig H. Kinsley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott Allison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Richmond
	      
	      Richmond, VA  23173    804/289-8100

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Psychology - Cognitive (73)
A shared Eye-Tracking Laboratory (ELT) has been
              established at the University of Richmond to advance undergraduate coursework
              and research. This laboratory is modeled after a similar one at the University
              of Chicago, but has been adapted for primary use by undergraduate students.
              Although eye tracking is being increasingly used for research in psychology,
              engineering, human factors, and education, students at primarily undergraduate
              institutions rarely gain experience with this advanced technology. The goal of
              the proposed ELT is to give students a greater understanding of advanced
              research methodologies in psychology, greater preparation for advanced study in
              a variety of related fields, and a deeper understanding of mind, brain, and
              eye. 

The ELT enhances the curriculum of advanced research methods courses
              in social psychology, cognitive psychology, cognitive science, adult
              development, and behavioral neuroscience. This lab is being used to demonstrate
              prior findings, and to conduct experiments that extend earlier work. In
              addition, students in these advanced methods courses are learning how to
              collect and analyze eye-tracking data in order to investigate their own
              research questions. Students who have been trained in eye tracking also have
              the opportunity to use the ELT for independent research projects under the
              direction of the principal investigator or co-principal investigators.
              Typically, 35 psychology majors conduct independent research at the University
              of Richmond Psychology Department each year.


