Title       : An Activity-Based Statistics Course for Engineers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0126815

Award Number: 0126815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52139              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven E. Butt steven.butt@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bob E. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tycho K. Fredericks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Other (59)
A common criticism of the teaching of undergraduate
              engineering statistics is that it is too academic in focus, excessively
              theoretical, and divorced from real problems that appear in industry. The
              purpose of this project is to teach statistics using activity-based learning. A
              one-semester lecture-based engineering statistics course is being re-engineered
              through the adaptation of an activity-based engineering statistics course
              currently offered at the Pennsylvania State University. The proposed course is
              being structured to include laboratories and workshops intermingled with
              activity-based lectures. The laboratory sessions are intended to provide the
              student with an opportunity to become proficient in designing experiments,
              collecting data, and analyzing problems using PC-based statistical software.
              Workshops are designed to involve short lecture segments mixed with team-based
              problem-solving activities and software tutorials. The development of the
              laboratory and workshop activities includes materials based upon the research
              and consulting activities of the investigators. Different engineering
              laboratories are being utilized for these activities. Working through a diverse
              set of engineering problems, the student are expected gain the confidence to
              apply statistical techniques to new and different situations and realize the
              role of statistics in engineering design.

Quantitative and qualitative tools
              are being employed to assess and evaluate this project and its components at
              different times throughout the two-year project duration. Dissemination plan
              involves conference presentations, journal articles, course workbooks, and a
              project web site.

