Title       : The Childrens Research Initiative: Integrative Approaches - CRI: A Longitudinal
               Study of Relational Aggression in Preschoolers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0126521

Award Number: 0126521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227102             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicki R. Crick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1358,1698,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

A Longitudinal Study of Relational Aggression in
              Preschoolers

Nicki R. Crick

     Longitudinal investigations have
              demonstrated that childhood aggression is one of the best known social
              predictors of future maladjustment.  Although many important advances have been
              made in our understanding of aggression, much of this knowledge has been gained
              through an empirical and theoretical focus on aggressive boys only.  The lack
              of attention to aggressive girls has likely occurred because the study of
              physical aggression has been emphasized, a form of aggression that is more
              characteristic of boys than of girls.  In an attempt to rectify this inequity,
              a relational form of aggression has been recently identified that has been
              shown to be more typical of girls than physical forms.  Although great strides
              have been made in our understanding of relational aggression, the significant
              gaps in our knowledge are too numerous to outline.  One of the most critical
              gaps is the lack of attention to the early development of relational aggression
              and its consequences, information that is crucial for informing early
              prevention and intervention efforts.  The proposed study was designed to
              address this issue through the longitudinal study of preschool-age children. 
              Four objectives will be addressed:  (1) to evaluate normative, developmental
              changes in relational and physical aggression in young children; (2) to assess
              gender differences in observed relational aggression among young children; (3)
              to assess the stability of individual differences in physical and relational
              forms of aggression for both boys and girls; and (4) to compare the concurrent
              and future social-psychological adjustment status associated with relational
              aggression for young children of both sexes.   A total of 80 preschoolers (40
              girls; 40 boys) between the ages of 2 and 4 years will serve as participants.
              During each of four assessment periods (Year One:  Time 1 & 2; Year Two:  Time
              3 & 4) naturalistic observations plus teacher-, peer-, and self-assessments of
              children's social behavior (relational aggression, physical aggression, and
              prosocial behavior) and social-psychological adjustment (social adjustment,
              internalizing difficulties, and externalizing problems) will be conducted at
              the preschools. A variety of statistical techniques will be used to evaluate
              the proposed hypotheses including descriptive analyses, linear growth modeling,
              ANOVA, hierarchical multiple regression, and path analyses.  Findings of the
              proposed research have great potential for enhancing our understanding of a
              vastly underrepresented group, aggressive girls, and for drawing attention to
              theoretical shortcomings that have promoted the lack of attention to this
              group.  Without the ability to assess and identify aggressive behavioral
              problems among young girls, we cannot understand the etiology and developmental
              trajectories of later adjustment problems for females.  Early prevention and
              intervention efforts are also impossible without adequate information to
              identify at-risk girls during their childhood years.  

