Title       : Integrating Applied Geophysics into a Student-Centered Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0126491

Award Number: 0126491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65444              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick Day-Lewis fdaylewi@bucknell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Beth Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geology (42)
We are developing a new Applied Geophysics course that represents
              an adaptation of a pedagogical model developed at the University of
              Massachusetts. We are also creating new opportunities for undergraduate
              research in geophysics. The lab component of our Applied Geophysics course
              includes six modules dedicated to seismic refraction and reflection,
              ground-penetrating radar, gravimetry, direct-current electrical methods,
              magnetic surveying, and cross-hole geophysics. Two four-hour field labs are
              devoted to each module. The instructor designs the first survey using each
              method, for the purposes of demonstrating proper survey design, data
              collection, safety measures, and data reduction. Alternating groups of students
              lead the second lab in each module, thus calling on student groups to take
              leadership roles in designing surveys, assessing the limitations of various
              methods through forward modeling, and organizing data collection efforts. The
              instructor-led experiments take advantage of diverse sites off campus.
              Student-led surveys are being conducted at various locations on campus,
              including our Geophysical Test Site and adjacent Experimental Well Field.
              Interpretations incorporate complementary data sets from multiple geophysical
              methods. New access to state-of-the-art geophysical equipment is having a major
              positive impact not only on the preparation of geology majors, but also on
              other physical science and engineering students.
