Title       : Implementing a Nanofabrication Concentration into the Applied Physics Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0126904

Award Number: 0126904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96008              (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen Armstrong AJARMS@ship.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Cresswell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Shippensburg U of PA
	      
	      Shippensburg, PA  17257    717/532-9121

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) The project is adapting and developing new courses in material
              science and nanotechnology in a traditional physics curriculum to better meet
              the interests, needs, and employment opportunities of majors. The adapted
              courses are 200 level Material Engineering classes taught in a single semester
              at the NSF National Nanofabrication Users Network (NNUN), Penn State
              Nanofabrication Facility. These courses are taught by the Pennsylvania
              Nanofabrication Manufacturing Technology (NMT) Partnership under the joint
              auspices of the Nanofabrication Facility and the State of Pennsylvania. The NMT
              classes are a unique opportunity for students to study the techniques and
              processes involved in state of the art micro- and nanofabrication at a premier
              research facility. Two new courses in the physics curriculum offer the
              theoretical foundations for the techniques and process courses offered by the
              NMT center. This project addresses the lab component of the new courses. The
              new course offerings, with the addition of the NMT courses, form the basis of a
              Bachelors of Science Applied Physics Degree with a Nanofabrication
              Concentration. 

This program offers significantimprovement to all three
              physics degree programs: 1) B.S. Physics majors interested in continuing on to
              graduate school have an opportunity to work with state-of-the art equipment and
              to fabricate devices for their undergraduate research projects, 2) B.S. Physics
              Ed. majors have an opportunity to gain understanding and experience in modern
              materials and fabrication, which they can take to the classroom to inspire
              future generations of students, 3) Applied Physics / Engineering majors have a
              viable four year alternative to the five year program currently offered.

