Title       : Mathematics Teacher/Researchers Collaborating for Collaboration in the Classroom
               (MTRC3)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1992  
File        : a9253298

Award Number: 9253298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Spresser                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $545473             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia P. Tinto pptinto@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Zarach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Shelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This four-year project aims at establishing a county-wide                      
              network of secondary mathematics teachers whose ongoing work                   
              will be to support the teachers of Onondanga County                            
              (Syracuse, NY) as they introduce and maintain programs of                      
              modern mathematics in the county's high schools.  To these                     
              ends, 42 well-prepared mathematics teachers will be selected                   
              for a program designed to strengthen their mathematical                        
              background, expand their pedagogical repertory, and enhance                    
              their leadership skills.  The program will begin with an                       
              initial group of 18 teachers (2 from each of 9 schools)                        
              attending a 4-week residential summer institute at the                         
              University of Syracuse with two major foci: (1) helping                        
              teachers modernize their classroom instruction (e.g.                           
              involving their students actively in doing mathematics); (2)                   
              professinalizing teaching by asking teachers to reflect on                     
              their own classroom practices, involving themselves in                         
              professional societies, and the like.  Participants will                       
              also study mathematical content -- with emphasis on the                        
              importance of connections between diverse topics; solve                        
              (real world) mathematical problems in small groups; explore                    
              the uses of technology to aid in doing mathematics; create                     
              lessons and units for use in their classrooms; learn new and                   
              appropriate ways of assessing student progress in                              
              mathematics.  During the implementation phase in the ensuing                   
              academic year, project staff will lend support to the                          
              participating teachers in a series of 12 half-day workshops.                   
              In the second year, the program described above will be                        
              repeated for an additional 24 teachers.  Participants from                     
              the first summer program -- after additional training --                       
              will act as mentors to this second group of teachers.  In                      
              the third and fourth years of the project, the entire group                    
              of participating teachers will have formed teams (of 4 to 14                   
              members) to initiate and maintain implementation and                           
              dissemination efforts throughout their respective districts.                   
              Project staff will provide a variety of support for these                      
              efforts.  It is expected that the network of teams thus                        
              established will continue its work after the end of the                        
              grant.  Cost sharing is 30%.
