Title       : Thermal Analysis System for Characterization and Evaluation of High Performance
               Polymers & Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1992 
File        : a9253016

Award Number: 9253016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric A. Mintz emintz@cau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark Atlanta University
	      223 James P. Brawley Dr. S.W.
	      Atlanta, GA  303144358    404/880-8000

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9130,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Clark Atlanta University (CAU) has established                                 
              a High Performance Polymers And Ceramics                                       
              (HiPPAC) Research Center.  The center                                          
              consolidates and expands existing polymer and                                  
              ceramic research capabilities through the                                      
              development of interdepartmental and                                           
              interinstitutional research anbd education                                     
              clusters.  To donduct basic and applied                                        
              research in high performancepolymers and                                       
              ceramics in the Center, major equipment and                                    
              instrumentation are required.  In this                                         
              proposal we request funds to acquire a thermal                                 
              analysis system to support research projectrs                                  
              conducted in the HiPPAC Center.  This                                          
              instrumentation will provide the HiPPAC Center                                 
              investigators with the ability to examine th                                   
              conversion of preceramic materials to ceramic                                  
              materials, and the characterization of ceramic                                 
              materials, in addition to the ability to                                       
              characterize high performance polymers.  The                                   
              growth in research and education programs in                                   
              the materials area at CAU. and in particular                                   
              expansion into the preceramic and ceramic                                      
              area, necessitates the acquisition of a                                        
              thermal analysis system- that includes a high                                  
              temperature TG/DTA and DSC and TMA with                                        
              programmable temperature conteol for below                                     
              ambient conditions and higher operating                                        
              temperatures and is capable of high throughput                                 
              and state of the art diagnostic capabilities.                                  
              The research projects that the thermal                                         
              analysis system will support are part of CAU's                                 
              strong commitment to enhance its overall                                       
              development of research capabilities,                                          
              strengthening minority faculty and student                                     
              experiences, establishing interinstitutional                                   
              research alliances with other HBCUs and major                                  
              research universities, and strengtrhening its                                  
              undergraduate and graduate science degree                                      
              programs.
