Title       : Toward Universal Access to Math and Science Resources: PhaseI of A National
               School Network Testbed
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1993    
File        : a9253410

Award Number: 9253410
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur W. St. George                    
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1574891            (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan L. Bernstein slb@bbn.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Denis Newman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : BBN Laboratories Inc
	      33 Moulton Street
	      Cambridge, MA  021381118    617/873-4277

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              13        Physics                                 
              20        Mathematics                             
              60        Life Sciences                           
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 7257,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Phase I of a National School Network Testbed will test the                     
              feasibility of a model for elementary and secondary school                     
              participation in internetworking.  This model makes available                  
              current scientific resources, engages students and teachers in                 
              authentic problem-solving, supports teachers in classroom                      
              innovation, and supports the implementation of advances in pedagogy            
              and educational technology.  The Phase I Testbed brings together a             
              number of projects that have already begun to use networking, from             
              simple email applications to distributed databases and multi-user              
              simulations.  BBN-developed technology will provide a uniform                  
              infrastructure for this range of applications.  Collaborating                  
              institutions will supply support, training, and study of usage.                
              The testbed research addresses the trade-off between the                       
              educational value and cost of the technology.  Can the                         
              technology bring educational benefits sufficient to attract                    
              large scale investment by local, state, and federal                            
              agencies, as well as industry?  Can it be implemented in a                     
              robust, supportable form with low entry-level costs?                           
                                                                                             
              The K-12 server and BBN/MacEMail software supply file,                         
              electronic mail, database, news/bulletin board, and other                      
              communications-based services to classroom desktop                             
              computers.  The server can operate at a national, regional,                    
              district or within-school level.  School computers connect                     
              over local and wide area networks using TCP/IP, the standard                   
              protocol for the Internet, instead of the currently common                     
              asynchronous terminal connections to a host computer.  A key                   
              component of the project involves the design and development                   
              of standard mechanisms that allow educational software                         
              programs to take advantage of email, database, and other                       
              services on the network server by invisibly establishing the                   
              underlying connection between the desktop computer and the                     
              server.
