Title       : Common Knowledge: Pittsburgh
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1994      
File        : a9253452

Award Number: 9253452
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1989654            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Carlitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph Z. Roskies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Levine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley J. Herman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MPC Corp.
	      H.B.H. 3000
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15213    412/268-2091

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9217,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This project establishes an educational networking testbed to             
              test conjectures about major changes in the teaching environment of            
              the Pittsburgh Public Schools made possible through the                        
              installation of an electronic data network that will ultimately be             
              available to all students and teachers in the school district.  The            
              proposed network will be novel in its distributed architecture and             
              distributed administrative structure.  Teachers and students will              
              use the network to access information and people outside of their              
              classrooms.  These new resources will be incorporated into                     
              curriculum, reform efforts, and the network will be used as a tool             
              for the development, implementation, evaluation and dissemination              
              of new curriculum components.                                                  
                   The project will develop a set of network-based activities and            
              provide a framework in which such activities can be implemented                
              throughout the local school system, tested, evaluated and made                 
              available to other school districts around the nation.  The project            
              also establishes mechanisms to institutionalize the use and                    
              maintenance of network technology in the Pittsburgh Public Schools.            
              The model that will be developed for the Pittsburgh Public Schools             
              will be applicable to other urban school systems, and materials                
              generated in the course of the project will be immediately                     
              available for the use of other school districts via district's                 
              connection the internet.  The project thus tests the educational               
              utility of wide area networks for the national K-12 community and              
              will provide empirical date on costs and essential factors                     
              contributing to effectiveness.                                                 
                   The project is a joint effort of the school district, the                 
              University of Pittsburgh and the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center,             
              which itself was jointly founded by the University of Pittsburgh,              
              Carnegie Mellon University and the Westinghouse Electric                       
              Corporation.  The proposed activities will build coalitions                    
              involving these groups and many others across the local community.             
              Within the school district the project involves cooperative                    
              activities which include students, teachers, instructional                     
              specialists, administrators and the Pittsburgh Federation of                   
              Teachers.  The proposed network is the key element which will allow            
              these groups to work together efficiently and smoothly.  It is also            
              the key to significant changes in the structure and quality of                 
              education in the Pittsburgh Public Schools and, by extension, in               
              other school districts across the country.                                     
                   Full implementation of the proposed network will require an               
              estimated five years to complete.  The present proposal will fund              
              a two-year pilot phase of the larger project.  This pilot phase                
              will attempt to answer all those questions which Pittsburgh - or               
              any other school district contemplating the development of an                  
              extensive computer network - should understand before proceeding to            
              a full-scale implementation.  Funding for the three-year                       
              implementation phase which follows will be sought from a                       
              combination of NSF programs and programs managed by other federal              
              agencies and private foundations.
