Title       : MRI: An Investigation of the Parameters of Stereotyping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1992      
File        : a9253059

Award Number: 9253059
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38549              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Zarate mzarate@utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 9135,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                            
              Social psychologists have long investigated the effects of                     
              applying various stereotypes.  Little is known, however, about                 
              how people are actually perceived in the real world.  When are                 
              stereotypes applied to make inferences about others versus when                
              are other types of knowledge used to make inferences about                     
              others?  Further, given that each individual can be perceived in               
              multiple ways (by sex, race, occupation, etc.), which stereotypes              
              are most likely applied to different kinds of people?  This                    
              research is an investigation of some of the parameters of                      
              stereotyping, focusing on understanding when stereotyping occurs               
              and what kinds of stereotypes are most likely applied.  The                    
              research goes beyond prior work in multiple ways.  First, unlike               
              much of the recent work in stereotyping, this research does not                
              assume that individuals are automatically racist or sexist.                    
              Rather, it investigates how people are actually perceived,                     
              testing how other types of knowledge (other known individuals)                 
              can be used to make inferences about new individuals.  Further,                
              the University of Texas at El Paso offers the unique opportunity               
              to study inter-ethnic tensions in a place where the usual white                
              majority is the local minority.  Given the changing demographics,              
              with Hispanics fast becoming the majority group in the southwest,              
              understanding racial stereotyping between Hispanics and Anglos                 
              seems particularly important - before it becomes a national                    
              problem.  Thus, this research will test hypotheses derived from a              
              newly developed model of person perception with the goal of                    
              understanding intergroup relations between Hispanics and Anglos.
