Title       : Workshop of the American Physical Society Committee on Minorities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1992 
File        : a9253144

Award Number: 9253144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. McHenry                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian B. Schwartz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Milton D. Slaughter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Physical Soc
	      One Physics Ellipse
	      College Park, MD  207403844    301/209-3204

NSF Program : 9132      RES CAREERS FOR MINOR SCHOLARS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9132,9133,
Abstract    :
                   For the past eleven years, the APS in collaboration with the              
              APS Committee for Minority in Physic has operated the APS Corporate            
              Sponsored Scholarships for Minority Undergraduate Students who                 
              major in Physics.  The scholarship program provide financial                   
              support, a mentorship program consisting of practicing professional            
              physicists and corporate sponsorship.  Over 100 undergraduate                  
              students have participated in the program which started in 1980.               
              As a result, among the scholarship recipients there is a wide                  
              spectrum of students at different levels as well as varied career              
              paths and achievements.  The APS has annually updated the records              
              of the student and thus is in excellent position to analyze the                
              results and make suggestions for improvements.  In spite of many               
              efforts, the number of minority students who chose careers as                  
              professional physicist and other scientists is well below their                
              percentage in the population.  The APS scholarships program has                
              obtained useful information on a rather significant portion of the             
              minority pipeline problem by following minority students from                  
              highschool,  to undergraduate school, to graduate school, to                   
              postdoctoral position and then on to employment.  Thus, significant            
              data can be developed, which can address the various decision                  
              making points at different stages in the pipeline.                             
                                                                                             
                  We proposed to hold a workshop consisting of past and present              
              APS Corporate Scholarship winners, their mentors, corporate                    
              sponsors and appropriate members of the professional societies and             
              government.  The workshop will focus on the:                                   
                                                                                             
              1. Identification and analysis of the crucial steps made be the                
              student scholarship winners in deciding to go on to careers in                 
              physics or a related science,                                                  
                                                                                             
              2.  Identification and analysis of the crucial decision points                 
              which resulted in some scholarship winners deciding not to major in            
              science but in another field,                                                  
                                                                                             
              3.  Identification and analysis of the variables leading to a                  
              scholarship recipient not completing his or her college education,             
                                                                                             
              4. Analysis of the role of the mentor program and how it effects               
              career choices,                                                                
                                                                                             
              5.  Determination of strategies on how to involve the scholarship              
              winners and professional physicists (many from minority groups) in             
              accessing existing networks, and developing their own networking               
              system with assistance from the professional societies and other               
              programs concerned with minorities.                                            
                                                                                             
              It is expected that information and results garnered form this                 
              workshop, focused on the APS program, will be applicable to other              
              efforts aimed at increasing the number of minority students in all             
              the sciences.
