Title       : Conditional Immortalization of Olfactory Neuron Precursors from Transgenic Mice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1992       
File        : a9253103

Award Number: 9253103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne L. Calof   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Neurogenesis, the proliferation and differentiation of cells that              
              give rise to neurons, plays a fundamental role in shaping the                  
              developing nervous system.  Currently, little is known about                   
              molecules that regulate neurogenesis in mammals and other higher               
              vertebrates.  To facilitate the study of vertebrate neurogenesis at            
              the molecular level, an in vitro system has been developed                     
              involving primary culture of a relatively simple germinative                   
              neuroepithelium, the olfactory epithelium (OE) of the mouse embryo.            
              Immortalized cell lines, which have some properties of OE neuronal             
              precursors, have also been generated, but failure of these cell                
              lines to differentiate fully precludes their usefulness for many               
              studies.  The objective of the experiments performed during this               
              Research Planning Grant is to generate conditionally-immortalized              
              cell lines capable of undergoing full differentiation into                     
              olfactory receptor neurons.  A strategy specifically designed to               
              select for differentiating cell lines, involving use of an existing            
              strain of transgenic mice, will be used in these preliminary                   
              experiments.  Future studies to be conducted with cell lines                   
              generated during the planning period would be directed towards                 
              identifying gene products characteristic of the neuronal precursor             
              phenotype.  Specifically, a molecular genetic approach ("promoter              
              trapping") would be used to identify genes that are expressed in               
              proliferating neuronal precursor cells and are turned off upon                 
              terminal neuronal differentiation.  Genes identified using this                
              approach would then be analyzed with respect to pattern and timing             
              of expressing in vivo during normal development, to determine                  
              whether they are expressed in all germinative neuroepithelia; such             
              widely-expressed genes are potentially of general importance in the            
              regulation of neurogenesis.
