Title       : RIMI: High Temperature Fatigue of Continuous Fiber Reinforced Silicon
               Carbide/Silicon Nitride Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1994    
File        : a9253028

Award Number: 9253028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bobby L. Wilson                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309912             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shaik Jeelani jeelanis@tusk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hassan Mahfuz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jayalakshmi Krishnagopalan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tuskegee University
	      
	      Tuskegee Institute, AL  36088    334/727-8501

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1446,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Continuous fiber reinforced ceramic composites (CFCC) will be tested           
              under fatigue at room and elevated temperatures to study the                   
              variation in fatigue phenomena with temperature.  Laminated coupons            
              of SiCf/Si3N4 (silicon Carbide fiber reinforced Silicon Nitride                
              matrix) composites with symmetric layups will be subjected to                  
              tensile-tensile fatigue.  Prior to fatigue tests, tensile properties           
              will be characterized at various temperatures to determine the                 
              strength, and to decide about specific temperatures at which the               
              elevated temperature fatigue tests are to be conducted.  Room                  
              temperature fatigue tests will be performed at various stress ratios           
              ranging from 0 to 0.5, and which frequencies varying from 1 to 10              
              Hz, to observe their effects on the fatigue life of the composite.             
              High temperature fatigue tests will be conducted under isothermal              
              conditions to maintain the cyclic loading as the main driving force            
              for the composite failure.  NDE and SEM characterization will be               
              performed to evaluate the damage and the failure characteristics of            
              the composite.  Parallel to mechanical testing, finite element                 
              analysis will be performed to investigate the non-linear response of           
              the laminate under tensile and fatigue loading.  Layered shell                 
              element developed on the basis of first order shear deformation                
              theory will be used.  Both large deformation and plastic strain                
              behavior will be considered to account for the geometric and                   
              material non-linearities in the analysis.  Cumulative fatigue damage           
              bases on the Miner's rule and the experimental S-N curve, will be              
              simulated in the finite element model to study the laminate response           
              under two and three stress level cyclic loading.  Few specimens will           
              be tested under cumulative fatigue to verify the FEM results.                  
                                                                                             
              The proposed research will be conducted by three faculty associated            
              with the Tuskegee University's Materials Research Laboratory (MRL)             
              which is a multi-disciplinary facility developed for synthesis and             
              characterization of high performance materials including advanced              
              composites.  It is proposed to involve six minority graduate                   
              students and six minority undergraduate students over a period of              
              three years.  The program will also allow the sponsoring department            
              to recruit talented minority faculty and students.
