Title       : Learning and Applying Difficult Science Knowledge: School- Based Research into
               the Application of Hypermedia Learning Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1997   
File        : a9253157

Award Number: 9253157
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $689682             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Jacobson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rand J. Spiro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 7257,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project investigates the learning of important but                        
              difficult scientific knowledge in biology using hypermedia                     
              learning systems based on a recent cognitive theory of case-                   
              based learning (Spiro, Feltovich, Coulson, & Anderson, 1988;                   
              Spiro & Jehng, 1990).  This approach to structuring                            
              hypertext and hypermedia systems provides a multidimension                     
              and nonlinear learning environment that explicitly                             
              demonstrates critical conceptual interrelationships in the                     
              instructional content.  The system has been tested in a                        
              number of different domains, such as biomedicine and                           
              military strategy (Spiro et al., 1988).  There have also                       
              been promising findings of knowledge transfer in a                             
              controlled experimental setting using a hypertext system of                    
              this type (Jacobson & Spiro, 1991).                                            
                                                                                             
              The proposed research represents the first application in                      
              biology classroom settings of this theory-based approach to                    
              structuring hypermedia learning technologies.  Scientists                      
              will validate the accuracy and currency of the biology                         
              content and practicing biology teachers will explore ways in                   
              which these hypermedia systems can be best integrated in                       
              real-world classroom settings.  These new instructional                        
              systems will be tested in public high school biology and                       
              life sciences courses with a wide range of students spanning                   
              from academically talented to underserved populations                          
              comprised of low income, minority, or academically low                         
              performing students.  These hypermedia learning systems are                    
              expected to help these different types of students both to                     
              learn difficult biology concepts and to be able to use their                   
              acquired knowledgen in new ways and in new situations.  This                   
              collaborative university-school research project will                          
              explore a number of issues related to the acquisition and                      
              transfer of biological knoweledge, cognitive learning                          
              theory, hypermedia instructional design, and the integration                   
              of hypermedia learning systems into the overall school-based                   
              science learning environment.
