Title       : An Enhanced Bioscience Education Program for the IntroductorYears of the Biology
               Major and for Interested Preteachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9253994

Award Number: 9253994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325788             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne E. Magee mageewe@duvm.ocs.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard P. Sagik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Presley F. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7419,9178,
Abstract    :
              The Enhanced Bioscience Education program greatly increases the                
              effectiveness of undergraduate education in the biological                     
              sciences.  The new integrated Curriculum presents science as it                
              is practiced--as a problem solving, investigative activity.                    
              The curriculum is designed for up to 100 bioscience and teacher                
              preparation majors.  It is organized around topic areas and                    
              extends over five quarters of instruction: (1) Biological                      
              Investigation is the heart of the curriculum and consists of a                 
              series of laboratory modules covering the important concepts of                
              modern biology, leading students toward design of their own                    
              experiments.  There is a strong emphasis on use of computers                   
              for collecting data and for data analysis and interpretation.                  
              (2) Principals of Bioscience includes the content areas now                    
              covered in freshman biology, cell physiology, microbiology and                 
              genetics presented as a single, coherent sequence and                          
              completely integrated with Biological Investigation                            
              laboratories.  (3) Physical Sciences and Mathematics covers the                
              topics of freshman and sophomore chemistry, mathematics and                    
              physics, with the appropriate information and skills introduced                
              in the order needed.  An Undergraduate Research Program                        
              includes freshman and sophomore independent research projects,                 
              preparation for more advanced projects, and the establishment                  
              of the Drexel Journal of Undergraduate Research as a vehicle                   
              for dissemination of student research.  Special attention is                   
              paid to problems of student support and retention.  Specific                   
              plans are included for evaluation and effective dissemination                  
              of the outcomes of the project.
