Title       : Tools of the Astronomer, An Interactive Science Education Exhibit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1992     
File        : a9253363

Award Number: 9253363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara H. Butler                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500710             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Millis   (Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Buckingham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lowell Observatory
	      
	      Flagstaff, AZ  86001    928/774-3358

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              11        Astronomy                               
              13        Physics                                 
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Lowell Observatory astronomers will collaborate with                           
              educators, museum specialists, and planetarium professional                    
              to design and implement a unique series of interactive                         
              science education exhibits entitled Tools of the Astronomer.                   
              The exhibits will capitalize on widespread interest in                         
              astronomy to illustrate the research process, demonstrate                      
              the theory and function of basic astronomical instruments,                     
              and encourage visitors to discover how measurements made                       
              with these instruments reveal the properties of celestial                      
              objects.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Exhibit concepts developed by the Lowell staff will be                         
              evaluated by a National Exhibit Advisory Board (NEAB).  The                    
              original concepts will then be modified to reflect the                         
              Board's recommendations, and prototype exhibits will be                        
              built.  The prototypes will be extensively tested for                          
              durability and effectiveness in achieving the educational                      
              goals.  Students and teachers from Arizona (including those                    
              from nearby Navajo and Hopi Indian Reservations), plus                         
              members of the general public, will participate in the                         
              testing.  The NEAB will then review the completed prototypes                   
              and test results, and recommend any further modification or                    
              testing needed prior to selection of a professional exhibit                    
              fabricator to build the final exhibits.                                        
                                                                                             
              The completed exhibits will be installed and further                           
              evaluated in a new educational facility to be opened at                        
              Lowell Observatory in spring of 1994.  There, the exhibits                     
              will be experienced by tens of thousands of people who visit                   
              Lowell Observatory each year.  A significant fraction of                       
              these visitors will be school children who will participate                    
              in instructional programs designed around the exhibits.  The                   
              exhibits also will ultimately be used in teacher workshops.                    
              To achieve maximum impact, all software, exhibit designs,                      
              teacher's guides, and other material developed in this                         
              project will be marketed to schools, science centers,                          
              planetaria, observatories, and other educational entities at                   
              the cost of reproduction.
