Title       : RPG: Organic Geochemistry of Fossil Non-Marine Molluscs with Applications to
               Amino Acid Racemization Dating
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1993   
File        : a9253105

Award Number: 9253105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: June E. Mirecki   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Enantiomeric (D/L) values of amino acids preserved in the organic              
              matrix of molluscan fossils are used to characterize Quaternary                
              stratigraphic units, and provide a basis for correlation of strata             
              and estimation of relative age.  D/L values increase as a function             
              of time (termed racemization), at a rate controlled to some extent             
              by post-depositional thermal history of the fossil.  Protein                   
              hydrolysis also exerts a rate-controlling effect on amino acid                 
              racemization, because amino acids on protein termini racemize                  
              preferentially  to those located within the protein chain.                     
              The extent to which hydrolysis affects D/L values preserved in                 
              mollusc shell protein is not well-defined.  Leaching of hydrolyzed             
              amino acids (primarily D-enantionmers) can affect resolution of the            
              amino acid racemizaton (AAR) dating method.  The focus of this work            
              is how the physical and chemical condition of fossil mollusc shell             
              protein affects resolution of the AAR method.  Fossil organic                  
              matrix will be studied using molecular weight separation methods               
              to define "resistant" versus "labile" components.  Enantiomeric                
              values will be determined in each component using HPLC methods, to             
              understand the influence of hydrolysis on diagenetic racemization.             
              Physical evidence of leaching will be observed using scanning                  
              electron microscopy.  This study will focus primarily of molluscan             
              fauna from Quaternary units of the southern High Plains, which                 
              represent a long geologic record during which protein diagenesis               
              can be studied.
