Title       : Physics Courseware Evaluation Project: Courseware Evaluationand PCEP Teacher
               Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1997  
File        : a9253343

Award Number: 9253343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joyce B. Evans                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1141514            (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Risley john risley@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of the program is to enhance the effectiveness of                     
              high school physics teachers in their use of the computer in                   
              the classroom and laboratory both for instruction and                          
              computation.  This will be accomplished via two distinct but                   
              inter-related activities:                                                      
                   * The evaluation of physics software for the use                          
                   of all physics teachers.                                                  
                   * A Teacher Institute for empowering leadership                           
                   teachers to use the software and achieve full                             
                   utilization of computers in the teaching of                               
                   physics.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The software evaluation component will provide independent ,                   
              timely, reliable and comprehensive guides to currently                         
              available courseware for high school physics teachers.                         
              These reviews will be disseminated by publication in The                       
              Physics Teacher and by contributed presentations and                           
              workshops given locally and nationally.                                        
                                                                                             
              The institute will provide intensive hands-on activity in                      
              the use of the latest Microcomputer Based Laboratory(MBL)                      
              interfaces, spreadsheets and sample exercises, and                             
              courseware materials for classroom demonstrations and                          
              student assignments.                                                           
              Each summer two sessions will be organized with 12                             
              leadership teachers in each. The sessions will be of three                     
              weeks duration at the Physics Courseware Laboratory of North                   
              Carolina State University.  During the following year staff                    
              members will make two follow-up visits to the teachers high                    
              schools and the following summer the teachers will return to                   
              NCSU for two weeks of review and assessment.  A total of 48                    
              nationally selected high school teachers will be able to                       
              participate in this three year project. During the first and                   
              second academic years the leadership teachers will be                          
              expected to conduct a total of 4 workshops and to give at                      
              least one presentation at a professional meeting on the                        
              utility of computers to teach physics. It is expected that a                   
              total of about 2000 teachers will receive information about                    
              the utility of computers in physics instruction.                               
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing is equal to 17% of NSF funding requested.
