Title       : VPW: Development of Genomic Libraries for Glycine max: A Genetic Tool (Genetics)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1992     
File        : a9253008

Award Number: 9253008
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84396              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen J. Danna   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1116,
Abstract    :
                    The investigator proposes to produce a tool critical for                 
              further studies of soybeans:  a collection of large, cloned                    
              segments of DNA (P1 library) from two lines:  (1) an elite line                
              (BSR101) which has superior genes at most loci and which is                    
              representative of the broader germplasm used for breeding; and                 
              (2) one which carries exotic genes, including those for resistance             
              to soybean cyst nematode (SCN), a serious pathogen.  Dr. Danna                 
              will screen the cloned DNA to identify segments that hybridize to              
              molecular markers tightly linked to the SCN-resistance loci.  The              
              cloned segments will be useful for obtaining new markers more                  
              tightly linked to these important genes and for eventual isolation of          
              the genes for transfer to other lines of soybean.  The P1 libraries            
              produced will be useful in addressing fundamental questions about              
              the soybean, including sequence organization of the genome and                 
              its evolutionary history from a wild ancestor species.                         
                    The long term goals of this project are to contribute to the             
              fundamental understanding of the molecular biology and genetics                
              of soybean and to facilitate the manipulation of soybean                       
              germplasm for crop improvement.                                                
                    This project furthers VPW program objectives to provide                  
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or                 
              engineering through research, and to encourage other women to                  
              pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced              
              visibility as a role model on the host campus.  The proposed                   
              activities which contribute to the second objective include:  giving           
              guest lectures on virology; teaching an undergraduate seminar                  
              course on "Women in Biology," with both an historical perspective              
              and a focus on contemporary biologists; arranging for guest                    
              lecturers, who will also present departmental seminars; organizing             
              an informal discussion group for women in the biology department               
              to provide a framework for "networking," and to provide                        
              counseling and mentoring for women students.
