Title       : RIMI: ON THE MECHANISM OF REVERSING HEMOGLOBIN PROPORTIONS IN ADULT RATS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1997    
File        : a9253023

Award Number: 9253023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mukul C. Datta   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tuskegee University
	      
	      Tuskegee Institute, AL  36088    334/727-8501

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1114,
Abstract    :
                   The purpose of this proposed research is to establish the                 
              importance of concurrent prostaglandin (PG) synthesis during changes           
              in hemoglobin (Hb) proportions toward newborn values in anemic adult           
              rats.  The rats and mice both have no specifically fetal Hb like               
              humans.  However, for both men and mice, certain congenital anemias            
              lead to levels of fetal and minor hemoglobins, respectively, close             
              to those seen shortly after birth.  Since 1982, a variety of                   
              chemical agents including hydroxyurea have been show to increase               
              fetal Hb level in humans in animals or in erythroid cultures.                  
              Hydroxyurea has been also show to induce 3-minor globin in adult               
              anemic mice.  Several mechanisms have been proposed to justify the             
              effects of these agents.  However, no single mechanism is adequate             
              enough to accept as a common mechanism for the reversion of Hb                 
              proportions in adult life.                                                     
                   It is proposed that studies in adult rats cover the following:            
              1. The role of recombinant human erythropoietin and several other              
              agents in the activation of fetal-like Hb proportions in the                   
              presence and absence of concurrent PG synthesis.  2. The burst                 
              forming unit-erythroid (BFU-E) cultures from marrow and peripheral             
              blood derived cells for synthesis of Hb components in presence of              
              PGE2.  3. The levels of some E-prostaglandins in plasma of                     
              recombinant erythropoietin treated and drug treated rats.  The                 
              several procedures to be employed include ion exchange                         
              chromatography, HPLC, radioimmunoassay and erythroid culture.                  
                   These studies should lead to an increased knowledge of                    
              mechanisms which regulate the reversion of Hb proportions toward               
              newborn values in anemic adult rats.  In addition, these studies may           
              contribute to the development of a strategy for manipulating Hb                
              components in diseases such as sickle cell anemia and thalassemia.             
                   Another important objective of this project is to provide an              
              opportunity to undergraduate and graduate students in the                      
              departments of biology and chemistry of Tuskegee University to                 
              receive adequate research training, in an effort to motivate them to           
              pursue careers in science fields.
