Title       : Developing A Comprehensive Desert Exhibit: An Innovative Model for Informal
               Science Education in Outdoor Museums
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1995  
File        : a9253472

Award Number: 9253472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara H. Butler                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $634776             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen M. Socolofsky   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Breunig  (Principal Investigator former)
              Joseph R. McAuliffe  (Principal Investigator former)
              Ruth Greenhouse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Desert Botanical Garden
	      
	      Phoenix, AZ  85010    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              60        Life Sciences                           
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Desert Botanical Garden will utilize its extensive                         
              collection to create a science learning center focusing on                     
              deserts and presenting fundamental science concepts applicable                 
              to all environments.  The comprehensive desert exhibit created                 
              by this proposal will feature six thematic trails through 25                   
              acres of the Garden, with the trails' themes ranging from basic                
              characteristics of deserts to adaptions of plants, animals, and                
              people to the desert.  Emphasizing ecology and conversation, the               
              trails will include conceptual signs, investigation stations for               
              hands-on, interactive learning, and innovative written                         
              exploration guides.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The proposal also includes educational programming which will                  
              extend the exhibit and encourage use of the Garden as an outdoor               
              laboratory.  An exhibit-based curriculum will be developed for                 
              use across the state, and an institute will be created to                      
              prepare teachers to use the exhibit and curriculum.  A newspaper               
              series focusing on key exhibit concepts will be disseminated                   
              across the state to reach out-of-school adults.  The products of               
              the proposal and the model created will be shred through various               
              networks with a national audience.                                             
                                                                                             
              The local and worldwide population explosion in arid lands                     
              mandates an increased understanding of deserts.  With this                     
              proposal, the Garden will be a catalyst for greater awareness                  
              and change.
