Title       : Collaborative Design In A Networked Multimedia Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1992 
File        : a9253085

Award Number: 9253085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly C. Hunter                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75292              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geraldine K. Gay gkg1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Thomas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In their study of design, engineering students often work                      
              without a context.  As a consequence, they may fail to                         
              understand the social, historical, economic, and other                         
              implications associated with the design and manufacture of                     
              products.  Also, students often design in an environment                       
              that is insular and hardly imitative of the team development                   
              characteristic of engineering in American industry.  This                      
              project will investigate some of the potential benefits to                     
              collaborative learning and a concurrent design environment                     
              when the powerful communication tools of high-bandwidth                        
              networking and digital hypermedia are joined.  A high-                         
              bandwidth network connecting digital hypermedia databases                      
              will enable both engineering design operations and                             
              information to be exchanged concurrently among users at                        
              several remote sites.  Research and development of this                        
              proposed distributed multimedia environments, should enable                    
              students to learn new ways of working with and using                           
              technology and hypermedia tools in order to collaborate more                   
              effectively.  The objectives of this study are as follows:                     
                                                                                             
              1.   to examine the characteristics inherent in a hypermedia                   
                   distributed environment (non-linearity, annotations,                      
                   multiple representations) as a communication medium                       
                   which supports collaborative design between distant                       
                   geographic locations;                                                     
                                                                                             
              2.   to modify and develop communication tools and resources                   
                   of collaborative design for use in a distributed                          
                   hypermedia environments;                                                  
                                                                                             
              3.   to analyze communication activities of students in a                      
                   collaborative design environment in order to promote                      
                   the teaching of collaboration skills needed for                           
                   concurrent engineering design; and                                        
                                                                                             
              4.   to introduce computer-assisted cooperative work models                    
                   into the engineering curriculum.
