Title       : VPW: Primitive Solar System Objects: Volatile Activity on Inner Solar System
               Bodies (Astronomy)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1994 
File        : a9253136

Award Number: 9253136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucy-Ann McFadden   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1214,9225,
Abstract    :
                    The research project will involve both ground-based and                  
              space-based observations of two small solar system bodies, the                 
              main belt asteroid, 1 Ceres, and the planet-crossing body, 2201                
              Oljato.  Past observations of both these bodies have revealed                  
              possible evidence of volatile activity.  1 Ceres is the largest main           
              belt asteroid, and formed in the inner solar system between Mars               
              and Jupiter.  Recent observations at one limb of Ceres have                    
              shown emission at 3085 A attributable to OH molecules from                     
              dissociation of water.  2201 Oljato is in a short-lived orbit which            
              crosses the planets Mars, Earth, and Venus.  There is dynamical                
              evidence indicating that it may have evolved from a comet-like                 
              orbit, and ultraviolet photometric measurements from which a                   
              reasonable production rate of water can be derived assuming the                
              flux is due to fluorescence of OH molecules.  Both these objects               
              will be observed again during the tenure of the investigator's visit           
              to place upper limits on the abundance and production rates of                 
              common cometary volatiels OH, CN, C2 and C3 using                              
              observational experiments that are designed to place the most                  
              sensitive limits that are technically possible on the abundance of             
              these species.                                                                 
                    The results of this project will enable us to compare the                
              nature of volatile activity on an object which originated in the inner         
              solar system, with one that quite possibly is derived from the outer           
              solar system.                                                                  
                    This project furthers VPW program objectives to provide                  
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or                 
              engineering through research, and to encourage other women to                  
              pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced              
              visibility as a role model on the host campus.  The proposed                   
              activities which contribute to the second objective include:                   
              teaching undergraduate courses for both the Astronomy and                      
              Geology Departments; supervising undergraduate students                        
              carrying out research projects; presenting departmental colloquia;             
              participating in colloquia planning to increase the participation of           
              women in the series; and interacting with regional chapters of the             
              Association of Women in Science.
