Title       : U.S.- U.K. Cooperation Research: Body Composition and Survival in Sturnus
               Vulgaris
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1992     
File        : a9123572

Award Number: 9123572
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15625              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Thompson wrens@ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 5946      UNITED KINGDOM
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1127,5946,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support U.S.-U.K. cooperative research between                 
              Charles F. Thompson of Illinois State University and Christopher               
              M. Perrins, Director of the Edward Grey Institute, Oxford                      
              University.  The investigators will examine the relationship                   
              between body fat stores and survival in fledgling and juvenile                 
              European starlings. Their objective is to test the hypothesis that             
              bird survival is positively correlated with fat storage capacity at the        
              time of nest-leaving.  Fat storage capacity is thought to be                   
              important for survival in many species of birds whose offspring                
              leave the nest before they are capable of obtaining food for                   
              themselves.  The investigators will employ European starlings,                 
              used extensively for ecological research at University Farm of                 
              Oxford University. Data on body composition will be collected and              
              fat content will be determined using the TOBEC method, a new,                  
              safe measuring technique in avian biology.                                     
                                                                                             
              Dr. Thompson brings to this collaboration his extensive background             
              on the house wren and his experience with the TOBEC method.                    
              This is complemented by the British group's background on the                  
              evolution of life history traits in birds. The Edward Grey Institute           
              has been at the forefront of avian biology and ecology since the               
              1940s.  This cooperative research effort will advance our                      
              knowledge about the relationship between variation in the condition            
              of offspring in certain species of birds, their survival and ultimately        
              the reproductive success of the parents.
