Title       : The Extent of the Market
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1992     
File        : a9123333

Award Number: 9123333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69389              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald N. McCloskey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A global economy alters the impact of changes in the environment.              
              The question addressed by this project is when the economy became              
              truly "global."  The answer is to be found in the statistics of                
              prices in different countries, which converge as the market                    
              becomes wider in extent.  Detailed studies of particular gaps in               
              prices--such as the 570 percent gap between the price of wheat in              
              Poland and in Northern Italy during the 15th century--test how                 
              much the convergence resulted from falls in transport costs and                
              how much from institutional changes, such as peace, literacy, and              
              security of contract.  The statistical material is supplemented                
              with linguistic and cultural information.  The methods employed                
              are used in economics and geography, but have not been applied to              
              the longer-term history of the market.  The objective is to                    
              measure price convergence over many centuries, from ancient times              
              to the present, in order to give a standard for "the" market.                  
              Such a standard forms the background for scientific studies in                 
              economics, human ecology, geography, and history.                              
                                                                                             
              The connection between environment and the economy is not as                   
              simple as it looks from the biological perspective.  The economy               
              amplifies or dampens the impact of the physical environment.  To               
              project the complex of environmental and economic change into the              
              future is difficult at best, sensitive to errors of specification              
              in the mode: the best work of economists and meteorologists and                
              ecologists agree that twenty years out we are guessing crudely.                
              But we can know the past.  From documentation of forecasted areas              
              we can know how rapidly Icelandic topsoil has been eroded by                   
              cultivation int he millennium of settlement.  From new isotope                 
              techniques we can know the long and startlingly stable history of              
              carbon dioxide in the atmosphere.  Global warming and chilling                 
              have happened before in recorded history, chronicles for example               
              in the growth rings of the bristlecone pine.  Contrary to recent               
              fears, global warming has on the whole been good for humans, and               
              in particular has expanded the market and the high culture that                
              goes with the market.  The unusually warm decades or centuries                 
              around 1500 BC, the birth of Christ, and 1200 AD saw the market                
              expand and civilization flourish.  The unusually cold decades or               
              centuries around 1000 BC, 700 AD, and 1350 AD were notorious                   
              setbacks to markets and culture.  The global market and the                    
              global ecology are connected, but in ways both benign and                      
              malignant, and in any case not easily predicted.
