Title       : Survey of Human Resource in Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1992    
File        : a9123894

Award Number: 9123894
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14231              (Estimated)
Investigator: Duncan T. Patten   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Forest Service
	      
	      Washington, DC  20250    /   -

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 5419,
Abstract    :
              Recent reports have identified the potential lack of qualified                 
              scientists and technicians as a major concern in ensuring that                 
              basic ecological research can be undertaken. This research is of               
              primary importance in addressing current environmental issues.                 
              Neither the scientific nor the policy-making communities know the              
              demographics of trained ecologists in the United States. There is              
              no document identifying the number of ecologists employed and                  
              their areas of specialization. Educators, government agencies and              
              research institutions need to know what training is required for               
              the next generation of scientists.                                             
                                                                                             
              The Ecological Society of America, Public Affairs Office, will                 
              develop, publish, and distribute a survey assessing the human                  
              resources in ecology. The objectives of the study are to                       
              determine the pattern of graduate ecology degrees earned over the              
              past 30 years; determine ethnicity and gender composition of                   
              ecologists (This information would be compared to the demographic              
              composition of the work force as a whole); catalog the nation's                
              environmental science capabilities according to problem area (eg.              
              how many scientists are trained to study the ecological                        
              complexity of global change); and analyze current employment                   
              patterns of ecologists. The resulting human resource survey would              
              provide direction to ecologists, other scientists, federal and                 
              state agencies, educators, and research institution in setting                 
              goals and designing programs over the next decade.
