Title       : MAB: Agronomic and Economic Analysis of Progressive Green- house Warming:
               Impacts on Grain Yields, Cropping Patterns, and Farm Profitability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1991  
File        : a9123883

Award Number: 9123883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49499              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel S. Wilks   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan J. Riha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harry M. Kaiser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy D. Mount  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
              0201000   Agriculture                             
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1124,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Agricultural ecosystems are key elements of the life support              
              systems of all developed societies.  These systems are so                      
              dominated by human factors that a reasonable understanding of                  
              their responses to large-scale changes in the physical                         
              environment necessarily requires consideration of economic                     
              influences on human decision making, which modulate the                        
              biophysical aspects of agricultural production.  The economics,                
              in turn, are critically influenced by the biological responses to              
              the physical environment, which determine yield potential and                  
              commodity supplies.  A credible treatment of these interactions                
              requires integration of physical, biological and social science                
              approaches and tools.                                                          
                   This research project will jointly assess the predicted                   
              economic and agricultural impacts of evolving climate changes                  
              caused by gradually increasing greenhouse gas concentrations.  A               
              recently developed methodology, which focuses on the response of               
              farm-level decisions to changes in the physical environment, will              
              form the basis of the study.  The project will consider the major              
              grain crops of North America, for which reasonably comprehensive               
              agronomic, climatological and economic data are available.                     
                   The proposed research will contribute to the scientific                   
              understanding of interactions between human and biophysical                    
              determinants of food production and prices in the context of a                 
              changing climate.  It will track the effects of gradual climate                
              changes through a set of physiological crop models to a                        
              sequential linear programming model of farm-level decision                     
              making, and is thus truly interdisciplinary in nature.  The                    
              results will provide tools which can contribute usefully to                    
              informed decisions regarding the consequences of both energy and               
              agricultural policy on landscape patterns, food production and                 
              prices.
