Title       : U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research on Zeolite Dehydration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1992      
File        : a9123567

Award Number: 9123567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mickey E. Gunter mgunter@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-6111

NSF Program : 5950      SWITZERLAND
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
              0510802   Rock Properties-Mineral                 
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1573,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Dr. Mickey Gunter of the University                        
              of Idaho to collaborate in geological research with Dr.                        
              Thomas Armbruster of the Laboratory for Chemistry and                          
              Mineral Crystallography of the University of Bern,                             
              Switzerland.  They share an interest in zeolites, a                            
              mineral group with unusual internal structure and                              
              valuable applications.  Dr. Gunter's experience in                             
              mineralogy and zeolite chemistry is complemented by Dr.                        
              Armbruster's expertise in crystallography and the                              
              relationship of optical properties of minerals to their                        
              crystal chemistry.  In addition, Dr. Armbruster's                              
              laboratory in Bern, where the joint work will be carried                       
              out, possesses state-of-the-art instruments and computers                      
              that are necessary for the proposed research.  In 1990,                        
              Gunter and Armbruster performed crystal structure                              
              analysis on clinoptilolite, a mineral form of a zeolite,                       
              at five different hydration levels.  Their current plans                       
              are to expand that work by measuring optical                                   
              characteristics at various hydration levels.  These data                       
              will help them to understand the effects of water on the                       
              optical properties of this mineral and to develop a                            
              simple method to correlate the properties to dehydration                       
              level.  This will lay the groundwork for future optical                        
              studies on this mineral and other zeolites with different                      
              liquids occupying the channels.                                                
                                                                                             
              Zeolites are a large mineral group with an unusual                             
              structure comprised of channels in a framework.  These                         
              channels give them commercially important uses as                              
              "molecular sieves," for applications such as water                             
              purification, petroleum refining, and radioactive waste                        
              treatment.  For example, the subject of the proposed                           
              joint work, clinoptilolite, can absorb radioactive cesium                      
              and was used recently in the cleanup of Chernobyl.  Very                       
              thorough characterization of zeolites will lead to a much                      
              better understanding of their crystal chemistry and                            
              physical properties and may make it possible to improve                        
              the "sieving" properties of these minerals.
