Title       : Metropolitan Restructuring, Neighborhood Change, and Concentrated Poverty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1995  
File        : a9123291

Award Number: 9123291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138318             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. White Michael_White@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hilary Silver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This is a proposal to study why some urban neighborhoods                  
              become overwhelmingly poor and black.  The study will use census               
              tract data to describe changes in neighborhoods between 1970 and               
              1980.  In attempting to explain such changes, the investigators                
              will consider first Wilson's so called mismatch hypothesis, which              
              sees economic restructuring as the basic reason for the                        
              concentration of poverty in urban areas.  An alternative                       
              explanation is provided by the out-migration hypothesis which                  
              sees the outmigration of the black middle class from the inner                 
              city ghetto as the primary reason for the changing composition of              
              many urban neighborhoods.  The resulting geographic concentration              
              of low-skilled, lower class families and individuals then gives                
              rise to emergent properties of neighborhoods that may exacerbate               
              social problems, such as deteriorated housing, social isolation,               
              joblessness, and female-headed families.                                       
                   The study will employ a unique data set constructed by the                
              Urban Institute.  Census tract data from 1970 and 1980 are                     
              matched with geographical coordinates and additional SMSA-level                
              characteristics.  The investigators will add further information               
              about metropolitan areas as well as longitude and latitude                     
              coordinates for each tract.  The resulting data file will be a                 
              national multi-level data base with information on all census                  
              tracts, their geographic position, and the characteristics of the              
              metropolitan area in which they are located.  The analysis of                  
              neighborhood change will be done using first difference equation               
              models with variables specified at two levels, the tract level                 
              and the metropolitan area level.                                               
                   This study will shed new light on the problem of                          
              concentrated urban poverty in the United States.  The study will               
              go a long way towards resolving the arguments both among social                
              scientists and among policy makers about the causes of the                     
              spatial concentration of poverty that was observed during the                  
              1970s.
