Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Determined Inverse Boundary Value Problems and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1992     
File        : a9123742

Award Number: 9123742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ziqi Sun sun@twsuvm.uc.twsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wichita State University
	      1845 Fairmount
	      Wichita, KS  67260    316/689-3456

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The project continues work on inverse boundary problems and               
              their application to inverse scattering theory.  Inverse problems              
              are common in physical experiments where one only knows the                    
              outcome of some process and tries to determine the physical                    
              parameters which could produce such a result.  In this work, one               
              seeks the coefficients of a partial differential equation from                 
              knowledge of the associated map taking Dirichlet data (boundary                
              values) to Neumann data (boundary flux).  Inverse problems have                
              clear applications to electric current tomography.  In addition,               
              it is an example of how specific applications can lead to new                  
              methods, which then lead to new and unexpected theoretical                     
              developments.                                                                  
                   In the present context, the new method is the use of                      
              exponential solutions of elliptic partial differential equations.              
              It may be viewed as an elliptic analogue of geometrical optics.                
              The method has led to major advances in inverse scattering  and                
              several other, related problems.  It is now beginning to yield                 
              results on problems involving systems (such as Maxwell's                       
              equations) rather than scalar equations.  The success of this                  
              viewpoint for elliptic problems has also spurred work on                       
              analogous questions for hyperbolic equations.                                  
                   The goals for future work involve further exploration of the              
              global uniqueness question in two dimensions (a major concern in               
              all inverse problems, with two dimensions being the most                       
              difficult) and further progress on systems such as Maxwell's                   
              equations or those of elasticity.
