Title       : Context Effects in Psychological Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1993    
File        : a9123378

Award Number: 9123378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Blackman                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1992   
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43810              (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Council james_council@ndsu.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Psychological researchers often administer more than one                  
              measure during the same research session in order to test                      
              hypothesized relationships among contructs.  However,  initial                 
              measures might influence subjects in ways that affect their                    
              responses to subsequent measures.  Demonstrations of such "context             
              effects"  have important methodological implications,  since                   
              correlations obtained in studies that fail to control for context              
              effects may significantly differ from those obtained with proper               
              controls.                                                                      
                   Three studies are proposed in order to demonstrate that the               
              phenomenon is robust and should be of general concern in research              
              on personality and individual differences.  Two basic conditions               
              will be employed:  In the Same Context condition,  measures will               
              be administered together in one research session,   so that                    
              subjects may infer an association.  In the Separate Context                    
              condition,  scales will be administered in separate sessions,  as              
              parts of independent studies.  Thus,  subjects will be unlikely to             
              perceive any connection  among them.  Three established                        
              relationships will be investigated to determine whether                        
              relationships have been confounded by context effects:  a)                     
              hypnotizability and absorption;  b)  depression and attributional              
              style;  and c) childhood traumata and adult personality.                       
                   Professor Council is an internationally known scholar in the              
              area of hypnosis research.  His proposal to test for the presence              
              of context effects in several different substantive areas is of                
              considerable importance.  Much work on  personality,  social                   
              psychology,  and psychopathology consists of studying relationships            
              between measures obtained from subjects on a single occasion.                  
              Thus,  if context effects are shown to contribute significantly to             
              relationships between measures,  many well-known facts may turn out            
              to be artifactual. Likewise, the experimental results may  lead to             
              a change in the methodologies customarily employed to collect                  
              information in these fields and may spur new theoretical                       
              investigations.
