Title       : Nature Study in American Schools: 1890-1930
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 2,  1995    
File        : a9123719

Award Number: 9123719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally G. Kohlstedt sgk@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A full understanding of the crisis in science teaching in the                  
              elementary and secondary schools of the United States requires a               
              look at the historical background against which teaching of science            
              in this country has developed.  How were things done before?  Why              
              were the choices for presentation made? What were the goals of                 
              science teaching when it was first introduced?  How has the                    
              situation changed?                                                             
                                                                                             
              Professor Kohlstedt's project constitutes the first comprehensive              
              analysis of the Nature Study program of teaching science in schools            
              to consider its scientific outlook, its concern for social and                 
              environmental issues, the extraordinary diversity of its activities            
              by region and the ways in which gender issues influenced the                   
              program and affected its stability.  "Nature Study" was an                     
              international movement that came from Europe to the United States              
              in the 1890's.  It developed as a method to introduce children to              
              the natural world in a systematic way.  Professor Kohlstedt is                 
              examining the period from 1890 to 1930 when the Nature Study                   
              movement moved beyond the school system to extracurricular and                 
              public institutions.  She is probing the deceptively simple clarity            
              of Nature Study's basic proposition--learning from natural objects-            
              -that was elaborated in textbooks and lesson plans variously                   
              directed at rural and urban children in both private and public                
              schools.  She is reassessing the outlook and activities of those               
              administrators and teachers who established Nature Study as a                  
              curriculum and publicized it through lectures and publications.                
              Based on the records of normal schools, university archives, school            
              system records, and the papers of individual teachers and students             
              as well as the numerous published books and articles on Nature                 
              Study, this research will document its philosophy, content,                    
              pedagogy, scientific outlook, and public connections.  This study              
              promises to be a most important contribution to our understanding              
              of the processes of science teaching in the US.
