Title       : CRB: Species-centered Environmental Analysis for the Red- cockaded Woodpecker
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9123941

Award Number: 9123941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178526             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frances C. James james@bio.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9285,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the project is to develop a new approach to basic             
              research in conservation biology--Species-Centered Environmental               
              Analysis (SCEA)--and to apply it to an extensive analysis of the               
              population dynamics of the endangered Redcockaded Woodpecker                   
              (Picoides borealis) in relation to its environment. A graph                    
              (envirogram) containing information on extrinsic factors that                  
              directly and indirectly affect the reproduction and survival of the            
              population of interest is constructed. These factors include                   
              predation,competition, with other species for cavities,                        
              quality and amount of foraging habitat,properties of cavities, and             
              the distances among social units. The second step is causal                    
              modeling by path analysis using structural equations. In the third             
              step,field data for 160 social units from three study areas in                 
              northern Florida and Southern Georgia and additional data from                 
              North Carolina is obtained. The fourth step is an explicit                     
              interaction among theory, previous knowledge about causal                      
              relationships, and statistical data analysis. Finally, the results             
              are simplified into a graphic summary of the covariance structure              
              of factors thought to be limiting the populations. The method,                 
              Species-centered Environmental Analysis (SCEA), searches the system            
              of responses of units to their respective environments for the                 
              combination of key environmental factors that could support a                  
              viable natural population at each site. For the Red-cockaded                   
              Woodpecker, this research is crucial. Provision in a modern managed            
              landscape of the specific features of old growth that it requires.             
              We think that the SCEA approach will help researchers develop                  
              interpretable descriptions of factors regulating populations. One              
              of its potential applications is in the development of recovery                
              plans for endangered species.
