Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Unknotting Numbers, and Essential Surfaces and
               Laminations in Knot Exteriors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1992      
File        : a9123655

Award Number: 9123655
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Morwen B. Thistlethwaite morwen@math.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigator and William W. Menasco of SUNY-Buffalo have              
              recently proved an enhanced version of the venerable Tait                      
              conjecture for alternating knots, as well as the cabling conjecture            
              for alternating knots.  They will broaden their investigations into            
              geometric questions concerning specific families of links.  They               
              will seek to characterize knots of unknotting number one within                
              certain classes, for instance the classes of alternating knots,                
              Montesinos knots, and arborescent knots.  They hope to establish an            
              effective procedure for determining the unknotting number of knots             
              within these classes.  They will also seek information on the                  
              unknotting number of a cabled knot and will investigate the old                
              conjecture that unknotting number is additive with respect to                  
              connected sum.  They will seek to prove that alternating knots have            
              property P, that all boundary slopes of alternating knots are even             
              integers, and that alternating links are determined by their                   
              complements.  They will endeavor to develop techniques for                     
              constructing essential laminations in alternating knot exteriors,              
              and in the case where the boundary slope is rational, they will                
              examine the completions of these laminations in the closed manifold            
              obtained by appropriate Dehn filling.                                          
                   Knots are rather elementary geometric objects whose really                
              interesting properties are topological.  By this we mean that two              
              geometric knots do not differ in an interesting way if one of them             
              can be transformed to look just like the other without cutting or              
              untying it, just by pushing its string about to rearrange the                  
              crossings.  Topologists say that they are two different geometric              
              realizations of the same topological knot.  Nevertheless, it is not            
              a trivial matter to recognize when one complicated geometric knot              
              is topologically different from another, rather than just a                    
              different geometric realization.  This problem can be addressed by             
              computing certain numbers or polynomials which are called                      
              "topological invariants," meaning that they always have the same               
              value for different geometric realizations of the same topological             
              knot.  The problem would be reduced to pure algebra if there were              
              one invariant which also always had different values for geometric             
              realizations of different topological knots, but life is not so                
              simple -- no single invariant achieves this ideal, nor even all the            
              known invariants taken together.  It is therefore valuable to                  
              investigate new invariants, some of the most useful being those                
              inspired in recent years by ideas from quantum physics.  The                   
              investigator has been in the thick of this activity and has been               
              particularly successful in applying some new polynomial invariants             
              to settle old questions about alternating knots.  He will continue             
              to exploit these techniques.
