Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Studies in Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1992      
File        : a9123478

Award Number: 9123478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee A. Rubel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The mathematical research supported by this award focuses on              
              the nature of solutions of differential equations in the complex               
              domain. Specifically, work will be done investigating algebraic                
              differential equations. That is, differential equations in which               
              the derivatives of the dependent variable enter only                           
              polynomially. A solution to such an equation is called                         
              differentially algebraic. The point of view taken in this project              
              is one of determining the complex calculus one can derive with                 
              the restricted class of differentially algebraic analytic                      
              functions. For example, is it possible to classify all such                    
              entire functions? What, if any, are the growth restrictions on                 
              such functions? Efforts will also be made to analyze the iterates              
              of such functions and to establish the extent to which                         
              interpolation of arbitrary complex sequences is possible at                    
              prescribed values by a single function in the class.                           
                   Differential equations play an essential role in modeling                 
              the physical universe. It is often the case that solutions,                    
              although known to exist theoretically, may not be expressible by               
              elementary means. The purpose of this research is to develop                   
              properties of broad classes of functions that can arise as                     
              solutions of differential equations and to use these properties                
              as part of a comprehensive classification scheme.
