Title       : Use of Ligand-Modified Micellar-Enhanced Ultrafiltration in the Selective
               Removal of Toxic Metal Ions from Polluted water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1993      
File        : a9123388

Award Number: 9123388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342488             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Scamehorn scamehor@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sherril D. Christian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal is concerned with removing divalent metal ions,                  
              present in dilute amounts, from aqueous solutions by ligand                    
              modified micelle enhanced ultrafiltration.  In this method,                    
              surfactant molecules are added to the aqueous solution in                      
              concentrations exceeding the CMC so that the molecules form                    
              micelles.  Micelles are aggregates of surfactant molecules in                  
              which the nonpolar chains of different molecules extend and                    
              stack together to form a ball-like hydrophobic core with the                   
              polar parts surrounding the core and remaining in contact with                 
              the aqueous phase.  Also added to the aqueous solution are                     
              metal complexing ligands consisting of a hydrophic tail and a                  
              moiety which complexes with the metal ion.  The ligand                         
              complexes the metal ion, and the ligand-metal assembly                         
              attaches itself to the micelle by solubilization of the                        
              hydrophobic tail into the membrane interior.  The aqueous                      
              solution is then forced through a membrane which does not                      
              allow passage of the micelles.  Thus the metal ion is                          
              retained, attached to the micelle, in the retentate on one                     
              side of the membrane, and the permeate contains a reduced                      
              level of the ion.                                                              
              The feature of this separation which is most attractive is its                 
              selectivity.  Ligands can be engineering which exclusively                     
              bind to a particular metal ion.  Therefore an aqueous solution                 
              that has only one ion at an undesirable high concentration can                 
              be cleansed of that ion without wasting materials on the                       
              removal of other ions.  The PI and CoPIs received an NSF grant                 
              to develop the process and study its selectivity in 1988.  As                  
              reported in the section of the proposal "Results from Prior                    
              NSF Support", research supported by the previous grant                         
              demonstrated the feasibility of the separation.  In                            
              particular, in a stirred-cell ultrafiltration of a solution                    
              containing a mixture of Cu2+/Ca2+, using the ligand NIDA which                 
              binds the copper ion prefentially, rejection of copper was                     
              upwards of 90 percent.                                                         
                                                                                             
              The present proposal extends the technique developed in the                    
              previous grant to the specific selective removal of divalent                   
              Pb2+, UO22+, Hg2+, Cd2+, Cu2+, Zn2+ and Ca2+ and synthesizing                  
              new ligands.  Binding constants of the ligands with ions, and                  
              their protination constants will be measured when the ligand                   
              is free in solution and solubilized in a micelle.  These                       
              measurements will be undertaken by a combination of titration                  
              and dialysis experiments.  Ultrafiltration experiments will be                 
              undertaken using a spiral wound membrane module.  The proposal                 
              remarks that this configuration allows for modelling of the                    
              laminar boundary layer, and concentration polarization                         
              phenomena.
