Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research in Applied and Computational Mathematics:
               Analysis of Block and Two-Stage Iterative Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1992 
File        : a9123273

Award Number: 9123273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Szyld szyld@euclid.math.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1271,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports Professor Daniel Szyld of                                  
              Temple University to collaborate in applied and                                
              computational mathematics with Professor Andreas                               
              Frommer of the Institute for Applied Mathematics                               
              of the University of Karlsruhe, Germany.  The                                  
              two researchers have worked on different aspects                               
              of the study of iterative methods for the                                      
              efficient solution of linear and nonlinear                                     
              algebraic systems of equations on both                                         
              sequential and parallel computers.  Frommer has                                
              worked extensively on linear and nonlinear                                     
              asynchronous methods and on multisplitting                                     
              methods.  Szyld and his coauthors have worked on                               
              two-stage methods, including the tools needed                                  
              for their analysis and computational                                           
              experiments.  Recently the two collaborators                                   
              completed a study of two-stage iterative methods                               
              for H-matrices.  In the proposed new work, they                                
              will extend this study to block two-stage                                      
              methods and asynchronous (chaotic) parallel                                    
              methods.  They will look at both convergence                                   
              properties as well as implementation details.                                  
              This work relies heavily on the complementary                                  
              expertise that each has developed in prior work.                               
                                                                                             
              A central problem in many science and                                          
              engineering applications is the solution of                                    
              large linear systems of algebraic equations.                                   
              The cooperating scientists will study                                          
              theoretical, computational and algorithmic                                     
              aspects of the solution of such systems and                                    
              their applications.  The project is likely to                                  
              result in criteria to determine an optimal or                                  
              near-optimal number of inner iterations to                                     
              guarantee overall convergence and reduce                                       
              parallel computing time.
