Title       : High-Coordinate Main-Group and Main Group/d-Block Metal Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1994   
File        : a9123811

Award Number: 9123811
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Lattman mlattman@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic                  
              Program supports the research of Dr. Michael Lattman of the                    
              Chemistry Department, Southern Methodist University, on the                    
              chemistry of hypervalent main group elements and some                          
              transition metals.  Elements are described as "hypervalent"                    
              when they are formally surrounded by more than eight electrons                 
              and contain a three-center four-electron bond.  Lattman will                   
              investigate the behavior of these elements with nitrogen- and                  
              oxygen-containing macrocycles, specifically members of the                     
              cyclen and calixarene families.  Basic relationships of ring                   
              size, atomic size and geometry will be determined, as will                     
              amphiprotic behavior.  Some metals will be placed in                           
              phosphorylated calixarene "baskets."                                           
              %%%                                                                            
              Large cyclic organic molecules which contain nitrogen or oxygen                
              can use electrons available on the nitrogen or oxygen to bond                  
              to metals or other elements.  Factors such as ring size and                    
              position of the heteroatom impose geometric constraints on the                 
              molecule formed, making it possible to stabilize atoms in                      
              unsual geometries or oxidation states and to influence their                   
              reactivity.  Lattman will study some elements in unusual                       
              environments to obtain fundamental information on their                        
              behavior.  It is possible that the results may be relevant to                  
              the stabilization of heterobimetallic compounds, shape                         
              selective catalysis, and nonlinear optical behavior.
