Title       : Dissertation Research: Subsistence and Technological Organization Among the Pume
               of Venezuela
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1992   
File        : a9123875

Award Number: 9123875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell D. Greaves  (Student current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Lewis Binford, Mr. Russell Greaves                  
              will collect data for his doctoral dissertation.  He will study                
              the Pume, a group of horticulturalists and hunter gatherers who                
              live in southwestern Venezuela.  His research will focus on how                
              the Pume make and use tools for subsistence activities. To do                  
              this, he will follow the process from the collection of raw                    
              materials through manufacture and subsequent use and discard.  In              
              particular, he is interested in the time tradeoffs involved                    
              between tool manufacture and other activities such as                          
              subsistence.  He will collect data in a number of ways.                        
              Randomized time allocation studies will be conducted.  He will                 
              also follow individuals and groups on subsistence trips and                    
              record the time spent in different activities.  He will also note              
              what tools are taken, how they are used and how patterns may                   
              change based on the goal of the expedition, the number of                      
              participants and the distance traveled.                                        
                                                                                             
              Although this study is ethnographic, the significance is                       
              primarily archaeological.  Because they are virtually                          
              indestructible, stone tools are found in most paleolithic sites -              
              often they are the only material recovered - and archaeologists                
              of necessity focus strongly on their interpretation.  On the                   
              basis of these often difficult-to-understand remains,                          
              prehistorians attempt to reconstruct diverse cultural attributes               
              such as group size and movement patterns and they have developed               
              many theories about how tools and behavior are related.  The                   
              problem is that very little empirical data support many of these               
              observations and Mr. Greaves research is designed to address this              
              problem.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This project is important for several reasons. It will help to                 
              provide analytic methods of general archaeological use.  It will               
              shed new light on a traditional South American group and will                  
              assist in the training of a promising young scientist.
