Title       : Study of Auroral Radio Emissions from Alaska: Continued Observations and Data
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9123068

Award Number: 9123068
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Timothy E. Eastman                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39294              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. LaBelle jlabelle@einstein.dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                Despite the intensity with which the aurora has been studied at              
              radio wavelengths, there remains a gap in the ground measurements              
              between a few hundred kiloHertz, the upper range of VLF                        
              experiments, and a few tens of megaHertz, at which riometers                   
              operate.  A number of ground observations indicate that emissions              
              are generated by the aurora in this frequency range, but the                   
              observations are spotty, and the nature and even the existence of              
              these emissions remains uncertain.  There is some theoretical work             
              justifying the investigation of auroral emissions using ground-                
              based instrumentation, but more systematic observations are needed             
              to lay the groundwork for further theoretical progress.  Under a               
              previous NSF grant, a PC-based instrument for monitoring 0.1-5 MHz             
              radio waves from remote sites has been developed and operated for              
              one Winter, a preliminary analysis of the data has been done, and              
              publications on this related subjects have been prepared or                    
              published.  In the next year, we propose to continue collecting                
              radio data from Alaska with an improved version of the instrument.             
              We further propose three specific plans for completing the analysis            
              of last year's data and the data from the upcoming year.  The goals            
              of the further year of study are:  1) to provide a solid start                 
              towards clearing up the uncertainty regarding the existence of                 
              and/or natures of LF/MF/HF emissions observable on the ground from             
              aurorae; 2) to determine whether the method of using PC-based radio            
              receivers in the Northern Hemisphere shows promise for longer-term             
              observations of auroral emissions in the frequency range; and 3) to            
              complete several specific data analysis goals which are achievable             
              with data collected last year, and which will be enhanced by a                 
              further year of data.
