Title       : U.S. Participation in the Development of a Transnational Database on Family
               Income
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1992      
File        : a9123675

Award Number: 9123675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Blackman                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201809             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy M. Smeeding TMSMEED@MAXWELL.SYR.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0312000   Population                              
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Luxembourg Income Study (LIS) project is an                           
              internation-al social science consortium currently                             
              participated in by 18 in- dustrialized nations which have                      
              agreed to pool microdata on the incomes of families living                     
              within their diverse economies.  The data so furnished are                     
              made statistically comparable and stored at a central                          
              facility in Luxembourg,  where they may be accessed by                         
              researchers either on-site or remotely through a computerized                  
              telecommunications network.  The LIS database provides a rich                  
              resource for multifaceted analyses of income distributions,                    
              of  systems of cash and noncash income transfers,  of                          
              relative levels of economic well-being across different                        
              demographic groupings,  and of many other topics which are                     
              now,  or soon will be of worldwide societal concern.                           
                   Support for the data facility is provided by the                          
              consortium of member nations on a shared-cost basis.  Funds                    
              provided by the National Science Foundation constitute United                  
              States participation in the consortium,  and these funds help                  
              assure that the potential value of the LIS database to U.S.                    
              social scientists will be realized.  The full cooperation of                   
              all member nations is required in order to guarantee                           
              feasibility of data retrieval,  maintenance of high standards                  
              of data quality,  and gradual relaxation of methodological                     
              constraints on certain types of data analysis.  National                       
              Science Foundation funds not only represent U.S. cooperation                   
              in the enterprise,  they also assure U.S.  involvement in all                  
              important developmental decisions as well as helping to                        
              offset the cost of database maintenance and update.  In its                    
              nearly ten years of existence the results of this                              
              transnational project have been impressive.
