Title       : Trans Geometry Complexes of Ru and Os for Photophysical and Electrochemical
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1992     
File        : a9123215

Award Number: 9123215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Meyer tjmeyer@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 5926      LATIN AMERICA, SDC
Fld Applictn: 0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1964,
Abstract    :
              This Science in Developing Countries award will                                
              support the collaboration of Thomas J. Meyer of the                            
              University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, and Barbara                         
              Loeb L. of Pontificia Universidad Catolica, Chile.                             
              The project will focus on the design, synthesis,                               
              characterization, and systematic investigation of the                          
              properties of a novel class of monomeric and                                   
              multinuclear ligand-bridged metal complexes.                                   
                                                                                             
              The research aims to synthesize trans-- (poly)pyridyl                          
              (d)6 metal complexes of Os(II), Ru(II), and Re(I), in                          
              which intramolecular photochemical and electrochemical                         
              electron transfer processes from spatially controlled                          
              electron donor and acceptor sites can be studied.  The                         
              project will pursue three different approaches to                              
              synthesizing these trans- metal complexes in order to                          
              (1) compare the solution phase photophysical responses                         
              of the trans complexes with those of cis analogs; and                          
              (2) assemble uniform monolayers of these trans                                 
              complexes on the surface of metal oxide electrodes to                          
              explore possible molecular diode-type rectifying                               
              behavior.  The collaboration is expected to lead to                            
              the development of new molecular systems that will                             
              allow more thorough investigation of intramolecular                            
              electron transfer events.  The Chilean team has                                
              synthetic expertise, facilities, and manpower for                              
              performing the syntheses most efficiently.  The U.S.                           
              side will gain knowledge to duplicate synthetic                                
              development in the U.S.  By observing in the U.S.                              
              methods of photophysical and electrochemical                                   
              investigations of the anticipated new compounds, the                           
              Chileans will gain experience needed to establish a                            
              laboratory in Chile.
