Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Hydrodynamics and Magnetohydrodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1992       
File        : a9123946

Award Number: 9123946
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan J. Friedlander susan@math.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigator, in collaboration with Dr. M. M. Vishik of               
              University of Chicago, will continue to investigate topics in                  
              fluid dynamics.  She uses inverse scattering techniques to obtain              
              solutions to the Euler equations that govern the flow of an                    
              incompressible, inviscid fluid.  This work follows from a Lax                  
              pair formulation for the Euler equations derived by the                        
              investigator and Vishik.  She also proposes to apply dynamo                    
              theory techniques to extend the applicability of the instability               
              criteria that she and Vishik have recently obtained for the                    
              linearized fluid equations.  The investigator will continue her                
              examination, via the use of Hamiltonian techniques, of the                     
              stability/instability of three dimensional axisymmetric                        
              magnetohydrodynamic equilibria.                                                
                   The primary subject of this research concerns criteria for                
              the existence of instabilities (i.e., when a small change in a                 
              steady configuration becomes larger and larger with time.)  Fluid              
              instabilities are crucial factors in determining the behavior of               
              many important physical systems.  For example, the so called                   
              baroclinic instability governs the large scale circulation of the              
              atmosphere; convective instabilities play an important role in                 
              air-sea interaction with implications for possible global                      
              warming; magnetohydrodynamic instabilities underlie the                        
              phenomenon of plasma fusion; the existence of terrestrial and                  
              solar magnetic fields is dependent on dynamo instabilities.  The               
              investigator's mathematical analysis of the equations of fluid                 
              motion has led to specific criteria governing the existence of                 
              certain types of instabilities and her proposed research will                  
              continue to advance our understanding of the behavior of                       
              geophysical and astrophysical fluids.
