Title       : Peasant Household Strategies and Socio-Economic Differentiations: A Comparative
               Study of Transmigrants in South Sumatra and the Moluccas, Indonesia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1993       
File        : a9123431

Award Number: 9123431
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23646              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Goss jgoss@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Agrarian transformation receives considerable attention in                
              the literature on social and economic change in the developing                 
              nations of the world.  Socio-economic differentiation of the                   
              peasantry is poorly understood at the household or village level,              
              particularly with respect to household strategies of petty                     
              enterprise and labor mobility.  This project will investigate                  
              social and economic differentiation of the peasantry in the                    
              context of the Indonesian Transmigration program.  Under this                  
              program, poor, landless households in Java and Bali are recruited              
              to move to the outer islands to new settlements where they                     
              receive land, allowances and training in agriculture.  This                    
              attempt to cope with population growth and deforestation of the                
              inner islands is seen by other nations as a possible solution to               
              problems of overpopulation and its associated problems.  Little                
              is known about the impact of this resettlement scheme on the                   
              transmigrants, particularly their economic behavior and its                    
              effect on the household.  This pilot project will employ surveys,              
              in-depth interviews, and focus groups to examine the process of                
              socio-economic differentiation at the regional and household                   
              level in selected areas involved in the transmigration program in              
              Indonesia.                                                                     
                   Traditional agriculture continues to dominate the peasant                 
              economies of most developing parts of the world.  In many areas,               
              economic development has contributed to the commercialization of               
              rural economies, leading to profound social and economic changes               
              which threaten the viability of peasant economies.  This project               
              will provide new knowledge about how differentiation proceeds as               
              a result of government sponsored migration.  It will also refine               
              a methodology for doing research in newly settled areas which are              
              undergoing rapid socio-economic change.  The results of this                   
              research will inform not only theory but also policy regarding an              
              important regional development strategy.
