Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Molecular Gas Surrounding Newly Formed
               Massive Stars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1992  
File        : a9123533

Award Number: 9123533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward B. Churchwell churchwell@astro.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1217,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports Dr. Edward B. Churchwell and                               
              a graduate student of the University of                                        
              Wisconsin to collaborate with Dr. Malcolm                                      
              Walmsley of the Max-Planck Institute for                                       
              Radioastronomy in Bonn, Germany.  They are                                     
              studying the conditions under which massive                                    
              stars form and subsequently evolve by                                          
              investigating the remaining molecular gas in                                   
              which the star is embedded and the star's                                      
              interaction with it.  In particular, they will                                 
              test the bow shock hypothesis by observing                                     
              carefully selected molecular and atomic lines                                  
              that probe the ionized and molecular gas.  These                               
              observations will be obtained from observations                                
              at observatories in the U.S., Spain and Germany.                               
              This project is an important extension of the                                  
              ongoing research of Dr. Churchwell that would                                  
              not be possible without collaboration.  Dr.                                    
              Walmsley is an acknowledged expert on the                                      
              interstellar medium in general and particularly                                
              on the computation and interpretation of the                                   
              physical conditions in interstellar molecular                                  
              and ionized gas clouds.  These areas are                                       
              particularly important to their joint research.                                
              He also provides convenient access to the 100 m                                
              telescope operated by the MPI in Germany and                                   
              brings expertise in using the specialized                                      
              instruments.  He will also collaborate closely                                 
              in developing detailed models of the molecular                                 
              gas.  Dr. Churchwell offers expertise in VLA                                   
              measurements and will use interferometric                                      
              instruments like the VLA in New Mexico to make                                 
              observations in the US to study these objects                                  
              with high spatial resolution.                                                  
                                                                                             
              Massive stars are formed in dense condensations                                
              of molecular gas inside of giant molecular                                     
              clouds.  They play a crucial role in the                                       
              energetics of galaxies and the interstellar                                    
              medium, but their formation and early evolution                                
              are poorly understood.  This project will                                      
              contribute new insights into the formation of                                  
              such massive stars by obtaining detailed                                       
              physical parameters and spatial distribution of                                
              the  surrounding hot gas.
