Title       : Beliefs, Scale, and the Human Response to Global Environmental Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1994       
File        : a9123884

Award Number: 9123884
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98255              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Mitchell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1352,9278,
Abstract    :
                   Awareness of global environmental change as a problem for                 
              human societies and the biosphere has developed rapidly during                 
              the past decade.  Humans respond positively to environmental                   
              change in one of two ways, by either adapting to changes which                 
              affect their activities or by anticipating unacceptable                        
              environmental change with the goal of preventing or minimizing                 
              its effects.  The ways in which individuals respond to global                  
              environmental change as perceived is little understood and under               
              researched.  This project will focus on the public's perception                
              of global environmental problems and how this shapes the way in                
              which people respond to these problems.  It will also examine the              
              influence of geographical scale on public beliefs and attitudes.               
              The study will engage focus groups of citizens in several cities               
              on various aspects of their attitudes and beliefs about global                 
              change at different spatial scales.  A national telephone survey               
              will provide both qualitative and quantitative information about               
              public perceptions of global change and the range of possible                  
              responses people might make to combat it.                                      
                   This research will improve existing knowledge of the                      
              societal response to global warming by investigating the role                  
              that behaviorally relevant beliefs play in shaping people's                    
              interest in it, their perception of its characteristics, their                 
              assumptions about its effects, and the likelihood that they will               
              take personal action or support societal action to minimize these              
              effects.  It will enhance theoretical understandings of the human              
              response to threats of global change, and it will inform public                
              policy as to the ways in which global warming is perceived.
