Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Traveling Waves in Excitable Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1994       
File        : a9123674

Award Number: 9123674
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202125             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Tyson tyson@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Traveling waves of excitation provide for communication and               
              spatial organization in a variety of biological systems.  The                  
              long-term goal of this project is to study mathematically the                  
              origin and properties of traveling waves of excitation in heart                
              muscle, in fields of aggregating cells, in fields of dividing                  
              cells, and in nonliving chemical mixtures.  The investigator                   
              emphasizes those features of wave propagation that are common to               
              all excitable media because of their similar mathematical                      
              description.  At the same time, the best current                               
              scientific understanding of specific mechanisms is built into the              
              models, so that detailed quantitative comparisons between theory               
              and experiment can be sought.  The models are studied by                       
              analytical mathematical methods and by numerical simulations.                  
                   In modern industrialized nations, the two most common causes              
              of death are heart disease and cancer.  Each is a                              
              complicated suite of diseases with many different causes and                   
              treatments. Nonetheless, at a fundamental level, hearts fail                   
              because the electrical stimulation of heart muscle contraction                 
              goes awry, and cancers spread because the normal controls over                 
              cell growth and division are short-circuited.  To develop                      
              rational strategies to treat or cure these diseases, one must                  
              understand the basic biological machinery that controls the                    
              contraction of heart muscle and the division of body cells.  The               
              investigator and other mathematical biologists are using powerful              
              mathematical tools to unravel the inner workings of the beating                
              heart and the dividing cell.  Their models have revealed                       
              previously hidden secrets.  For instance, the rapid disorganized               
              fluttering of a failing heart is caused by tiny rotating waves of              
              contraction the spin out of control in the heart muscle.                       
              Mathematical models are used to uncover the laws that govern                   
              these spinning waves, that dictate their onset and demise, and                 
              that hold the key to their treatment.  Similarly, the laws that                
              govern cell division, that determine which cells shall divide and              
              when, are ultimately expressible with mathematical precision.  As              
              these laws become clear, through experimental and theoretical                  
              investigations, it will be possible to use them intelligently to               
              bring renegade cancer cells back under control.
