Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Complex and Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1994   
File        : a9123115

Award Number: 9123115
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Nagel nagel@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Work done on this project combines elements of the theory of              
              several complex variables with those of harmonic analysis on                   
              Euclidean domains with applications to partial differential                    
              equations. During the past five years or so, developments in the               
              analysis of functions of two complex variables on pseudoconvex                 
              domains has reached the level of completeness comparable to what               
              is known for strictly pseudoconvex domains in arbitrary                        
              dimension.  Regularity results for the Bergman and Szego                       
              projections, sharp estimates for the basic differential operators              
              and characterizations of zero varieties are well understood.  The              
              present work will continue the task of extending these kinds of                
              results to domains (of finite type) of dimension greater than                  
              two.                                                                           
                   A second fundamental problem concerns metrics on the                      
              boundary of domains.  If the domain has finite type, then the                  
              metrics, although not unique, are classified.  For domains of                  
              general type, it is not even known if there is a reasonable                    
              boundary metric which can be used to analyze some of the                       
              important analytic objects on the domain.  Work is proceeding                  
              through the study of specific domains to clarify the right                     
              questions to be studied. Work on Fourier analysis is related to                
              Fourier transforms of measures defined on submanifolds in                      
              Euclidean space.  Estimates of the transform have important                    
              applications in a variety of problems ranging from number theory               
              to partial differential equations.  The best results to date                   
              assume that the manifold is the boundary of a convex domain.                   
              Little is known if the domain is nonconvex or if the manifold has              
              high codimension.  Although some information is available                      
              concerning the transform at infinity, much remains to be done in               
              obtaining geometric description and interpretation of the                      
              transform and its antecedent measure.
