Title       : Dissertation Research: Role of Light in Determining the Costs and Benefits of
               Extrafloral Nectar Production in Two Costa Rican Passiflora Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1994     
File        : a9123066

Award Number: 9123066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William S. Armbruster                   
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6280               (Estimated)
Investigator: Doyle B. McKey dmckey@umiami  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger W. Gunther  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1128,
Abstract    :
                   Although many researchers propose that the balance between                
              costs of plant defenses and the cost of herbivory have influenced              
              both the types of defenses a plant employs and the distribution of             
              those defenses among plant structure, no study to date has fully               
              evaluated these costs in a quantitative fashion nor has anyone                 
              determined how these costs are affected by the plant's access to               
              light and other resources.  To address this question, the                      
              relationship between costs of extrafloral nectar production in two             
              closely related Passiflora species that differ in the range of                 
              light conditions in which they grow will be studied.  The proposed             
              project provides several advantages over previous approaches to the            
              study of costs and benefits of defense.  Extrafloral nectar, unlike            
              many toxic chemical defenses, has a simple chemical composition and            
              can be measured in a non-destructive fashion.  Further, protection             
              associated with extrafloral nectar production can be evaluated by              
              comparing untreated plants to plants from which ants have been                 
              excluded.  Finally, by using population projection matrices to                 
              model plant growth, the costs of defense and herbivory can be                  
              expressed in terms of a fitness component.  Thus, extrafloral                  
              nectar-based ant defense may represent an ideal system for the                 
              study of costs and benefits of leaf defense.
