Title       : Primary and Secondary Productivity of Arctic Marginal Seas: Collaborative
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1993     
File        : a9123007

Award Number: 9123007
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140318             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence R. Pomeroy   (Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Wiebe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 5211      POLAR BIO & MEDIC ARCTIC RES
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Modeling and empirical measurements suggest that much of the                   
              ocean's margin is net heterotrophic, that is, utilizing more                   
              organic matter then is produced by photosynthesis.  Seasonally,                
              many continental shelves are dominated by autotrophic processes                
              and may then export organic matter to the ocean's interior.  This              
              annual cycle of trophic status is largely the result of an                     
              interactive two-factor response by bacteria to low temperature                 
              and low substrate concentration.  Bacterial isolates from the                  
              Arctic Ocean, the Labrador Current, and the subtropical                        
              southeastern continental shelf all indicate greatly reduced rates              
              of growth when cultured at their annual minimum temperature and                
              at low substrate concentrations, comparable to those normally                  
              present in seawater.  Little is known, however, about net                      
              metabolism in arctic marine communities.  Bacterial production is              
              very low during the early spring period when most primary                      
              production is within the sea ice, and it is higher in late summer              
              after the open-water phytoplankton bloom.  This understanding is               
              based on limited data, both seasonally and geographically.  This               
              project will result in an extensive concurrent data set on                     
              phytoplankton biomass, bacterial and microzooplankton abundance,               
              nutrient uptake (nitrate and ammonium), inorganic nutrient                     
              concentration, hydrographic variables, primary production,                     
              microbial secondary production, and microbial respiration in the               
              Arctic Ocean.  Knowledge of the autotrophy-heterotrophy stauts of              
              the arctic will be an important consideration for modeling the                 
              global carbon cycle and for predicting the effects of global                   
              climate change, as well as for understanding and modeling polar                
              food webs.
