Title       : Collaborative Research: Social Learning in the Management of Global
               Environmental Risks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1994    
File        : a9123033

Award Number: 9123033
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin A. Cantor                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116497             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Haas haas@polsci.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This collaborative research project seeks to understand the nature             
              and determinants of long term changes in humanity's competence to              
              deal with global environmental risks.  It views that competence as             
              a product of possible interactions among various domestic, state,              
              and international actors:  in particular the scientific community,             
              non-governmental organizations, private sector interests, national             
              governments, the media, and international organizations.  Changing             
              competence is characterized in terms of the changes in the                     
              performance of six management functions: risk assessment, the                  
              placing or risks in context, response assessment, strategy                     
              formulation, policy implementation, and monitoring/evaluation.                 
                                                                                             
              The principal theoretical goal of the project is to establish the              
              major processes by which such changes occur, the determinants of               
              those processes, and how both change with time.  Special attention             
              is paid to determining the extent to which cumulative learning, as             
              opposed to changing bureaucratic structures, interest                          
              configurations, or power alignments, underlies observed changes in             
              management.  The principal applied goal is to establish the most               
              important factors constraining cumulative improvements in                      
              functional performance, and to characterize policies that might be             
              expected to improve prospects for learning how to manage global                
              environmental risks.  These goals are pursued as part of a larger              
              international collaborative effort involving detailed case studies             
              of how 8 countries have dealt with the risks posed by climate                  
              change, ozone depletion and acid rain.  The work focuses on                    
              changing social competencies that have emerged from the                        
              interactions of one particularly influential country -- the United             
              States -- with the family of organizations over the last 30 years.
