Title       : Ethical Issues in Statistics in Expert Testimony
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1994    
File        : a9123955

Award Number: 9123955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42570              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Bailar BarbaraB@ASA.MHS.Compuserve.Com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Statistical Assoc
	      1429 Duke Street
	      Alexandria, VA  223143461    703/684-1221

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              Statistical evidence, reports, and testimony play an increasing                
              role in decision-making, ranging from the actions of individuals               
              and private organizations, to those of the courts and other                    
              public authorities.  Because of their expertise, statisticians                 
              are called on for information and advice, in these various                     
              settings.  With these roles come ethical questions concerning                  
              appropriate behavior in difficult situations.  What is the                     
              statisticians' responsibility to employer or client, for                       
              instance, when called on for testimony in a courtroom or before                
              the Congress, or when asked by the media for comment?  How should              
              statisticians respond when they disagree as to the treatment of                
              uncertainty in statistical analyses, or the methods of evaluation              
              of statistical studies, or the sufficiency of data for making a                
              decision or ruling?   This project begins a process whereby the                
              American Statistical Association (ASA) can enhance the knowledge               
              of statisticians and decision makers about the issues of                       
              professional responsibility facing all of them in these various                
              settings.  With advice from a broadly representative Steering                  
              Committee, the Association will plan and hold a workshop on the                
              role of statisticians as expert witnesses.  Using the census                   
              undercount and environmental topics as initial cases for                       
              exploration, the workshop will focus on issues that arise for                  
              expert witnesses in courtrooms, in Congressional hearings and on               
              regulatory expert panels.  The workshop report will address the                
              roles of statisticians and of the organizations and institutions               
              calling on them in inhibiting or enhancing ethical behavior.                   
              Material from this and later workshops will be organized into a                
              text using a casebook format accessible to students,                           
              practitioners, and users of statistics.
