Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research in Experimental Geochemistry at High Pressures
               and Temperatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1994  
File        : a9123384

Award Number: 9123384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Drake drake@lpl.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1573,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports Elisabeth McFarlane and                                    
              Valerie Hillgren, two graduate students of                                     
              Professor Michael Drake, University of Arizona,                                
              to travel to Germany to take advantage of an                                   
              unique combination of facilities and personnel                                 
              at the University of Bayreuth to carry out                                     
              experimental geochemistry research.  Professor                                 
              Drake made an extended visit to the Geological                                 
              Institute there in 1991.  Now he has arranged                                  
              for further related work to be carried out by                                  
              his students under the guidance of his principal                               
              collaborator at Bayreuth, Dr. David Rubie.  In                                 
              addition to fruitful interactions with Dr. Rubie                               
              and other experts at the Geological Institute,                                 
              the students will benefit from the availability                                
              of two highly advanced and very rare pieces of                                 
              equipment: a multi-anvil press and an x-ray                                    
              microdiffractometer.  Both of these apparatus                                  
              are invaluable in conducting ultrahigh pressure                                
              trace element partitioning experiments between                                 
              various metal and silicate phase pairs.  The                                   
              results of their experiments will be applied to                                
              understanding the early thermal history and                                    
              differentiation of the Earth and Mars, and the                                 
              origin of the Moon.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The principal research program of Professor                                    
              Drake involves experimental studies of elemental                               
              partitioning among solid silicate, oxide, and                                  
              metal phases and silicate and metallic melts at                                
              high pressures and temperatures.  Knowledge of                                 
              these partition coefficients is essential to the                               
              interpretation of elemental systematics in the                                 
              mantle and mantle-derived materials.  This bears                               
              specifically on the question of the formation                                  
              and early differentiation of the Earth and the                                 
              intimately associated problem of the origin of                                 
              the moon.
