Title       : Biopsychology of Parturition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1995     
File        : a9123748

Award Number: 9123748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Koenig                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark B. Kristal psymark@ubvms.cc.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9111,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Mothers of almost all nonaquatic, nonhuman mammalian species                   
              ingest amniotic fluid and placenta during delivery.  Dr. Kristal               
              has demonstrated that the increased contact, associated with this              
              ingestion from the surface of the young, causes an accelerated                 
              onset of maternal behavior toward those young.  Moreover, he has               
              shown that this enigmatic behavior helps to relieve the mother's               
              pain and discomfort during delivery.  A substance contained in                 
              the afterbirth materials, which he has named the Placental                     
              Opioid-Enhancing Factor or POEF, seems to potentiate any ongoing               
              opioid-mediated analgesia but does not by itself produce                       
              analgesia.  The importance of this factor is that during labor                 
              and delivery, pregnancy-mediated analgesia can be maximized                    
              without so massive a release of endogenous opiates.  Thus, it is               
              possible to relieve pain with only a minimum brain opioid level.               
              This is very important since too high a level of natural                       
              occurring opioids during and immediately after birth can                       
              detrimentally interfere with maternal behavior.  A major problem               
              that has prevented a thorough understanding of this fundamental                
              behavior is the inability to prevent delivering mothers from                   
              ingesting any placenta or amniotic fluid without stressing the                 
              mother, disrupting delivery, or blocking the mother's natural                  
              behaviors.  Dr. Kristal has overcome this obstacle by a clever                 
              series of experiments in which activated charcoal administration               
              is used to block the utilization of subsequently ingested POEF.                
              He can now determine its effects on pain threshold, maternal and               
              other behaviors, as well as natural characteristics of delivery                
              and fertility.  These findings will enhance our knowledge of the               
              physiological mechanisms of birth and postpartum behavior.                     
              Moreover, the research has importance for a broader range of                   
              mammalian taxa, since it could point the way toward the                        
              development of a new class of non-narcotic analgesics and shed                 
              new light on fundamental processes involved in pain and the                    
              body's reaction to it.
