Title       : Buried Ge-Si-C Channels and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1999     
File        : a9821054

Award Number: 9821054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178850             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Greve dg07@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9821054
Greve

This project will explore the growth and applications of
              germanium-silicon-carbon strained-layer channels in semiconductor devices. 
              Germanium-silicon strained epitaxial layers have been the subject of intense
              research and have recently been applied to heterojunction bipolar transistors. 
              In addition, germanium-silicon layers have been used to fabricate
              heterostructure field effect transistors which might provide higher performance
              p-channel transistors for CMOS.  In both cases, the attainable performance
              improvement has been limited by the amount of germanium which can be
              incorporated while maintaining fully strained layers during subsequent
              processing.

Uniform germanium-silicon-carbon epitaxial layers will be grown
              by UHV/CVD and applied to novel device structures.  A buried-channel
              charge-coupled device (CCD) will be fabricated which can operate at lower
              temperatures than existing CCDS.  Such a CCD is potentially applicable to
              astronomical imaging.  In addition, it will facilitate studies of the transport
              in germanium-siliconcarbon epitaxial layers which will lead to improved
              understanding of heterostructure field effect transistors.  A crucial part of
              this project is the growth of epitaxial layers with low carbon concentration
              (=O.2 %) which nevertheless have improved thermal stability,

This project
              will also explore the growth and application of nonuniform channels.  When
              grown under the proper conditions undulated layers are formed and in the limit
              of high undulation amplitude isolated islands (or quantum dots) are formed. 
              Arrays of quantum dots can be used to perform logic functions in the quantum
              cellular automata (QCA) concept.  In one implementation of QCA logic, it is
              necessary to gate transport between the quantum dots.  Quantum dots with the
              appropriate size and spacing will be grown in the germanium-silicon-carbon
              system, which will then be used to explore gated transport between quantum
              dots.

This project will yield results of benefit to both silicon integrated
              circuit technology and also to more exotic and speculative devices.  Work on
              uniform germanium-silicon-carbon channels will improve the prospects for the
              use of heterostructure field effect transistors in CMOS and will also lead to
              improved understanding of the factors which limit carrier mobility.  Studies of
              gated transport between quantum dots will improve the prospects for advanced
              quantum cellular automata-based computing.
***


