Title       : Development and Implementation of Effective Force Testing: A Method of Seismic
               Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9821076

Award Number: 9821076
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321742             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine W. French cfrench@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol K. Shield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Posbergh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,5921,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research project is to develop and implement a test
              method, "Effective Force Testing" (EFT), which enables real-time testing of
              large-scale structural systems subjected to earthquake loadings.  This method
              has at least two desirable characteristics.  First, it permits economical
              real-time dynamic testing of large-scale structural systems, which is important
              for structural details affected by strain rate effects.  Second, it provides a
              means of testing the robustness and reliability of active, semi-active, and
              passive control systems on large-scale structures.

The EFT method provides
              capabilities which complement those of the other three primary types of
              earthquake simulation test methods: shake table, quasi-static, and
              pseudodynamic.  Restrictions on the type of structures that can be tested are
              similar to those required by the pseudodynamic test method (i.e. lumped mass
              systems fixed to the laboratory floor).  However, rather than using a
              displacement control algorithm, as is the case for the pseudo-dynamic test
              method, EFT uses a force control algorithm.  The EFT method can be used to
              conduct real-time earthquake simulation studies because the effective forces to
              be applied to the limped mass structure are known a priori.  They are the
              product of the respective story masses and the ground acceleration record. 
              Consequently, the effective forces are independent of structural response.

A
              pilot study conducted on the EFT method on a linear elastic SDOF system was
              successful; but control problems associated with actuator/structure interaction
              were discovered.  In this project, the investigation will be extended
              systems.

The project will be accomplished in two phases.  The first phase
              consists of experimental and numerical simulation studies to investigate
              potential control problems expected with increased servovalve flow demands
              associated with taking a test structure into the nonlinear range of behavior. 
              A source of control problems may be associated with servovalve/actuator
              nonlinearities not currently accounted for in the linear models used by the
              investigators.  To detect these problems, tests will be conducted on a simple
              test structure designed to repeatably exhibit nonlinear behavior.  The second
              phase of the research will consist of a proof-of-concept test on a replicate
              structure, which has been tested previously on an earthquake simulator to
              compare the results of the two earthquake simulation techniques.

An
              integrated interdisciplinary approach will be used throughout the project,
              which combines structural testing and analysis expertise from the Department of
              Civil Engineering faculty, and controls expertise from the Department of
              Aerospace and Mechanics faculty.  Japanese collaborators on the project at
              University of Tokyo will focus on developing a real-time "on-line" testing
              method, similar to pseudo-dynamic testing, including substructuring.

This
              project is supported under NSF 98-36, "US-Japan Cooperative Research on Urban
              Earthquake Disaster Mitigation."




