Title       : Near-Source Ground Motion: Probabilistic Prediction of Accelerograms &
               Structural Demands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a9821096

Award Number: 9821096
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286502             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Allin Cornell cornell@ce.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory C. Beroza  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,5921,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This project is aimed to improving our understanding of near-source strong
              ground motions and extreme structural response to develop improved
              vector-valued measures of strong ground motion intensity that will correspond
              more closely to the potential to damage structures.  In particulalr, the
              problems posed by near source effects and their consequences for structural
              response in the nonlinear regime will be focussed on such effects may lead to
              substantially larger structural desplacements than current engineering practice
              associates with common measures of intensity, such as spectral
              acceleration.

A major element of this research project will be improved
              prediction of near-source strong ground motions.  Their engineering application
              implies that the range and undertainty in these motions due to source, site and
              path effects be understood and represented, particularly in the near-fault
              region.  This will lead to optimal  prediction of the dynamic response of
              nonlinear multi-degree-of-freedom systems, and its variabilty from likely
              earthquake sources.  

This cross-cutting ground motion and response research
              will be uniquely coordinated in the context of the larger objective of
              practical probabilistic performance estimation.

This project involves
              integration of engineering and earth science investigation  and is supported
              under the second year initiative "US-Japan Cooperative Research in Urban
              Earthquake Disaster Mitigation, " NSF 98-36

