Title       : Dissertation Research: Stress and Culture Changes Among the Yucatec Maya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9821115

Award Number: 9821115
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Little mlittle@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Biological anthropologists have had a long standing interest in the
              biological consequences of culture change, whether it occurs in situ, as a
              result of economic development, or through migration.  Previous work has
              demonstrated a relationship between acculturation, or the broadly defined
              changes that take place among groups and individuals upon contact with another
              culture, and biological indicators of stress including blood pressure and the
              stress hormones (e.g. catecholamines and cortisol). Poor health outcomes
              associated with stress include high blood pressure and cardiovascular disease,
              immune deficiency and increased susceptibility to infectious diseases and
              cancer, and poor birth outcomes.  Until recently, however, little work has
              focused on intracultural variation, due for example to gender differences and
              ethnic discrimination, and the biological stress response. 
     The proposed
              research draws from several related fields to examine the response to
              acculturative stress in the context of profound and rapid social change.  The
              field-setting for this project is the state of Quintana Roo on the eastern
              coast of the Yucatan Peninsula, Mexico.  Since the early 1970s, this area has
              undergone rapid development in response to the international tourism industry. 
              As such, many indigenous Yucatec Maya have been drawn from their
              subsistence-based lifestyles into the world economy. The process of
              acculturation occurs here in the context of a massive and growing tourist
              trade.  Real and exaggerated images of western affluence heighten the tension
              between previous conceptions of self, family, and community and romanticized
              notions of western lifestyle.  The impact of more than two million tourists
              yearly has dramatically altered the very life possibilities of these people.  
              
     In this environment gender and social roles, as well as household and
              community organization are particuarly vulnerable to change, with resultant
              challenges to mental and physical well-being.  Consequently, this environment
              is ideally suited to undertake the goal of this research:  a sex-specific
              analysis of the individual, household, and community level forces that both
              create and buffer acculturative stress and its health consequences. 
              Specifically the proposed research will address:  the definition of, and
              biological and behavioral response to, gender-specific stressors; the impact of
              changing gender-role beliefs on the response to psychosocial stress; the
              process of ethnic discrimination and marginilization as a cultural stressor;
              and the contextual effect of household and community level processes on the
              individual stress response.  The biological stress response will be measured
              primarily through overnight urinary catecholamines (stress hormones) and blood
              pressure, along with interviews assessing attitudes and beliefs in four
              communities along the Corredor Turistico (Tourist Corridor), which vary in
              their degree of dependence upon, and type of interaction with, tourism and
              tourists. 
     This study will add to the anthropological literature on
              stress and acculturation by focusing on intracultural variation (particlarly
              gender and marginilization issues) in the biological response. Moreover, and
              importantly, this work will contribute to stress research in general, by
              examining the impact of social roles and expectations on human health,
              operating through the medium of the biological stress response and consequently
              has broad implications for a more thorough understanding of the relationship
              between social processes and health status.  Additionally this work has
              practical importance. Change is inevitable for the Yucatec Maya as it is in
              similar populations around the world.  This study will address the very real
              health problems that occur in the transition to a cash economy by identifying
              specific challenges to the mental and physical well-being of the Maya as they
              negotiate a rapidly changing world.  Therefore, this study will provide a basis
              for the primary prevention and/or reduction of acculturative stress and
              associated diseases.       


