Title       : Improved Measures for Evaluation of Facility Layouts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a9821033

Award Number: 9821033
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367377             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shahrukh A. Irani   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas G. Hall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding to develop and evaluate a new approach for
              evaluation of a facility layout.  This approach will use a deterministic
              scheduling model to incorporate the time-based value of throughput delays into
              the traditional distance-based measures.  The transportation and queuing delays
              that are absent in the traditional facility layout evaluation models will be
              modeled as communication delays in a generic manufacturing problem.  The cost
              function in the scheduling algorithm will implicitly consider the traditional
              material handling and work-in-process costs as inventory carrying costs.  An
              Activity Based Costing (ABC) approach will be adopted to quantify the setup,
              processing, material handling, and queuing components of order throughput time.
              New dispatching rules that treat the material handling delays as non-zero
              transfer delays between consecutive pairs of operations will be developed and
              evaluated.  Extensive computational experiments will be conducted to study the
              sensitivity of the facility layout cost when different priority rules for order
              sequencing and dispatching are used. The performance of the model will be
              compared with those obtained using existing static and dynamic methods for
              evaluating layouts.

If successful, the results of this research will yield a
              comprehensive economic model for evaluating facility layouts that could be
              embedded in state-of-the-art software for computer-aided facility layout. 
              Industry will get a more reliable means for layout evaluation and
              justification.  Also, a new role for scheduling software is anticipated - that
              of evaluating capital-intensive facility layout/relayout projects.  This would
              minimize the reliance on dedicated simulation software to evaluate facility
              layouts.  A unifying cost basis will be established for any component of
              throughput time when a product is produced in a facility - setup, processing,
              loading/unloading, inspection, queuing, material handling, storage, etc. 
              Instead of material handling costs only, future layout evaluation models will
              consider the opportunity costs of raw material, labor hours and equipment hours
              that are invested and the interest that those investments accrue over the
              period of time that the product moves through the facility.
