Title       : Mathematical Modeling of Geometric Variations to Integrate Parametric Computer
               Aided Design with Tolerance Analyses and Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9821008

Award Number: 9821008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $485509             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph K. Davidson j.davidson@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jami J. Shah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The objective of this project is to develop a new bi-level math model for
              geometric tolerances, that is, the range of variation in size and shape that
              can be permitted for a part to be acceptable when in use.  At the local level,
              the new model would represent each tolerance zone for a plane or an axis (line)
              as a multidimensional region or map, and it would include the computational
              techniques that relate interdependencies between these regions and subregions
              within them.  The mathematical model to be developed will include formulations
              for variations in size, form, orientation, position, and runout, and
              combinations of these, which can be modeled using points, lines, and planes. 
              The primary method for the research is to use traditional mathematics for
              representing planes, lines, and points in a tolerance zone.  At the global
              level, the proposed model interrelates all frames of reference on a part or an
              assembly.  It will include a symbolic algebra that relates the degrees of
              freedom and constraints for a feature, such as a hole, to reference frames used
              when specifying dimensions and tolerances.  In order to validate the integrated
              bi-level mathematical model and to demonstrate its feasibility and usefulness,
              a set of prototype software modules will be designed and implemented.
     If
              successful, the results of this research will impact the state-of-the-art for
              geometric tolerances and the productivity of designers who use the results.  At
              the local level, the model will treat dimensional and geometric tolerances in
              three dimensions and in a manner consistent with the standard on tolerances
              that is universally accepted by practitioners, whereas existing models for
              tolerances are only partially satisfactory in being consistent with the
              standard.  At the global level it is projected that the new model will provide
              a unique bridge between mathematical characterizations of features (planes,
              lines, and points) and existing parametric computer-aided design models and
              statistical tolerance software packages.  It is projected that successful
              completion of the project will provide the designer with a tool for making
              better decisions about allocating geometric tolerances.  The completed model
              also should permit designers to identify trade-offs and to optimize the
              allocation of tolerances.  The impact should be a shorter design time, fewer
              iterations in the prototype phase of design, and hence lower cost.

