Title       : Robot Algorithms for Haptic Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9821067

Award Number: 9821067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ming C. Lin lin@cs.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Intelligent systems and simulated environments require intuitive interfaces for
              man-machine interaction. These may include visual, auditory, and haptic
              interfaces. Compared to the presentation of visual and auditory information,
              methods for haptic display are not as well developed. To exploit the
              possibility of haptic interaction for performing assembly or dis-assembly tasks
              in an electronic prototyping environment, it is imperative to develop the
              necessary real-time algorithms and software systems, in addition to the
              force/torque-feedback devices.  The PI proposes to design robot algorithms for
              haptic interaction.  Specifically, these include interactive contact
              determination for non-linear models and deformable bodies, and fast penetration
              depth computation between general three-dimensional geometric models.  The PI
              will develop prototype software systems and integrate them with force-feedback
              devices for haptic interaction in virtual prototyping environments.  Besides
              force display, the resulting algorithms and systems will also be useful for
              robot motion planning and dynamic simulation.  The research efforts will be
              complemented by developing a teaching curriculum in geometric computing for
              robotics and virtual prototyping, in order to enable better human resource
              development.  In addition to the intellectual pursuit of our research goals,
              the PI will also interact with potential users of the proposed research
to
              facilitate technology transition.



