Title       : Biosensing with Engineered Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1999      
File        : a9821049

Award Number: 9821049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Naomi J. Halas halas@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer L. West  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9821049
Halas
A new approach to biosensing utilizing nanoparticles with
              specifically engineered electromagnetic resonances is proposed. Two specific
              goals are targeted: (I) the fabrication and demonstration of an all optical in
              vivo glucose sensor, and (2) The development of a streamlined, all optical
              bioassay for the detection of plasma proteins in whole blood. Metal Nanoshells,
              composite nanoparticles consisting of a dielectric core and an ultrathin gold
              shell, possess a strong plasmon excitation whose resonant frequency is
              controlled by the particle core diameter and shell thickness.  By varying the
              nanoparticle's core/shell ratio, this resonance may be positioned at any
              wavelength across much of the visible and near infrared regions of the
              spectrum. When the nanoshell plasmon is resonant with a Raman excitation laser,
              enormous surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) enhancements have been
              observed from molecules adsorbed to the individual nanoshells. These
              enhancements occur without contributions from nanoparticle aggregation, as is
              typical with solid metal nanoparticle SERS enhancements. This effect provides a
              highly sensitive, high information content all-optical probe of molecular
              species in the local vicinity of individual nanoparticles suspended in a
              solution or other media. In addition, the plasmon resonance may be placed in a
              spectral "water window" of high infrared transmissivity in biological fluids
              and tissue, facilitating simple in vitro and in vivo sensing designs.
              Protein-conjugated nanoshell species, synthesized using the many
              well-established protocols of immunogold, will be utilized as specific
              functional agents in the development of new optically-based biosensing
              applications. Both sensor projects consist of bioconjugate-nanoshell attachment
              and activity studies, a series of nanoshell SERS-enhanced Raman spectroscopic
              studies for the biochemical species and reactions of interest, and
              characterization of the Raman-based monitors versus standard calibration
              methods.  In the case of the glucose sensor development these investigations
              will be followed by incorporation of the bioconjugate-nanoshell species into
              hydrogel media and in viva in the final stage. This project provides an
              exciting, goal oriented interdisciplinary series of studies that combines
              expertise in nanoparticle synthesis, immunochemistry, Raman and infrared
              spectroscopy, and quantitative and statistical analysis. The work described in
              this proposal is consistent with the demonstrated expertise of the two
              Principal Investigators.  This project will stimulate and unite graduate
              students in the disciplines of electrical engineering, applied physics,
              bioengineering and biochemistry toward goals of major technical and societal
              impact.
***







