Title       : Thermal Management of Reinforcements for Novel Microstructures and Interfaces in
               Cast Metal Matrix Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a9821057

Award Number: 9821057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217857             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pradeep K. Rohatgi prohatgi@csd.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ryoichi S. Amano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
In this research, new microstructures and interfaces will be created in
              selected aluminum matrix composites by extracting heat through reinforcing
              fibers. Heat transfer and fluid flow analysis will be done to design
              experiments on extracting heat through reinforcing fibers during solidification
              of an already infiltrated composite. Experiments will be done with carbon
              fibers in aluminum- 4.5% Copper alloy.  A tow of carbon fibers will be
              infiltrated, with a portion of the tow extending out of the casting.  The
              aluminum carbon  composite sample will be placed in a crucible, with the tow of
              fibers extending out of the melt, remelted and resolidified with the portion of
              the tow extending out of the composite, acting  as a source of heat extraction.
              Metallographic examination of the composites will be done after
              resolidification to determine the nature of the interface, thickness of the
              primary phase layer, grain size, and dendrite size as a function of the
              processing parameters. The experimental observations will be used to validate
              and modify the theoretical work on
extraction of heat through reinforcing
              fibers. The experimental results obtained in this study will include
              characterization of new type interfaces and matrix microstructures formed in
              the  composites when heat is extracted through reinforcing fibers.  The
              knowledge base could lead the way for improved composites with novel matrix
              microstructures and interfaces produced by heat extraction through the fibers.
              

