Title       : An Open Database of the Finite-Difference Time-Domain Literature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1999        
File        : a9821105

Award Number: 9821105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41737              (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Schneider   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9821105
Schneider

The finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method is
              arguably the most popular numerical method for the solution of problems in
              electromagnetics. It also is used widely in acoustics and continuum mechanics.
              Although the FDTD method has existed for over 30 years, the popularity of this
              computationally-intensive method continues to grow as computing costs continue
              to decline. In addition, extensions and enhancements to the method are
              introduced frequently, further broad-ening its appeal. Because of the
              tremendous amount of FDTD-related research activity, tracking the FDTD
              literature is a daunting task. To help researchers avoid duplication and
              quickly sort through the FDTD literature, an on-line (Web-accessible) database
              was constructed by the PI and a colleague, Dr. Kurt L. Shlager. Although this
              database is used widely by the FDTD community, there are several ways in which
              it, and the software that supports it, can be enhanced to build an on-line
              resource that provides much greater utility. Funds from this grant will be used
              to create an open database to which anyone can contribute comments,
              corrections, and additions. These contributions typically will be associated
              with citations to previously published work. When a user looks for literature
              on a particular subject, he or she will see not only the standard
              biblio-graphic information for the relevant citations, but also the comments
              for each. The database could be used, for example, by an author who wishes to
              note a minor typographical error that appeared in a publication, i.e, an error
              that the author feels does not warrant submission of an errata to the journal.
              Furthermore, a more substantive typographical error can be brought to the
              attention of the community immediately via the database (while the errata makes
              its way to press). Users will be able to comment on the content of
              publications--what appears to be worthy of notice and what appears to be
              lacking--and the authors of the paper will be free to clarify, expound,
              supplement, or rebut as they deem appropriate. By soliciting the collective
              knowledge of the FDTD community, the database will provide far more information
              than currently can be gathered individually. The database will be accessible
              via the Web and all the software developed will be open source and freely made
              available. Thus, other researchers who have interests in areas that enjoy
              significant at-tention and activity can easily host a similar on-line
              database/Web site that will aid their respective research communities.
***
