Title       : Traveling Wave Based Fault Location for Complex Network Topologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a9821090

Award Number: 9821090
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120633             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali Abur abur@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9821090
Abur

This project investigates the problem of determining the
              exact location of power system faults based on the recorded fault transients. 
              The potential of using traveling waves created by power system faults, as a
              means of determining the location of faults has long been recognized.  However,
              lack of suitable technological tools for high bandwidth monitoring of
              transients as well as the limitations of existing Fourier based signal
              processing methods in localizing abrupt changes in signals, have discouraged
              the efforts of developing comprehensive traveling wave based fault location
              methods so far.
This project focuses on the use of the Discrete Wavelet
              Transform in processing the traveling waves along the faulted transmission
              lines.  The ability of the Wavelet Transform to capture the fault transients
              with a high time resolution in lower scales, is exploited in order to develop a
              fault location algorithm.  Essential idea behind the algorithm is to capture
              the travel time of the modal components of the three phase transient signals
              during the fault, as they travel between the fault point and the line terminal
              at which the recording is done.  This information can then be translated into
              an equivalent distance, based on the knowledge of the travel velocities of
              various modes for the monitored line.  The project studies the behavior of the
              traveling wave based methods' performance under difficult yet common network
              topologies, such as mutually coupled lines, lines with series compensation
              capacitors, parallel lines with loop flows, etc.  The effectiveness and
              computational efficiency of the Wavelet Transform is also carefully examined in
              terms of the optimal choice of the mother wavelet, number of scales, and the
              modal signals to be processed.  Developed methods and the related algorithms
              are critically evaluated based on digital simulation of actual fault transients
              using the detailed models of power system components.
The project's results
              are expected to initiate a new way of processing fault transients, using the
              information at the higher frequency end of their spectrum, as opposed to most
              of the techniques currently in use today.  These results can potentially be
              used in related applications such as harmonics monitoring, detection and
              characterization of disturbances, distribution system fault monitoring and
              incipient failure detection of power transformers.



