Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Small Depth Boolean Circuits and Complexity - Theoretic
               Cryptography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1996       
File        : a9257979

Award Number: 9257979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell Impagliazzo russell@cs.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9218,9297,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 This award funds continuing investigations into two long-term  interests: 
              the complexity of small depth Boolean circuits, and the  computational
              complexity foundations of cryptography.  Computational  complexity as a field
              strives to provide a mathematical foundation for  computer science by
              developing techniques to evaluate the inherent  difficulty of computational
              problems.  The Boolean circuit seems the  most natural and robust concrete
              model of computational complexity.  Much work has gone into developing the
              theory of circuit complexity in  the hope of resolving such questions as P vs.
              NP.  There are strong  connections between bounds on circuit depth and issues
              in the theory  of parallel computation, logic (mostly proof theory), learning
              theory,  and the theory of neural nets.  Continuing projects in circuit 
              complexity are: establishing links between circuit bounds and Frege  proofs;
              examining the behavior of formulas under random restrictions,  (also known as
              neural nets).  Of course, circuit complexity is a  dynamic area, and specific
              projects may change with new results.  Work continues on the foundations of
              cryptography.  Recent work in  developing the structural complexity of
              cryptography has been so  successful that perhaps all the major, tractable
              questions in the area  have been resolved.  Indeed, there seem to be some
              theoretical  roadblocks to further progress in this direction.  However, there
              are  several important open questions regarding the relationship between 
              average-case complexity and cryptography, and that between oblivious  transfer
              and secret agreement.  More importantly, a large gap remains  between theory
              and practice.  Another goal of the project is  to develop theoretical tools
              that will actually lead to   implementable cryptosystems, and to handle such
              questions as virus   protection, secure electronic transfer of funds, and such
              issues   as privacy vs. security for electronic mail.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
