Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9257059

Award Number: 9257059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis J. Doyle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9227,9297,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The overall theme of this NSF Young Investigator Award                         
              research program is the utilization of mathematical tools for                  
              nonlinear analysis and computational tools for optimization in                 
              the synthesis of advanced controllers for chemical process                     
              control.  Dr. Doyle's principal research interests are in four                 
              categories:                                                                    
                                                                                             
              (1) Nonlinear Process Control, Optimization, and                               
              Identification -He plans to look at an efficient fusion of                     
              off-line and on-line techniques and identification (from data)                 
              of nonlinear plant models to be used for controller design.                    
              Initially theoretical issues of nonlinear control synthesis,                   
              performance analysis, and nonlinear optimization will be                       
              addressed, followed by work aimed at dealing with unmeasured                   
              disturbances and unmodeled dynamics.                                           
                                                                                             
              (2) Computational Modeling of Nonlinear Dynamical Systems -                    
              Control algorithms based on large order nonlinear models tend                  
              to be quite accurate at the expense of the complex nonlinear                   
              program which has to be solved for the optimal control action.                 
              The PI plans to develop accurate, low order nonlinear process                  
              models for industrial process operations which are to be                       
              validated against physical data.  An example is the use of                     
              wave propagation models he has used to develop control                         
              algorithms for packed bed reactors and distillation columns.                   
                                                                                             
              (3) Waste Management and Detection - Two areas of concern are                  
              waste water treatment and the control of harmful atmospheric                   
              emissions from combustion processes.  The key elements of                      
              these problems are the lack of primary measurements and                        
              extremely nonlinear behavior.  The PI plans to address these                   
              problems using nonlinear inferential control.                                  
                                                                                             
              (4) Biological Regulation - Homeostasis is the coordinated                     
              actions which maintain the steady states in a living body and                  
              is similar to the control mechanisms used for a complex                        
              chemical factory.  The PI plans to study the underlying                        
              paradigm of physiological regulation for use in developing                     
              improved medical treatments to assist the natural regulatory                   
              and defense mechanisms of the body.
