Title       : NSF Young Investigator Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1996        
File        : a9257951

Award Number: 9257951
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alessandro Gomez alessandro.gomez@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9297,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research program focuses on the fundamentals of                           
              electrostatic spraying and some novel applications of this                     
              technology in the areas of multiphase combustion and targeted                  
              aerosol drug therapy.  The objective of the first application                  
              is the study of the formation and burning of electrosprays of                  
              liquid fuels at both normal and reduced gravity in laminar and                 
              turbulent flow regimes.  The underlying philosophical approach                 
              is that of providing an experimental arrangement that will                     
              allow a systematic study of spray evolution and burning in                     
              configurations of successively increasing levels of                            
              complexity, starting from laminar sprays to fully turbulent                    
              ones.  A counterflow diffusion flame burner has been designed                  
              and used to stabilize a self-sustained ES flame of haptene.                    
              This configuration allows the decoupling of droplet-droplet                    
              and droplet-gas interactions from turbulence complications and                 
              represents a well-defined two-phase combustion flow whose                      
              ambient field can be systematically varied.  The ultimate goal                 
              of this experimental approach is that of eventually burning in                 
              a regime of three-dimensional droplet-droplet interaction, for                 
              which no experimental results are currently available.  The                    
              next level of complexity involves the "injection" of                           
              turbulence into the gas stream with synthesis of various                       
              turbulence scenarios characterized by different intensities                    
              and scales.  These experiments will address the issue of                       
              droplets/turbulence interaction which manifests itself as a                    
              two-way coupling.  As part of this activity, experiments will                  
              be conducted in a drop-tower facility to delineate the effects                 
              of natural convection on combustion of electrosprays.                          
                                                                                             
              A second electrospray application lies in the area of aerosol                  
              drug therapy, whereby acute and chronic respiratory diseases                   
              are treated by administration of a variety of substances as                    
              airborne dispersions of small "particles", typically composed                  
              of pure liquids or liquid mixtures such as water or aqueous                    
              saline solutions, in which drugs are either dissolved or                       
              suspended.  An electrostatic spray appears to be an excellent                  
              candidate for this task, since under appropriate experimental                  
              conditions it is capable of generating monodisperse droplets                   
              of arbitrary size and can be used to aerosolize pure liquids                   
              or suspensions of macromolecules (thus lending itself to                       
              dispersion of liposome encapsulated agents).  Aqueous saline                   
              solutions and suspensions of liposomes in a liquid carrier                     
              will be electrosprayed to generate droplets of controlled size                 
              and size distribution in the 1-8 micron range for targeted                     
              pulmonary deposition.  Effects of liquid flow rate, physical                   
              properties, and electric field on the generated droplets will                  
              be studied.  The influence of a delivery line in the path from                 
              generation to inhalation on the aerosol size distribution and                  
              transmission will also be investigated.
