Title       : RUI: Hypercapnic Hypoxia Impacts Shrimp Immune Defenses Against Bacterial
               Pathogens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0212921

Award Number: 0212921
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eugene N. Bruce                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $417412             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen G. Burnett burnettk@cofc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis E. Burnett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Charleston
	      66 George Street
	      Charleston, SC  294240001    843/953-5673

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1155,9117,9150,9178,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Like their terrestrial counterparts, most marine organisms require oxygen to
              live.  In recent years the levels of dissolved oxygen in waters along the
              world's coastlines has been decreasing.  This decline in water oxygen (hypoxia)
              has been attributed to many factors stemming from intensive agriculture and
              urbanization in the coastal zone.   In aquatic environments, hypoxia is often
              accompanied by changes in other aspects of water quality, including dissolved
              carbon dioxide and acidity or pH.  Laboratory and field investigations support
              the idea that this suite of changes in water quality, referred to as
              hypercapnic hypoxia, can increase the risk of resident organisms to infection
              and disease following exposure to a disease-causing microbe, or pathogen. 
              Coastal zones are critical breeding grounds for major groups of commercially
              important fin and shellfish.  Penaeids, including the white, brown, Pacific and
              tiger shrimps, are such an important group of crustaceans that live and breed
              in coastal estuaries.  Preliminary studies have shown that hypercapnic hypoxia
              increases the rate of infection and death in the Pacific shrimp, Litopenaeus
              vannamei, following exposure to the bacterial pathogen, Vibrio
              parahaemolyticus.   Hypercapnic hypoxia may directly enhance the distribution,
              survival, or growth of the bacterium itself, or suppress immune defenses of the
              shrimp host.   
The objectives of the proposed studies are to examine three
              factors of the interaction between the host L. vannamei and its pathogen, V.
              parahaemolyticus, that might be sensitive to hypercapnic hypoxia.  Hemocytes,
              those cells principally responsible for immune defense in crustaceans, may be
              sensitive to levels of dissolved oxygen and carbon dioxide, or to pH.  To
              examine this possibility, the first objective of this study is determine
              whether tissue-level changes in dissolved gasses and acidity that accompany
              sublethal hypercapnic hypoxia can suppress the ability of isolated hemocytes to
              kill or inhibit the growth of bacteria.  Several lines of evidence also suggest
              that physiological responses to hypercapnic hypoxia, such as increases in
              ventilation rate, hemolymph circulation and cell-cell aggregation, might alter
              the normal distribution of hemocytes in the shrimp and reduce the efficiency of
              clearing an infectious pathogen.  To address this possibility, the second
              objective of this study is to examine whether hypercapnic hypoxia alters the
              normal pattern of hemocyte movement to the gill or to other major tissue
              compartments following an injection of live bacteria. These movements will be
              monitored using both molecular and immunological probes specific for
              hemocyte-associated molecules that are involved in immune defense.  A third set
              of experiments will examine whether changes in oxygen, carbon dioxide and pH
              can alter the efficiency with which the shrimp clears a bacterial infection. 
              In these studies, L. vannamei will be injected with a genetically-modified V.
              parahaemolyticus that produces green fluorescent protein.  The genetic
              modification will allow investigators to track where the bacteria goes, where
              it is killed, and how it is ultimately eliminated from the shrimp.  The results
              of these studies are expected to provide basic information that can be used
              toward protecting a key natural resource, the Penaeid shrimp, while increasing
              our understanding of interactions between the functions of respiration, ion
              regulation and disease resistance in crustaceans. 

