Title       : Genetic Analysis of Methylotrophic Methanogenesis in Methanosarcina Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0212466

Award Number: 0212466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Metcalf metcalf@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              


The long-term goal of the research is to expand our knowledge regarding
              the physiology, metabolism and evolutionary adaptation of the methane-producing
              Methanosarcina species. Although the primary emphasis of these studies will be
              the identification and characterization of genes that directly and indirectly
              effect the utilization of methanol as a growth substrate (methylotrophic
              methanogenesis), the results are expected to have broad implications with
              respect to Methanosarcina and other methanogenic organisms. In particular, it
              is expected that these studies will reveal not only novel aspects of the
              methylotrophic pathway, but also how methanogenesis is integrated into the
              overall metabolism of the organism. Further, it is expected that a clearer
              understanding of archaeal transcriptional control will result from examination
              of the highly regulated methylotrophic genes. The experiments will be primarily
              based on recently developed methods for genetic analysis of Methanosarcina
              species; however, physiological, biochemical and molecular approaches will also
              be utilized to complement the genetic studies. This approach is expected to
              generate data that are both novel and complementary to the results of preceding
              studies. To achieve these aims Methanosarcina strains with mutations in a
              number of genes believed to be involved in methylotrophic methanogenesis will
              be constructed. These mutant strains will then be characterized with respect to
              a variety of physiological and biochemical traits. Random mutagenesis and
              proteomics approaches will be used to identify new genes that are specifically
              required for growth on methylotrophic substrates. Separate studies will examine
              the regulation of genes known to be involved and attempt to identify the genes
              that mediate this regulation. Finally, during the course of this work
              additional methods will be developed for genetic analysis of Methanosarcina
              species.

