Title       : Legume-Rhizobium Interactions that Maintain Mutualism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0212674

Award Number: 0212674
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Ford Denison Rfdenison@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9109,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   The importance of legume plants to nitrogen budgets of many natural and
              agricultural ecosystems depends largely on their interactions with rhizobia,
              soil bacteria that can live inside root nodules and convert nitrogen gas into
              "fixed" nitrogen that their plant host can use.  Rhizobia vary in costs and
              benefits to their hosts.  Why do many, but not all, rhizobia use plant
              photosynthate (carbohydrates) to fix nitrogen that mainly benefits their hosts,
              rather than hoarding that photosynthate to support their own future survival
              and reproduction?  This is especially puzzling since each plant typically hosts
              several competing strains of rhizobia.  Strains that fix nitrogen may increase
              host photosynthesis, thereby increasing the pool of available photosynthate,
              but if all strains share in this collective benefit then selfish strains that
              hoard photosynthate should displace those that fix more nitrogen.  Why hasn't
              this happened?    
      Preliminary data appear to show that plants can
              monitor individual root nodules and cut off resources (including oxygen) to
              those that fix little or no nitrogen.  Mathematical models show that such plant
              "sanctions" would be an effective deterrent to rhizobial "cheating," but
              additional research is needed on the mechanisms of plant sanctions and on their
              effects on survival and reproduction of rhizobia.  Various experiments will
              expose some nodules to a nitrogen-free atmosphere, while allowing other nodules
              on the same plant to fix nitrogen.  Noninvasive monitoring of nodule physiology
              and methods to count rhizobia are working well, and we also plan to measure
              resource levels in rhizobia.  The importance to soil populations of rhizobial
              release from nodules, relative to increased reproduction of rhizobia already in
              the soil, will be determined using rhizobia expressing two different
              fluorescence genes.  DNA fingerprinting of rhizobia collected from nodules in
              the field will test the key hypothesis that mixed nodules (containing two or
              more strains) are rare.  Although details will differ, our research may be
              relevant to any system in which cooperation can break down, such as expulsion
              of algae by bleaching corals.

