Title       : Does Ecological Stoichiometry and Defense Theory Predict Patterns of Resource
               and Predator Limitation in a Tropical Litter Food Web?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2002   
File        : a0212386

Award Number: 0212386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Kaspari MKASPARI@OU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1182,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A basic goal of ecology is to understand the processes that generate the vast
              variation in
abundance and biomass among taxa in time and space. Food webs
              summarize the flow of elements
and energy in ecological systems. One basic
              type of web groups taxa into trophic levels based on
shared prey and
              predators. A significant and attainable goal for Ecology is to predict the
              biomass
across these trophic levels in time and space. Three ecological
              theories, knit together, should help us achieve this goal:
Are resources
              limiting? OFAN
How strong is selection for defense? Defense theory
How do
              prey allocate between growth and defense? Ecological stoichiometry
Which
              elements are potential resources?
1. OFAN (an acronym for its architects)
              proposes that the balance of resource and predator imitation varies with the
              amount of resources available at the base of the web.
2. Ecological
              stoichiometry posits that resources limiting biomass reflect the balance of
              chemical elements needed for growth and defense relative to their availability
              in the environment. What available elements can build defenses? How do defenses
              shape elemental composition?
3. Defense theory posits that the optimal
              allocation between growth and defense is determined by
the intensity of
              predation and the time it takes for the prey to grow to reproductive
              age.
These theories will be used to explore the dynamics of tropical litter
              food webs in the Republic of
Panama's Barro Colorado National Monument (BCNM).
              Most of what we know about the structure
and function of food webs comes from
              plant-based, or green webs. However, over 80% of the
carbon fixed in
              photosynthesis in the tropical canopy falls as litter where it is decomposed in
              the
brown food web of microbes, microbivores, and their predators. The taxa in
              these webs may
represent 60% of the forest's invertebrates and their abundance
              can vary 100-fold at small spatial
scales. Yet, despite its importance in
              releasing carbon into the atmosphere, recycling ecosystem
nutrients, and
              sustaining much of the forest's biodiversity, we are profoundly ignorant of the
              factors shaping abundance in these webs. Like the green forest canopy above it,
              the tropical litter represents one of the last ecological frontiers on the
              planet.
BCNM, with its extensive infrastructure, its century-long stewardship
              by Smithsonian Tropical
Research Institute, and its ongoing large-scale
              experimental and demographic studies, is the best
place to undertake this
              project. Ecological stoichiometry will be used to identify which
              elements
(among C, N, Ca, P, S, Mg, K, Cu, Fe, Zn) limit biomass in the
              trophic levels and common taxa of
BCNM's brown food webs. Its 50 ha tree plot
              will be used to map this biomass onto the chemical
signatures of 10 common
              tree species at three stages of litter decomposition. These patterns will
              be
further tested experimentally with long-term 40 x 40 m fertilization plots,
              and pulses of nutrients in
1-m 2 plots. OFAN's prediction of a stairstep
              accumulation of biomass along nutrient gradients will be evaluated with the
              above data. Its mechanism--that the impact of predator limitation varies along
              resource gradients--will be tested using fences that keep out predacious ants
              and by supplementing plots with litter ant nests. Defense' theory's life
              history tradeoffs will be evaluated in microcosms by measuring growth rates of
              common litter taxa and evaluating their palatability to predators. If defenses
              by fungi and microbivores significantly curtail predation then life history
              tradeoffs that play out along resource gradients are a key phenomenon shaping
              the balance of predation and resource limitation in this system.

