Title       : Simulation, Situations, and Embodiment in Conceptual Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0212134

Award Number: 0212134
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300480             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence W. Barsalou barsalou@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1180,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Lawrence Barsalou will conduct
              three years of basic research.  The funded project will examine the knowledge
              that underlies typical high-level cognitive activities such as human discourse,
              reasoning, or perception.  The hypotheses that guide this research are quite
              new.  The key assumption is that high level, abstract, cognitive activities are
              actually grounded in the situated everyday workings of the body-thus the terms
              situated cognition or embodied cognition.  
For example, our knowledge of cars
              reflects how we interact with cars, what it is like to actually drive a car; to
              see, hear, touch, and smell a real car; or to feel an emotional response to a
              car.  This view contrasts with a tradition in psychology, whereby our knowledge
              of the world is assumed to be fully abstract and detached-something like the
              "centralized" one-kind-of-knowledge-structure-fits-all way in which a computer
              program can be written.  The funded research will test predictions derived from
              the new alternative.  Human participants will perform classic "knowledge
              tasks," responding to questions such as "What are the properties of a car?" or
              "Is a tire a property of a car?".  Carefully-controlled laboratory experiments
              have been designed around such questions and tasks to assess whether situated
              and embodied forms of knowledge are used to perform them.
This research has
              broad implications.  First, support for its working hypotheses would motivate
              big changes in basic scientific theories of human knowledge; this work could
              contribute to a fundamental shift in how we think about ourselves.  Second, the
              outcomes of this research could have broad applied impact in education (i.e.,
              how best to teach a knowledge domain) or cognitive engineering (i.e., how
              machines should be designed to best interact with human beings).  Finally, this
              work may suggest new forms of artificial intelligence.  Intelligent machines
              that use situated knowledge, shaped around their peripheral devices, are more
              robust than traditional centralized intelligent machines.  Possible new
              machines could resemble the robots used in exploration of Mars, for example, a
              second-generation of robots that better situate themselves in their
              environments.

