Title       : Characterization of Aux/IAA Protein Degradation in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0212659

Award Number: 0212659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy Callis jcallis@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The regulation of proteolysis is an emerging paradigm in cellular and organismal
              regulation.  Multiple pathways have been demonstrated to be regulated through
              the specific and controlled degradation of both regulatory and downstream
              proteins.  In higher plants, multiple aspects of plant growth and development
              require auxin, of which indole-3-acetic acid (IAA) is the most abundant
              naturally occurring biologically active member.  Auxin regulates cell division,
              cell elongation, cell differentiation, and it plays an important role in
              multiple organismal processes such as lateral root initiation, apical
              dominance, and tropic responses.
	Molecular and biochemical studies have
              identified the family of Aux/IAA proteins as essential players in the auxin
              signal 
transduction pathway that alters gene expression in plants.  In
              addition to the activity of the Aux/IAA proteins (which remains poorly
              characterized), their rapid degradation has emerged as an integral part of
              their biological function.  The mechanism and role of this rapid proteolysis is
              the focus of this study.  
	Based on work in other systems demonstrating that
              the cis-acting requirement for proteolysis is represented by a small region
              that can target other proteins for degradation, the rapid degradation of a
              fusion of Aux/IAA amino acids to the marker enzyme firefly luciferase was
              demonstrated directly in transgenic Arabidopsis plants.  The nature of
              absolutely required Aux/IAA amino acids were defined, however, flanking
              sequences appear to affect proteolysis in a way that was not completely
              understood.  Experiments proposed here will define the role of these sequences.
               Point mutations and deletions of Aux/IAA sequences will be made, fused to LUC
              and the fusion protein half-life determined in transgenic plants.  To determine
              whether all Aux/IAA proteins have the same half-life, the ability of additional
              Aux/IAA proteins to target LUC for degradation will be determined. An Aux/IAA
              protein lacking the required conserved amino acids will tested for in vivo
              degradation as a LUC  fusion.  If not rapidly degraded, this protein will serve
              as the starting point to determine the sufficiency of the Aux/IAA degradation
              signal.  
	Application of exogenous auxin alters the rate of Aux/IAA
              proteolysis, providing for the first time experimental evidence for a proposed
              mechanism for auxin-regulated gene expression. Increased loss of Aux/IAA
              proteins by faster proteolysis correlated with induction of transcription of
              genes containing auxin-response elements in their regulatory regions. 
              Experiments will be performed to test whether alterations in endogenous auxin
              alter Aux/IAA proteolysis through the construction of transgenic plants with
              inducible expression of enzymes that alter IAA steady state levels.  The above
              studies will be complemented by a genetic approach to isolate mutants defective
              in Aux/IAA::LUC degradation.  Additional screens, including an activation
              tagging screen, will be initiated.  The effect on Aux/IAA::LUC proteolysis of
              previously described mutants altered in auxin responses will also be determined
              to identify genes important for Aux/IAA proteolysis.  
	The results from the
              proposed work will be highly significant given the importance of the regulation
              of Aux/IAA proteolysis in auxin signaling and the importance of auxin in
              regulating plant growth and development.  Aux/IAA proteolysis will serve as a
              model by which other cellular pathways may be regulated, providing methodogy,
              reagents, and experimental approaches useful in other systems. Sequences
              defined in these studies may be used in other contexts to control the
              intracellular level of a protein.

