Title       : LTREB: On the Consequences of Removing Ground-dwelling Mammals for Tropical
               Forest Diversity: Towards a New Conceptual Framework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0212054

Award Number: 0212054
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273764             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter P. Carson walt+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0212054
Carson
LTREB
We have underway a long-term, large-scale experiment
              that is addressing one of the primary
hypotheses proposed to explain the
              maintenance of tree species diversity in tropical forests, namely,
that
              mammals acting as herbivores, seed predators, and dispersers, are critical
              determinants of tropical
tree diversity and abundance. This experiment is
              essentially a community-level test of the Janzen-Connell
Hypothesis that
              predicts that the removal of ground-dwelling mammals will ultimately cause
              a
decline in tropical tree diversity. Under this scenario, mammals
              preferentially prey on the juveniles of
tree species that are abundant and
              ultimately keep these tree species in check.
The study system is mature-phase
              tropical moist forest in central Panama on Barro Colorado
Island (BCI) and the
              adjacent mainland (Gigante Peninsula). Since1994, we have monitored
              the
consequences of excluding ground-dwelling mammals in 8 large (1355m
2
)
              fenced exclosures and
adjacent unfenced control plots. Four pairs of treatment
              and control plots were established on BCI and
4 pairs were located on Gigante
              in similar mature forest. Prior to initiating any treatments, we
censused,
              measured, identified, and tagged all woody plants > 50 cm in height in all
              plots. In
addition, we quantified newly recruited seedlings in 28 smaller
              subplots in each large plot. In total,
we have now followed the fate of more
              than 60,000 individual seedlings and saplings. Overall, the
exclusion of
              mammals led to a substantial and sustained increase in seedling density.
The
              results of this experiment to date suggest that excluding mammals may
              significantly
increase woody species diversity of the seedling layer at least
              in the short-term (~10 yrs). Thus, our
results contrast sharply with the
              community-level predictions of the Janzen-Connell hypothesis. We
propose a new
              conceptual model that suggests that the consequences of the short term removal
              of
mammals (2-25 yrs) from tropical forests, whether by experimental exclusion
              or more broadly via
over hunting, will cause first an increase in woody
              species diversity and thereafter potentially a
decrease (see Fig. 1). This
              result will first appear in the seedling layer (1-50 cm in height) and
              then
move as a wave through larger size classes. The data to date, however,
              even after 7-years, remain
equivocal. The short term increase in diversity
              clearly documented inside exclosure plots may be a
transient effect of the
              1998 El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO) event. Specifically, the ENSO
              event
caused a severe and extended dry season that increased seedling
              mortality. Because there was a higher
seedling density inside the exclosures,
              these sites may have been buffered from the drought. We
believe that it is
              imperative that we continue this experiment and monitor the next phase as the
              seedling
layer moves into the small sapling size class. The conservation
              implications of this work are clear; the
overexploitation of the mammalian
              fauna in many tropical forest reserves, parks, and fragments may
have
              long-term negative consequences for forest diversity that may not become
              apparent for decades.
It is only through long-term experiments that we can
              unequivocally separate out short-term dynamics
from long-term forest
              trajectories.

