Title       : Adaptation and Extinction in Changing Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0212487

Award Number: 0212487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Pfrender pfrender@biology.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0212487
Pfrender

Contemporary natural populations are faced with a
              challenging suite of changing environmental conditions. The ability of
              populations to adapt to new conditions depends, in large part, on the patterns
              of genetic variation underlying adaptive characters.  A well-developed
              theoretical framework exists for analyzing the rate and trajectory of
              adaptation.  However, there is a lack of sufficient empirical data to extend
              this framework to make predictions about the potential for populations to adapt
              to changing conditions.  This research will make direct comparisons of
              freshwater invertebrate populations before and after a rapid change in the
              environment, focusing on a suite of alpine lakes in the Sierra Nevada Mountains
              of California that have known histories of fish introductions.  Estimates of
              the rate and trajectory of adaptation will be obtained by hatching eggs from
              lake-bottom sediments prior to the introduction of fish and comparing the
              historical and contemporary populations.

Given the current level of
              anthropogenic influences on the environment, understanding the limits to the
              process of adaptation in natural populations is critically important.  The
              results of this research will provide important insights into the ecological
              and genetic processes in natural populations and will be directly applicable to
              the conservation and management of natural resources and biodiversity,
              particularly when these are challenged by phenomena such as climate change and
              invasive species.  Sediment cores obtained in these studies will document
              historical changes in abiotic and biotic lake structure and will be a valuable
              resource for researchers across a wide range of disciplines.  Research and
              education will be integrated through the training of graduate and undergraduate
              students.  The results of this work will be disseminated widely through
              peer-reviewed journals and direct contact with federal agencies.


