Title       : CRB:Manipulation of Vertical and Horizontal Heterogeneity in a Large-Scale,
               Restoration Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0212005

Award Number: 0212005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390129             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joy B. Zedler jbzedler@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Callaway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharook P. Madon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0212005
Zedler
Ecosystem degradation often involves the loss of topographic
              heterogeneity, a critical
ecosystem property that declines as sediments fill
              in depressions, flatten surfaces and
raise elevations. In southern California,
              coastal habitat that is highly valued for its
support of endangered plants and
              animals has suffered catastrophic sedimentation,
followed by altered species
              distributions and lowered biodiversity. When recovery is
attempted,
              topographic complexity is typically ignored as sediments are excavated
              and
restoration sites contoured by bulldozer. Insufficient vertical and
              horizontal
heterogeneity might be a key constraint on the restoration of
              wetlands toward structural
and functional equivalency with undisturbed
              sites.
In this project, we will investigate how adding topographic
              heterogeneity might
accelerate the progress of ecosystem restoration. The
              principal hypothesis is that adding
vertical and horizontal pattern at to will
              facilitate the restoration of wetland structure and
function. To test this
              hypothesis, an entire 8-ha tidal wetland restoration site within the
Tijuana
              River National Estuarine Research Reserve (San Diego County, CA) was
designed
              to support the large-scale, ecological experiment. The $3.1-million
              excavation
was completed in February 2000 with the connection of the site to a
              main tidal channel,
and we have monitored several attributes over the 22
              months since tidal flushing was
reinstated. We propose to take full advantage
              of the experimental treatments and
examine the influence of (1) a vertical
              pattern of topographic heterogeneity, in the form
of complex tidal creek
              networks, and (2) a horizontal pattern furnished by varying
densities of
              planted salt marsh halophytes, on the diversity, abundance and composition
of
              multiple response variables and trophic levels: geomorphology, algae, vascular
              plants,
invertebrates, and fish.
In addition to testing methods for
              recovering wetlands, the integrative work proposed
herein will demonstrate the
              power of restoration experiments and contribute fundamental
new insights into
              the relationship between topographic heterogeneity and the
development of
              ecosystem structure (species composition and abundance) and function
(e.g.,
              foraging by fish). 

Conservation and Restoration Biology (CRB).
