Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Extension of Suffrage as
               Policy Innovation: A Comparative Study of the American States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0212419

Award Number: 0212419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11885              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy E. Burns nburns@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
               

This Doctoral Dissertation provides an explanation of the extension of
              suffrage rights in a federal system. The ultimate question is: what does it
              take for a previously excluded group to successfully lobby for the right of
              electoral inclusion? While other scholars have treated the behavioral
              explanation of mass activism for suffrage rights and the institutional
              explanation of policy enactment as separate endeavors, the Principal
              Investigator argues that the two are too highly interconnected to be understood
              independently. Understanding when and how movements for political incorporation
              succeed requires understanding how the processes of activism and institutional
              constraints interact. The project will explicitly endeavor to combine
              theoretical frameworks from the literature on social movements that seek to
              explain the development and maintenance of activism, with the literatures in
              political science that seek to explain processes of policy enactment (e.g.,
              political parties, legislative institutions, and policy innovation) to offer a
              new and more complete explanation of the process of enfranchisement. 

To
              answer this fundamental question about the American political system, the
              Principal Investigator studies the struggle for adoption of woman suffrage.
              Woman suffrage measures were considered and adopted by states through
              legislative enactment, constitutional convention, and popular referendum. Some
              of these measures provided for only presidential suffrage, some only primary
              suffrage, some full suffrage. Thirty years passed between the earliest and
              latest state-level adopters of woman suffrage.  It is through investigation of
              this variance that we can discover the institutional and socio-political
              factors that make expansion of the right of electoral participation more or
              less possible for previously excluded groups. 

The research design combines
              an event history approach to analysis of in all forty-eight states with
              in-depth archival research on the consideration of woman suffrage (in a sample
              of six states). The national data analysis models the time to adoption of woman
              suffrage in the states as a function of social and institutional conditions,
              including: partisan competition, electoral strength of third parties, racial
              and sex composition of the population, economic conditions, organization of
              woman suffrage interests, and the difficulty of the state initiative and
              constitutional amendment processes. The archival work is conducted in states
              chosen explicitly for their variance on these conditions.  This allows the
              Principal Investigator the ability to trace the processes through which each of
              these factors comes to matter in the struggle by disenfranchised groups for
              their political inclusion. 


