Title       : Mechanisms of Sister Chromatid Pairing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0212323

Award Number: 0212323
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $622647             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert V. Skibbens rvs3@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	The continuance of life through cell division requires that each daughter cell
              receive one and only one chromosome set from the parent cell.  High fidelity
              DNA replication and chromosome segregation are fundamental components to this
              process.  During DNA replication, each parental chromosome is exactly
              duplicated.  At the same time, the resulting chromosomes (called sister
              chromatids) become tightly paired along their length.  This pairing between
              chromatids identifies the sisters over time.  Upon cell division, the pairing
              mechanism is inactivated and the sisters segregate away from each other into
              the newly forming daughter cells.  This is the hallmark of proper cell
              division.  Defects in sister chromatid pairing have dire consequences for the
              organism, causing severe abnormalities of many kinds. This project will help
              characterize the mechanism by which sister chromatid pairing is established. 
              CTF7 (also called ECO1) is an essential component of the sister chromatid
              pairing pathway in yeast and   Ctf7p is highly conserved throughout evolution. 
              The goals of this research are to 1) map Ctf7p protein interaction domains
              required for sister chromatid pairing, 2) test molecular models of how sister
              chromatids are paired, and 3) identify new components that are required for
              sister chromatid pairing.  These goals will be accomplished using biochemical,
              molecular, genetic and high-resolution light microscopy approaches in yeast
              cells.  The successful completion of these goals will enable the investigator
              to build a testable physical model of how sister chromatids become paired and
              elucidate the regulatory mechanisms involved.  
	In addition to advancing the
              understanding of chromosome segregation, this research program will strengthen
              the scientific infrastructure at Lehigh University, an institution with a high
              percentage of undergraduate students.  Students and post-doctoral fellows will
              acquire new intellectual and technical skills from this project.

