Title       : Interrelationships Between Success and Learning Strategies Applied by
               Engineering Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0212150

Award Number: 0212150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonhard E. Bernold bernold@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joni Spurlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cathy Crossland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher M. Anson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Faculty and administrators in engineering programs across the country will
              readily admit to being puzzled by a shared national phenomenon: while the
              number of engineering jobs continues to increase, the retention rate of
              freshman engineering students remains disturbingly low (43%). In a positive
              national context for employment in engineering, there is an urgent need for
              research to examine the institutional, pedagogical, and personal reasons for
              students to give up their pursuit of a career in engineering. Our study
              proposes to investigate this phenomenon in ways that can help to inform and
              reform undergraduate education in engineering.  

The central question
              guiding the proposed research project is what can be done to help engineering
              students to be successful in college and in their profession given the fact
              that the teaching culture can't be changed instantly?

Grounded in existing
              research on student achievement in engineering, the present proposal seeks to
              investigate those skills and attributes that create successful and personally
              motivated undergraduate engineering students. We propose a five-year
              longitudinal, multi-phased study with following components: Phase 1) Learning
              strategies,
attitudes, and success of engineering freshmen; Phase 2)
              Effectiveness of Coached/Integrated Cognitive Empowerment of Engineering
              Freshmen; 3) Longitudinal Effect of Cognitive Empowerment Beyond Freshmen Year.
               

The goal of Phase 1 is to establish a thorough understanding of "what
              freshmen do" when it comes to "college-study" and how or whether their behavior
              changes during the first year. We propose to use a combination of previously
              validated instruments and personal interviews to generate a bank of relevant
              data from approximately 1000 engineering freshmen starting in August 2002, as
              well as from engineering students at higher levels. This data will provide
              baseline information for the design of a series of interventions targeted to
              students rather than the teaching environment; that is, rather than proposing
              new courses, teaching methods, or instructional delivery systems, we will focus
              on the identifying and providing cognitive and learning strategies that foster
              healthy habits and coach students to remove weaknesses in the context of the
              existing culture in engineering education into which first-year students are
              immersed, both at NC State and at many other engineering programs. 

Based on
              the experience gained from Phase 2, the project will embark on sustained
              monitoring of student successes as they matriculate in different engineering
              disciplines (e.g., mechanical) and possibly continuing its
              interventions/support geared towards the different learning environments faced
              by the students.  Based on the experience gained from Phase 2, the project will
              embark on sustained monitoring of student successes as they matriculate in
              different engineering disciplines (e.g., mechanical), and possibly continuing
              appropriate interventions/support judged to be effective in increasing student
              success within the different learning environments encountered in the
              engineering curriculum.

The impact of this study is expected to be
              universal: engineering colleges nationally and internationally have established
              a similar teaching culture and face similar educational problems. We hope to
              demonstrate how empowering engineering freshmen to become effective and skilled
              learners can increase their level of success and with it their retention and
              lifelong interest in the pursuit of the intellectual and work-related goals of
              engineering.

