Title       : engage1st - Creating First Generation Engineers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0212225

Award Number: 0212225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374781             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janie E. Seat seat@tennessee.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith H. Hector  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This proposal describes a collaborative program between East Tennessee
              Community Colleges and the University of Tennessee (UT) College of Engineering
              (UT_COE called engage1st to widen the pipeline of incoming first year
              engineering students from under-represented populations and to provide an
              intervention program that supports success for these students.  The
              participating community colleges are  Northeast State Technical Community
              College, Pelissippi State Technical Community College, Roane Community College,
              and Walters State Community College.
Engage1st has the goal of attracting and
              graduating students with merit but not opportunity to engineering from those
              groups under-represented in the UT-COE.  Data shows that students in
              engineering at UT are from families having an engineer in the immediate family
              or from locations where engineers live and work - overwhelmingly suburban
              locations and specific high schools.  These students enter engineering having a
              model and an expectation of being an engineer and being successful at UT. 
              Under-represented students are those from high schools in the institutional
              service area where there has not been a supply of engineering freshmen. 
              Students in this target audience come from rural, urban, and inner-city
              settings and include Caucasians, African-American, and Hispanic men and
              women.
Engage1st has four components: 1) recruiting of students while in high
              school, 2) academic preparation of students at community colleges for
              engineering school, 3) adaptation of students into the University academic and
              social setting, and 4) industry support for these students from their home
              counties thru summer internships and scholarships.  The aim of the program is
              to provide a model for being an engineer and to foster the expectation of
              success in engineering at the University to create new first generation
              engineers.
Students will be recruited as high school juniors and encouraged to
              take SMET preparatory courses as seniors.  After high school, the students will
              attend a local community college for one year where they will take English and
              Chemistry, Trigonometry, Pre-Calculus and computer programming toward their BS
              in Engineering.  Students will intern in their home county the following
              summer.  Students will begin at UT in the engage freshman-engineering program
              and will live together and be taught as cohorts of 20 in Calculus and
              engineering classes.  Students return to their home counties to intern the
              summer after their freshman year.  In year 3, students enter their sophomore
              classes as mainstream engineering students.  Affiliated programming and
              scholarships support the students throughout the program.
The intellectual
              merit of this program lies in the redefinition of the engineering education
              entry problems and combination of existing expert resources as a solution. 
              Engage1st combines the expertise of the community colleges in remediation of
              fundamental skills with the innovation of teaching freshman engineering in
              engage to academically deliver mainstream engineering sophomores at the
              conclusion of two years.  These students must be taught to problem solve, and
              they need encouragement and the confidence from the community college year to
              move to UT.
The broader impacts of the program are in workforce development of
              technical expertise in a manner that will, in time, increase the number of
              engineering graduates.  This program develops first generation engineers
              (implying a new source of engineers in future generations) and does it by
              creating a pipeline into engineering in populations where there are not
              existing role models.  Economically, this program starts to create that
              technical staff and to develop a technical career track for a future
              workforce.
     


