Title       : RUI: Measurement and Modeling of Photosynthetic Responses by Temperate Forest
               Herbs and Tree Seedling to Nearground Enriched Carbon Dioxide and Irradiance
               Regimes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0212164

Award Number: 0212164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy W. Sipe T_Sipe@acad.fandm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin & Marshall Col
	      Office of the Provost
	      Lancaster, PA  176043003    717/291-3911

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	The proposed research has two goals: (1) to measure the interactive effects of
              naturally-occurring near-ground enriched carbon dioxide (NEC) and fluctuating
              light on photosynthesis by six herbaceous and woody plant species in a
              temperate forest ecosystem; and (2) to model daily leaf-level photosynthesis
              across a wide range of CO2/light combinations in order to determine the
              potential for NEC/sunfleck interactions to affect survival, growth, and species
              composition within and across forest stands. The widespread occurrence of
              naturally enriched CO2 in the herbaceous zone (due to respiration by plant
              roots and soil microorganisms) and its likely impacts on photosynthesis have
              been noted for many decades, but no comprehensive effort has been made to
              measure or model NEC variation or quantify its effects on photosynthesis,
              especially under the fluctuating light levels (especially sunflecks) typical of
              the forest environment. Previous research by the principal investigator and his
              colleagues has shown that the impacts of enriched CO2 on leaf-level
              photosynthesis are substantial during both background shade and sunflecks.
              However, it is necessary to measure NEC/light regimes and photosynthesis more
              extensively in order to accurately predict NEC variation and its effects on
              plants over longer time periods (days to weeks). The results of this project
              will increase our understanding of temperate forest ecology in several
              important ways. First, the data on spatial and temporal NEC/light variation
              will help fill a major gap in our knowledge of forest resource environments.
              Second, empirical models of NEC regulation generated during the project should
              apply in broad outline to other forested systems. Third, the accuracy with
              which a recently developed dynamic photosynthesis model can predict daily net
              carbon gain under a range of CO2 levels in the field will be determined.
              Finally, the data will have implications for estimating the effects of
              human-caused global CO2 rise on plant species in the herbaceous stratum,
              including forest regeneration processes.
Undergraduate students will play
              critical roles in all phases of the proposed project, including research
              planning, field measurements, data processing, data analysis, presentation of
              results at professional meetings, and publication. A total of nine students
              will each spend twenty months on the project, including an academic year of
              preparation for twelve weeks of intensive summer research at the Harvard Forest
              research site (Petersham, MA), followed by one to two semesters of formal
              independent study focused on data analysis, presentation at professional
              meetings, honors thesis preparation, and co-authorship on publications. 

