Title       : Enhanced Learning in Undergraduate Education: A Research Communications Studio
               Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0212244

Award Number: 0212244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Matthews   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy S. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elisabeth Alford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Objectives and Methods: The objectives of this project are to develop and to
              critically assess a novel Research Communications Studio model that is designed
              to improve learning, retention, and diversity of undergraduate engineering
              students. The project will provide much-needed data on how student learning is
              enhanced via hands-on research and interactions that take place within the
              studio group. In the Research Communications Studio (RCS), small groups of
              three to five undergraduate students, who are working on research with an
              engineering faculty, will meet under the mentorship of communications faculty
              and engineering graduate students. To ensure full integration of the model into
              the colleges program of research and instruction, the project will provide
              orientation for faculty/research directors and training for graduate student
              mentors.  The RCS model focuses strongly on the students communications tasks,
              as assigned by their research directors. The RCS project emphasizes student
              participation in professional meetings where results of their undergraduate
              projects are presented. The studio enhances inquiry-based learning by making
              principles of research and communications explicit and by engaging students in
              reflection on those experiences. Assessment of the methodologies, results, and
              significance will be done by the South Carolina Office of Program Assessment.
              Assessment data will include measures of enrollment, persistence to graduation,
              interviews with faculty and students.  Data will be collected for project
              participants as well as for a control group of non-participating undergraduate
              students.

Intellectual Merit. The RCS project is predicated upon Vygotskian
              theories of guided
participation and distributed cognition, i.e. cognitive
              development of the engineering novice within groups or communities. The project
              explores three hypotheses related to the effect of studio methods of
              instruction on 1) quality of learning 2) retention and enrollment and 3)
              cognitive development and self-directed learning. The program evaluation
              component will furnish data to test the three hypotheses and the overall
              effectiveness of the RCS model, especially the use of communications, in
              cognitive development through research-based learning.  The interdisciplinary
              project team includes engineering, communications, and education professionals.
              Their expertise spans chemical, electrical, and mechanical engineering,
              rhetoric, educational psychology, and interactive methods of teaching
              professional communications.  Broader impacts. In an effort to recruit and
              retain more, and more diverse, undergraduate students, engineering colleges in
              research-intensive universities are expanding opportunities for undergraduates
              to conduct research with a faculty members group. However, better understanding
              of student cognitive development from this project is urgently needed to
              identify modes of mentoring and instruction that are effective in improving
              student learning, retention, and performance. Collaboration with the South
              Carolina Alliance for Minority Participation is designed to promote research
              participation by underrepresented minorities, and to provide data on whether
              minority performance and retention is improved via the RCS. The proposed RCS
              implementation plan conforms to the situations and constraints typical of a
              state-supported, research intensive engineering college. It should therefore be
              widely adaptable. Dissemination of results from the RCS project will occur in a
              variety of methods, most notably through two national workshops planned for
              years three and five.

