Title       : Fine Tuning Photochemical Reactions Through Confinement and Cation-Organic
               Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0212042

Award Number: 0212042
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: V. Ramamurthy murthy@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The PI seeks to continue his work in the use of zeolites to help effect
              diastereoselective and enantioselective photochemical reactions.  The PI
              proposes that the cations which are present in the zeolite cage, along with the
              photoreactive molecule and chiral auxiliary, are critical to the success or
              failure of the asymmetric photoreactions.  Cations present, hydronium ion
              concentrations present, and chiral inductors or auxiliaries present will be
              systematically varied.  The main goal of the project period is to use this
              information to develop a model to help one predict and plan enantioselective
              photoreactions within zeolites.  

With this award, the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. V.
              Ramamurthy of the Department of Chemistry at Tulane University.  Dr. Ramamurthy
              will work on using zeolites to facilitate asymmetric photochemical reactions. 
              The photochemical reactions to be studied produce molecules which are chiral
              (have two nonsuperimposable mirror images) and make only one of the two
              possible forms (a single enantiomer).  Development of this family of reactions
              is one of the most important problems facing the pharmaceutical industry today.
               When developed, Dr. Ramamurthy's work could be applied to the syntheses of a
              number of biologically active molecules.  Students trained during the course of
              this work will gain skills needed by the pharmaceutical industry which now
              produces a number of single enantiomer compounds. 



