Title       : Anharmonicities and Nonlinearities in the Ultrafast Dynamics of Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0212823

Award Number: 0212823
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $484290             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Stratt Richard_Stratt@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Richard Stratt of Brown University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to develop methods employing the instantaneous
              normal mode (INM) approach to explore intramolecular vibrational energy flow
              within polyatomic molecules in liquids, and the intermolecular liquid dynamics
              revealed by fifth order two-dimensional Raman spectroscopy.  Recent progress in
              incorporating dynamical anharmonicities and nonlinear interactions into the INM
              formalism are expected to help reveal the ways in which molecules choose
              between competing pathways for intramolecular vibrational energy relaxation,
              and help to identify the amount of dephasing to be expected from different
              intermolecular motions.  Insights are also expected into the events that lead
              to homogeneous broadening in a variety of spectroscopic venues.

Chemical
              processes in liquids take place over a tremendously wide range of time scales,
              but many of the key "triggering" events seem to occur in times well under a
              trillionth of a second.  This dichotomy is especially evident when one examines
              how energy flows in liquids at a molecular level.  It can take anywhere from a
              trillionth of a second to seconds to release the energy buried within the
              vibrations of a molecule into the surrounding solution, but such processes are
              driven by a solvent friction whose lifetime is invariably less than a
              trillionth of a second.  Only relatively recently, experimental techniques have
              been able to examine vibrations in liquids at these ultrafast time scales and
              with sufficient sophistication to learn about underlying molecular mechanisms
              in the dynamics of liquids.  This project aims to develop a framework to
              interpret the results from these challenging new experiments that study
              vibrational energy relaxation pathways in molecules dissolved in liquids. 

