Title       : Skin Lipids and Cutaneous Water Loss Among Larks Along an Aridity Gradient
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0212092

Award Number: 0212092
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254949             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph B. Williams Williams.1020@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Title of Proposal: Skin lipids and cutaneous water loss among larks along an
              aridity gradient.
Principal Investigator: Dr. Joseph B. Williams, Dept
              Evolution, Ecology, and Organismal Biology, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
              43210.

A major evolutionary event that shaped current vertebrate life was
              the transition from water to land. During this transition, animals evolved skin
              that reduced water loss. With the later development of the ability of maintain
              high body temperature, called endothermy, problems of water loss were
              exacerbated because high metabolic rates are associated with increased water
              losses from respiratory passages and by excretion. With high rates of energy
              expenditure and water loss, endotherms make poor candidates for living in
              deserts, regions of high ambient temperature, low rainfall, and low plant
              growth. Yet despite this, birds occupy the driest deserts in the
              world.
	Recent work has indicated that arid-adapted larks have a reduced total
              evaporative water loss, the sum of respiratory water loss and water loss
              through the skin, compared with mesic relatives within the same family. Desert
              birds could reduce their total evaporative water loss by decreasing their water
              loss through their skin. Research suggests that the barrier to water vapor
              diffusion in vertebrates resides in the non-living outer layer of the
              epidermis. This proposal outlines an integrated study designed to advance our
              understanding of the interplay between environment, water loss through the
              skin, skin structure, lipid composition of the outer layer of the epidermis,
              and the effect that increased cutaneous water loss has on behavior and/or
              survival in a natural setting. The comparative method and controlled
              experiments varying temperature, water vapor content of the air, and hydration
              state will be used to examine adaptation of the avian skin to desert conditions
              and the role of reversible phenotypic plasticity on water loss through the
              skin. Variation in physiological phenotype may also result from differences in
              environment during development. Experiments are planned that shed light on how
              variation in the water content of the air during development influences
              cutaneous water loss in adults.
	Characterization of the potential for both
              short-term and evolutionary change within populations will be of crucial
              importance in predicting changes in distribution and the probability of
              extinction with the rise in temperature of the earth as a result of global
              warming.

