Title       : Solving a Bottleneck in Functional Genomics: Rules for Efficient Computational
               Identification of Cis-Regulatory Elements by Interspecific Sequence Comparison
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0212869

Award Number: 0212869
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $939123             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Andrew Cameron acameron@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric H. Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan Rast  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1080,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0212869
Cameron


Understanding the details of how individual cis-regulatory
              elements function and how the gene regulatory networks they form control
              developmental process is crucial to understanding how the genome works, how
              development works, and how evolution works.  An effective method of locating
              individual cis-regulatory elements is comparative sequence analysis conducted
              at appropriate divergence times to reveal conserved elements.  Current results
              show that this approach may yield a more than 10-fold increase in rate of
              experimental cis-regulatory element discovery, compared to the most efficient
              "blind" search methods.  However, general rules for carrying out such analyses
              are not yet known, and initial work has shown very different degrees of
              similarity between genomic regions surrounding different genes in a single pair
              of sea urchin species.  These investigators propose to determine the rules for
              efficient cis-regulatory sequence prediction by interspecific sequence
              analysis.  To this end they will analyze and then test by gene transfer
              putative cis-regulatory elements identified in the vicinity of about 20
              different genes, using several different echinoderm species that display a
              range of phylogenetic relatedness.  The sea urchin embryo is a model system of
              choice in which this method can be quickly and effectively explored:  species
              separated by various known evolutionary distances are available; they have
              already established methods for comparative prediction of conserved
              cis-regulatory sequence for one sea urchin species pair and shown that the
              methods work; and there is a practical high throughput gene transfer technology
              available.  These investigators will construct BAC libraries for 6-8 species
              including sea urchins, and for more distant comparisons, a sea star and a
              hemichordate.  Sequence of BACs containing the set of genes to be studied will
              be obtained, and they will then identify putative cis-regulatory regions for
              the candidate genes selected, as indicated by interspecific sequence comparison
              at diverse distances.  These DNA fragments will be tested for cis-regulatory
              capability by gene transfer.  Not only will this approach reveal rules for
              computational cis-regulatory analysis, but it will also support the extension
              of the current repertoire of BAC libraries, improve computational tools, and
              generate more efficient laboratory methods for this essential research
              area.



