Title       : Regulation of Aromatic Compound Degradation in Acinetobacter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0212604

Award Number: 0212604
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen Neidle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,1168,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

These studies focus on aromatic compound degradation by the soil bacterium
              Acinetobacter sp. strain ADP1.  Catabolic pathways, which serve as model
              systems for understanding many aspects of biology, can be manipulated for
              bioremediation and for the generation of useful chemicals.  The success of such
              ventures rests on a thorough understanding of microbial metabolic and genetic
              regulation. The first objective of this project is to determine the molecular
              basis for a recently discovered novel type of transcriptional activation. 
              BenM, a transcriptional regulator involved in the degradation of benzoate by
              strain ADP1, was found to respond synergistically to two different metabolites.
               The synergistic modulation of transcriptional regulation in response to more
              than one inducer can significantly alter gene expression and may be a common
              biological regulatory feature.  These studies will determine the specific
              nucleotide and amino acid sequences that control how BenM interacts with
              different effectors and DNA regions to regulate the expression of multiple
              genes and operons involved in aromatic compound catabolism. The second
              objective is to investigate preferential carbon source consumption by
              Acinetobacter strains when multiple growth substrates are available.  Many soil
              bacteria degrade the components of a mixture of aromatic compounds in a
              sequential fashion.  However, the method by which aromatic-compound degrading
              bacteria control the preferential consumption of carbon sources is unclear.  In
              ADP1, regulation may occur at the transcriptional level, the
              post-transcriptional level, and/or at the level of substrate uptake into the
              cell.  This research project will address how CatM and BenM repress genes
              needed for 4-hydroxybenzoate catabolism.
