Title       : Evolution of Dioecy from Distyly and the Impact of Recent Landscape Changes on
               the Reproductive Systems of Cordia spp in the Guanacaste Region of Costa Rica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0212742

Award Number: 0212742
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kamaljit S. Bawa kamal.bawa@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard V. Kesseli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0212742
Bawa

Breeding systems, a keystone feature of the life history of
              plants, are known to be diverse and mutable. Two breeding systems of particular
              note are distyly and dioecy.  Distyly, with self-incompatible hermaphroditic
              individuals of two types, has evolved multiple times in flowering plants.  
              Mating of the two types of individuals, (those with long styles and short
              stamens (pin) and those with short styles and long stamens (thrum)), is
              generally restricted to crosses between types.  Dioecious species, on the other
              hand, have separate male and female (unisexual) individuals.  There are many
              examples of closely related species (Cordia spp. is one) that possess these
              alternative breeding strategies and it has been repeatedly suggested that
              dioecy has evolved from distyly.  Yet no genetic tests nor ecological studies
              have been made to confirm or refute the likelihood of this evolutionary
              pathway.  The first objective of this research is to use molecular phylogenetic
              techniques to reconstruct the phylogeny of Cordia spp. and to map changes in
              breeding system onto it. The second objective is to use DNA markers to identify
              regions linked to sex-determining genes in dioecious species and to flower
              morphology (pin and thrum) in distylous species.  These markers will be
              utilized to characterize the genetic basis of each breeding system, the
              likelihood of a common origin, and the specific steps that lead to changes.
              

These studies will provide information about the direction of evolutionary
              change in breeding systems in a tropical tree. This work will lay the
              foundation for future studies on how breeding system evolution occurs within
              the context of rapidly changing environments (e.g., changes in the pollinator
              community brought on by landscape-level disturbance), a topic of considerable
              importance for conservation biology.  The research will also impact human
              resource development because of PIs' strong commitment to provide research
              opportunities for female students and for students from groups
              under-represented in science (e.g., through our summer Research Experience for
              Undergraduates (REU) programs, McNair fellowships and Undergraduate Mentoring
              in Environmental Biology (UMEB)).  In addition the project will train graduate
              students and post doctoral associates.



