Title       : Introducing Engineering Through Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0212101

Award Number: 0212101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne M. Spence aspence@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Taryn M. Bayles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Muddappa Gowda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Claudia Morrell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) will address the need to
              increase both the awareness of and interest in career opportunities in
              engineering by developing algebra curricula that use engineering applications
              to build students mathematical skills and understanding.

UMBC, in
              collaboration with Baltimore County Public Schools, Anne Arundel County
              Public
Schools, the Maryland State Department of Education, Northrop Grumman,
              The Whiting-Turner
Contracting Company, Meade Middle and High Schools, Sollers
              Point/Southeastern High School, the Baltimore Museum of Industry, The American
              Society of Mechanical Engineers, and UMBC's Center for Women and Information
              Technology, will work to achieve the following objectives:

1.	Develop
              curriculum kits, each one targeting a different aspect of engineering
              (chemical, electrical, civil, and mechanical) that can be used in both middle
              and high school algebra classes.
2.	Provide a five-day summer workshop
              annually for 30 in-service mathematics teachers and 10 undergraduate
              engineering Teaching Fellows. This workshop will give an   introduction to
              engineering career opportunities, and an overview of the curricula on the kits
              prior to classroom use.
3.	Develop an undergraduate engineering Teaching
              Fellows program targeting women and 
other underrepresented minorities to
              provide hands-on instructional classroom support for middle and high school
              algebra teachers to help them integrate the curricula into their courses.  The
              Fellows program will also support the long-term retention of current
              engineering students, particularly underrepresented groups.
4.	Maintain
              student interest in engineering at eight schools through the development
              and
institutionalization of an after-school engineering program that
              culminates in a series of
collaborative and competitive
              activities.
5.	Increase the involvement of females and other underrepresented
              groups in engineering by providing female and minority engineering role models
              in the classroom and developing curricula that encourage interest and
              participation by all groups.

The "Introducing Engineering Through
              Mathematics" project will benefit UMBC, the State of
Maryland, and a nation in
              great need of a larger and more diverse technology workforce. The engineering
              program at UMBC will improve its retention rate through the project's Fellows
              program. Also, students and teachers throughout Maryland will become familiar
              with engineering through the standard algebra curriculum. Further, increased
              numbers of diverse students will understand and be able to apply higher
              mathematics concepts and be more likely to pursue further training in science
              and mathematics. Finally, greater numbers of diverse students will develop an
              interest in and select engineering as a career.

