Title       : Responses to Artificial Selection for Voluntary Activity in Mice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0212567

Award Number: 0212567
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore Garland tgarland@citrus.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	Natural and sexual selection act on complex, highly integrated phenotypes, but
              theories of how evolutionary response will occur across multiple levels of
              biological organization are non-comprehensive, and existing empirical tests are
              both fragmentary and inconclusive.  Previous NSF support allowed development of
              a novel model system to study multi-level evolutionary responses to selection
              for high locomotor activity.  Selective breeding for high voluntary wheel
              running was implemented with outbred laboratory mice.  By generation 16, mice
              in the 4 replicate selection (S) lines ran 170% more than in the 4 randombred
              control (C) lines (for females, " 15 vs. 5.5 km/day).  This difference
              continued for generations 17-29, indicating a selection limit.  Increased
              activity has occurred primarily by higher running speed.  S mice run more at
              weaning and for at least 18 months.  Proposed research will test the nature of
              the physiological limit to selection, elucidate the mechanisms of locomotor
              adaptation, and explore the neurobiology of increased activity.  Research will
              emphasize training of graduate and undergraduate students, as well as a
              postdoctoral researcher.  A lack of evolutionary plasticity in maximal aerobic
              speed is hypothesized to limit further increase in wheel running.  Effects of
              both increased and decreased oxygen on wheel running and on maximal oxygen
              consumption will be studied.  The energetic cost of locomotion will be measured
              during both wheel and treadmill running.  Lung diffusing capacity will be
              estimated morphometrically.  Components of the skeleton will be examined for
              differences in size, shape, symmetry, and amount of secondary remodeling. 
              Myosin heavy-chain isoform expression will be quantified in hindlimb muscle,
              and the "mighty mini-muscles" that occur in two of the selected lines will be
              characterized biochemically and by electron microscopy.  For many of the
              above-mentioned traits, both genetic and phenotypic plasticity, and potential
              interactions, will be examined by measuring S and C mice that have been housed
              chronically with or without wheel access.  Immunocytochemistry with cFos as an
              indicator of neuronal activity will be used to compare key brain regions in S
              and C mice at rest and during peak wheel running (motivation, reward, &
              addiction; voluntary control of movement; spatial memory & learning).  Results
              will lead to a comprehensive understanding of how increased activity levels
              evolve in a model mammalian system.  Mice will be made available to other
              researchers and they will be an important model for studying effects of
              exercise on physical fitness, health, and aging.


