Title       : RUI: Regulation of Cytoskeletal Linkages by AFAP-110 and Src: Focus on
               Myofibrils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0212406

Award Number: 0212406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry G. Zot hzot@online.emich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Michigan Univ
	      Office of Research Development
	      Ypsilanti, MI  48197    734/487-3090

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research project will examine the processes that underlie the assembly and
              disassembly of myofibrils. Myofibrils are composed of sarcomeres, which are
              repeating units of thin and thick filaments. Thin filaments composed largely of
              actin filaments are linked to the Z-line, a structure that resembles cell
              adhesions in protein composition. Among the proteins found in both focal
              adhesions and Z-line structures are the barbed ends of the actin filaments,
              focal adhesion kinase, p130 Cas , alpha-actinin, and AFAP-110. AFAP-110, which
              is the focus of this project, associates with the nonreceptor tyrosine kinase,
              Src. Recent evidence demonstrates that AFAP-110 recruits Src to the actin
              cytoskeleton in response either to elevated protein kinase C (PKC) activity or
              to mechanical stress.  Evidence also suggests that AFAP-110 activates Src
              directly, resulting in elevated phosphotyrosine levels in the cell.  One
              downstream effect of wide- spread activation of Src substrates is the
              reorganization of the cytoskeleton brought about by the disassembly of
              cytoskeletal linkages at focal adhesions and Z-lines. Mature myofibrils
              disappear from myotubes expressing high Src or PKC activity. Conversely, the
              generation of force across cell adhesions has been shown to cause the formation
              of actin filament linkages and to stimulate Src activity restricted to the
              vicinity of the mechanical strain. The properties that make AFAP-110 a
              candidate for participating in the formation of cytoskeletal linkages include
              the ability to bind and crosslink actin filaments, the ability to recruit Src
              to the cytoskeleton, and the ability to activate Src tyrosine kinase.  AFAP-110
              could be important in the formation of myofibrils during muscle development. 
              To examine the role of AFAP-110 in muscle development, primary cultures of
              myotubes will be stained for AFAP-110 and the Z-line marker alpha-actinin. The
              two proteins should colocalize throughout all developmental stages if AFAP-110
              plays a role in the formation of cytoskeletal linkages during
              myofibrillogenesis. Specific inhibitors of Src will be used to test the
              hypothesis that the myofibril formation requires activation of Src.  To examine
              the disassembly mechanism, myoblasts will be transfected with a mutant form of
              AFAP-110, AFAP.lzip , which has been shown to activate Src and disrupt actin
              cytoskeleton of cultured fibroblasts. Preliminary results show that PKC
              phosphorylation of AFAP-110 results in the activation of Src tyrosine kinase
              activity and stress fiber disruption in fibroblasts.  Transfection with mutants
              of AFAP-110 that cannot bind PKC or that cannot interact with Src protect
              fibroblasts from PKC induced stress fiber disruption. Parallel experiments will
              be carried out to test whether AFAP-110 serves a similar role in muscle cells.
              The results of these studies will elucidate the mechanisms by which mature
              myofibrils turn over and new myofibrils form. The work is to be carried out in
              large part by undergraduate students, who will carry their training onward to
              careers in science.
