Title       : RUI: Developmental and Cognitive Constraints on Birdsong Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0212393

Award Number: 0212393
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261251             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Braaten rbraaten@mail.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1160,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              RUI: Developmental and Cognitive Constraints on Birdsong Learning
Richard F.
              Braaten, Colgate University, PI

Animals are constrained in the kinds of
              things that they are most likely to learn. For example, humans and other
              primates easily learn to fear snakes and other predators of their evolutionary
              ancestors, but do not so easily learn to fear some other objects, even when
              they are clearly associated with danger. As another example, rodents and other
              mammals are more likely to learn about the association between the taste of
              food and subsequent illness than about other characteristics of the feeding
              experience. Birdsong learning is a particularly interesting example of
              constrained learning because it is constrained in two ways. First, songbirds
              are more likely to learn the song of their species than the songs of other
              species, even under experimental conditions in which the amount of song
              exposure is equated. Second, like human language learning, in which languages
              are learned more effectively early in life, birdsong learning is also
              temporally constrained. Songbirds are much more likely to learn songs presented
              during a specialized early period of development, the sensitive period. This
              project attempts to better understand the role that cognitive processes such as
              attention, perception, and memory may play in constraints on song learning in
              birds, and also how the role of these cognitive processes may change with
              development. For example, do birds learn the songs of their own species because
              those songs are particularly memorable? Are they especially memorable during
              the sensitive period of song learning? To answer these questions, zebra finches
              will learn to make responses to particular songs to receive food reward. Birds
              will later be tested for their memory of both their own and other species'
              songs. In order to study possible developmental changes in memory, zebra
              finches will be tested during and after the sensitive period for song learning,
              at 30 and 90 days. Effects of early experience will also be evaluated by
              testing 30-day-old birds raised in acoustic isolation from zebra finch song.
              Similar experiments will be done that will assess developmental changes in
              attention, perception, and categorization of the songs of zebra finches and
              other species.

The broader impacts of this research are two-fold. An
              understanding of the cognitive processes involved in constraints on song
              learning may help to better understand constraints on learning in general. Song
              learning in birds has many parallels with human speech development, including
              the existence of sensitive periods, and the presumed involvement of
              attentional, perceptual, and memory processes in human speech learning. The
              second broader impact of this work derives from it being carried out in an
              undergraduate institution. Concepts and experiments from this proposal will be
              integrated into all levels of the undergraduate curriculum. Undergraduates will
              be involved in the research both during the academic year, and as part of a
              special summer research program at Colgate University. 





	

