Title       : Organization of Behavioral Plasticity by Neurochemicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0212371

Award Number: 0212371
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene E. Robinson generobi@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,1191,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Organization of behavioral plasticity by neurochemicals
Gene E. Robinson,
              Principal Investigator

Many animals show profound changes in behavior as
              they grow up, and these changes are based on maturational changes in the
              structure and functioning of the brain. Like other forms of behavioral
              plasticity, behavioral maturation involves coordinated change in many different
              aspects of behavior and is accompanied by extensive changes in neurochemistry. 
              Previous NSF funding led to the discovery that octopamine influences the
              behavioral maturation of the honey bee, specifically the age at which honey
              bees shift from working in the hive to foraging.  Octopamine is a biogenic
              amine, which is a prominent class of neurochemicals that regulate behavior in
              many organisms, vertebrate and invertebrate, including humans.  This proposal
              seeks to use octopamine to explore precisely which behavioral mechanisms need
              to be affected to orchestrate complex behavioral maturation.  Research will
              determine whether octopamine acts to increase responsiveness towards specific
              environmental stimuli so that a bee with the occupation of foraging continues
              in that occupation because of the way that it reacts to certain stimuli. Other
              possibilities that will be tested is to determine whether octopamine promotes
              foraging behavior by increasing overall activity or improving the cognitive
              abilities that are essential for successful foraging.  The research will
              involve detailed measurements of biogenic amines in the brains of individual
              bees, treatments of biogenic amines, and quantitative behavioral analyses.  The
              honey bee has become an important model system for studies at the interface of
              neurobiology, behavior genetics.  This research will provide useful insights
              into the neurochemical basis of complex behavioral changes experienced by many
              social animals, including man, and provide a demonstration of how brain
              chemicals influence the development of cognitively demanding tasks.

