Title       : Plant Vacuole Biogenesis and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0212013

Award Number: 0212013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $401115             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Rogers bcjroger@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plant cells store a diverse variety of molecules in vacuoles.  Storage is the
              central reason why plants are so important to humankind. The wars against
              cocaine and heroin result from the harvest of products in storage vacuoles, the
              morning coffee is brewed to release products stored in vacuoles, the flowers in
              our garden are there because of pigments stored in vacuoles, and the nutrition
              of domestic animals and humans ultimately depends upon proteins stored in plant
              vacuoles. Many molecules that are targets in plant biotechnology are stored in
              vacuoles. Only by understanding the different compartments, their internal
              contents and environment, and how proteins and membrane are directed to each,
              will we be able to program a cell to make and accumulate a desired product. The
              need to separate a digestive compartment similar to the yeast vacuole or
              mammalian lysosome from the storage compartments has resulted in a complex
              plant vacuolar system. Of the storage compartments, protein storage vacuoles
              have been best studied because proteins are relatively easy to track in a
              cell.
In many plant cells, separate protein storage and lytic vacuoles
              coexist. Proteins are delivered to each from the Golgi complex by separate
              vesicular trafficking pathways, clathrin coated vesicles for the lytic pathway,
              and dense vesicles (or their equivalents)for the protein storage vacuole
              pathway. However,in developing seeds and certain other cells, the two pathways
              converge on the same vacuole. In this instance, for example in protein storage
              vacuoles in seeds, the resultant organelle is a multivesicular body, where the
              storage products are partitioned in the "soup " and lytic functions are
              partitioned into the internal vesicles. Thus the seed protein storage vacuole
              is a compound organelle,where two functionally distinct compartments exist
              within the limiting membrane.  How proteins are delivered by the two separate
              vesicular pathways to the two compartments within the organelle is an important
              unsolved question in cell biology.  This project focuses on mechanisms by which
              proteins are sorted into the protein storage vacuole pathway in the Golgi
              complex.  Results from recent ligand binding experiments indicate that the
              lumenal domain of a plant RMR protein specifically interacts with the targeting
              determinants that sort proteins into the protein storage vacuole pathway.  RMR
              proteins are integral membrane proteins that traffic from Golgi to the protein
              storage vacuole where they are incorporated into a membrane-containing
              crystalloid within the storage compartment.Thus it is likely they serve as a
              unique type of sorting receptor.RMR proteins are also expressed in avian and
              mammalian cells.  The association and dissociation constants, and
              stoichiometry, for binding of RMR protein lumenal domains for a model ligand
              will be determined.  The function of RMR proteins in plants will be assessed by
              generating antisense knockouts in tobacco and by identifying transposon/T DNA
              insertions in individual RMR protein genes in Arabidopsis. Motifs in the RMR
              proteins' cytoplasmic tails responsible for traffic from Golgi to the storage
              compartment will be identified.
A separate experimental strategy will address
              mechanisms by which the storage compartment crystalloid is formed. Dr. Rogers'
              laboratory has purified protein storage vacuole crystalloids away from other
              membranes in the vacuole. Using a proteomics approach, the integral membrane
              proteins specifically incorporated into PSV crystalloids, and then tonoplast
              and globoids in B. napus seeds will be identified.  The mechanisms by which a
              tomato storage protein related to 11S globulins that appears to have
              transmembrane helices is incorporated into crystalloid membranes will be
              defined.
Although protein storage compartments were thought initially to be
              unique to plant cells, evidence now emerging indicates that animal cells also
              have a dense vesicle pathway, and that multivesicular body endosomes in animal
              cells may partition two separate functions within the same organelle.  Thus,an
              understanding of fundamental processes of compartmentation in plant cells may
              have broader impact in cell biology.  The ability to visualize the two
              compartments easily in protein storage vacuoles and to track proteins in each
              of the vesicular pathways provides great advantages for use of a plant system
              in these studies.

