Title       : Conformation and Dynamics of Complex Polysaccarides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0212702

Award Number: 0212702
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Allen Bush bush@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The oligosaccharides and polysaccharides of the cell surface have complex
              structures encoding information which controls cellular interactions. The
              information is decoded by binding to proteins such as lectins which is often
              complex and multivalent and may also involve cooperative interactions between
              protein and carbohydrate binding sites.  The solution conformation and the
              dynamics of the oligosaccharide ligands, which can have a significant influence
              on the free energy of binding, is poorly understood and will be studied in this
              project by physical methods including computational molecular modeling and NMR
              spectroscopy.  The model proposed for flexibility in complex oligosaccharides
              and polysaccharides will be useful for interpretation of protein-carbohydrate
              binding equilibria and will serve as a basis for interpretation of the dynamic
              properties of high molecular weight polysaccharides. The glycosidic linkages
              joining the comparatively rigid pyranoside chairs in complex, branched
              oligosaccharides have highly varied stereochemistry with some linkages being
              relatively rigid and others highly flexible.  
In this research, examples of
              relatively rigid oligosaccharides will be selected from the Lewis and blood
              group oligosaccharides while oligosaccharides and polysaccharides isolated from
              the cell walls of the viridans streptococci,  S. mitis and  S. oralis  will be
              models for more flexible oligosaccharides.  In addition to traditional nuclear
              Overhauser methods, NMR experiments involving heteronuclear scalar coupling
              across the glycosidic linkages will be studied both in natural abundance
              samples and in samples prepared with biosynthetic incorporation of stable
              isotopes. The recently introduced method of residual dipolar coupling of
              oligosaccharides partially oriented in dilute liquid crystal solutions is
              capable of giving abundant and very precise experimental information on the
              conformation of rigid oligosaccharide epitopes and  new methods for treating
              flexible oligosaccharides will be used  which will lead to greatly improved
              models for conformation and dynamics of the hinges which join more rigid
              domains.   The experimental results will be interpreted with computer molecular
              modeling calculations including molecular dynamics simulations and Monte Carlo
              methods.

This project will support training in structural biochemistry for
              graduate and undergraduate students who will learn modern nuclear magnetic
              resonance experiments and computer molecular modeling methods along with
              aspects of the analytical and physical biochemistry of complex carbohydrates. 
              The PI's department has an especially strong tradition in training of under
              represented minority students, both at the graduate and undergraduate level.  
