Title       : Relationships of Protein Dynamics to Structure and Stability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0212746

Award Number: 0212746
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $545000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin J. Stone mastone@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to understand the relationship of dynamics to
              structural features and fold stability in a small model protein, the B1 domain
              of Streptococcal protein G.  This will be accomplished by using NMR relaxation
              data to compare the backbone NH and side chain methyl group dynamics in various
              mutants of the B1 domain.  First, for a series of 10 single-site mutants, the
              dynamics at the mutation site and remote sites will be correlated with the
              properties  (volume, branching, and polarity) of the amino acid at the mutation
              site.  Second, the backbone and side chain conformational entropy of each of
              the 10 mutants will be estimated from the dynamics data and correlated with the
              fold stabilities of the mutants.  This section will incorporate dynamics
              studies of the folded as well as unfolded forms of the mutants.  Third, the
              extent of correlated motions in the B1 domain will be investigated by analysis
              of the covariation of internal dynamics parameters.  Correlation data will be
              obtained both for the family of 10 mutants and for the dynamics of the B1
              domain measured at several temperatures.  Fourth, the mechanism by which
              dynamic information is propagated from a mutation site to a remote site in the
              B1 domain will be investigated using double-mutant experiments.  Finally, the
              influence of secondary structural environment on amino acid dynamics will be
              investigated using two B1 domain variants, in which the same 11-amino acid
              sequence exists in alpha-helical or beta-hairpin structures,
              respectively.

The chemical properties of proteins such as structural
              stability, binding to other molecules, and ability to catalyze reactions can
              often not be adequately understood from the static protein structure because
              these properties are influenced by the dynamics of the protein.  The broad goal
              of this study is to understand the relationship of dynamics to structural
              features and fold stability in proteins.  The study will provide insights that
              will aid in our understanding of protein stability and function and may be
              useful in the design of proteins with novel properties.  The major educational
              goal of this project is the training of a graduate student and a postdoctoral
              research associate.  Activities in the project range from site-directed
              mutagenesis and protein expression and purification to NMR spectroscopy, other
              physical biochemistry experiments and extensive computational data analysis. 
              The project will involve development of skills and knowledge in all of these
              practical areas as well as in theoretical aspects of protein stability and in
              experimental design.

