Title       : Physiological and Molecular Causes of Genetic Variation/Covariation Inendocrine
               Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0212486

Award Number: 0212486
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Zera azera@unlserve.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Oakeshott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence G. Harshman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Although a tremendous amount of information is available on physiological,
              biochemical, and molecular aspects of endocrinology, very little is known about
              the evolution of endocrine regulation.  Genetically-based variations in
              endocrine traits provide the raw material upon which natural selection acts
              during the initial stages of adaptive evolution.  Thus, a key step in
              understanding the evolution of hormonal control is the characterization of
              genetically-based variation in endocrine regulators within species. The goal of
              the present multi-disciplinary study is to identify the variable molecular and
              physiological factors that cause genetically-based variation in the enzyme
              juvenile hormone esterase (JHE) in a cricket species.  JHE degrades and
              regulates the key insect hormone, juvenile hormone, and has been the subject of
              intensive study in the Principal Investigator's laboratory during the past 15
              years.  This proposal has three primary research objectives.  First, using both
              in vivo and in vitro approaches, the following hypothesis will be tested:
              genetic variation in the concentration of or tissue sensitivity to
              neurohormones causes genetically based variation in JHE activity and tissue
              distribution.  Experiments will largely involve assessing the effect of
              extracts or implants of neural tissue derived from high- or low- JHE activity
              genetic stocks on JHE activity and related endocrine traits in the same vs
              alternate lines. Second, the role of variation in JHE messenger RNA abundance
              as the cause of genetically-based variation in JHE activity will be tested. 
              JHE mRNA abundance will be compared between high and low activity lines using
              Northern blots employing a probe derived from a recently obtained, nearly
              full-length JHE cDNA.  Third, the high and low JHE activity lines will be
              crossed and backcrossed to determine the degree of co-segregation among (1) JHE
              activity and associated endocrine traits, (2) molecular correlates of these
              traits (JHE mRNA level), and (3) potential regulators of these traits. This
              research will simultaneously provide important new information for several
              different areas of biology. This will be the first study to identify the
              molecular and physiological causes of genetically-based variation in an
              endocrine regulator in natural populations.  This project will result in the
              first detailed synthesis of endocrine physiology, molecular biology, and
              quantitative genetics. Finally, these studies will constitute the first
              investigations of genetic variation in neuroendocrine regulation in natural
              populations and will set the stage for subsequent identification of these
              regulators and the genes that encode them.           
