Title       : Molecular Basis of Stability and Folding of Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0212414

Award Number: 0212414
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bertrand Garcia-Moreno bertrand@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goals of this research program are to further understanding of electrostatic
              contributions to the stability and function of proteins. Electrostatics is the
              most useful correlator of structure and function in biological macromolecules,
              especially in proteins. Without deep understanding of the contributions of
              electrostatics, the computational methods that are needed to bridge the gap
              between structure and energy of proteins cannot be improved, nor can the
              structural basis of stability and function of proteins be established.  To
              accomplish these goals, two sets of experimental studies will be carried out. 
              One set will address the relationship between the dynamic character of proteins
              and their electrostatic properties. To understand how local structural
              fluctuations modulate pKa values, the pKa of Asp and Glu residues in
              staphylococcal nuclease will be measured by NMR spectroscopy.  The pKa values
              will also be used to analyze the acid unfolding of nuclease with an
              ensemble-based computational method that has the potential to describe a
              ligand-linked structural transition at unprecedented level of detail.  Global
              conformational changes will be studied by measurement of the Stokes radii of
              the native and denatured ensemble with size-exclusion chromatography.  The goal
              of the second set of studies is to elucidate the determinants of the energetics
              of short-range electrostatic interactions. A cluster of ionizable and polar
              residues in staphylococcal nuclease will be studied systematically.  The
              approach entails perturbation of interactions with mutagenesis, crystallography
              to obtain structures, NMR to measure pKa values, and measurements of stability
              by chemical and temperature denaturation. 

A central goal of this research
              is to develop computational tools for structure-based calculation of
              electrostatic energy and pKa values. The experimental studies will contribute
              the physical insight needed to guide the improvement of computational models,
              and provide the data needed to test these methods. To the extent that the
              concepts and computational tools that emerge from these studies have a direct
              bearing on problems in protein engineering, in rational, structure-driven
              design, and in biotechnology, they will have a deep and broad impact on
              society. 

