Title       : Hypocrella and Aschersonia: Systematics and Evolution in the Clavicipitaceae
               (Ascomycota)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0212719

Award Number: 0212719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96533              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathie T. Hodge kh11@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0212719
Hodge
	Few studies have been conducted to test species limits in fungi
              used in insect biocontrol programs. One such group of ascomycete fungi is the
              Hypocrella and Aschersonia group, the former with sexual, ascospore producing
              phases and the latter with only or usually asexual spore forming phases, but
              shown with recent DNA sequence data to be likely close relatives of various
              sexual Hypocrella species. These fungi mostly infect Homoptera insects, usually
              scale insects and whiteflies, and some were used early in the 1900s to control
              pests of citrus groves in Florida. The taxonomic boundaries between species and
              the linkages between sexual and asexual forms remain poorly studied, which in
              turn has limited the development of improved biocontrol agents. Dr. Kathie
              Hodge of Cornell University will work with graduate students there to analyze
              species relationships in the critical Aschersonia aleyrodis and A. goldiana
              complex, with a focus on integrating data from morphology, mating trials, and
              multi-gene sequences to establish species circumscriptions that reflect
              biological properties of the organisms while providing practical tools for
              rapid identification from observable phenotypic features. 
	Taxonomic data
              will be gathered from existing herbarium specimens and laboratory cultures, and
              from material newly collected during field work in Florida and elsewhere,
              augmented with material provided by colleagues around the world. New taxonomic
              identification resources and keys will be generated. Evolutionary relationships
              will be assessed through phylogenetic analyses of morphological characters and
              of DNA sequence data obtained from several nuclear ribosomal and protein-coding
              genes. A graduate student will be trained in collecting techniques and in
              modern phylogenetic systematics. Publications and Internet-based resources will
              be generated to transmit the results of the work to other biologists and to the
              public.

