Title       : Fire Ant Colony Fitness and Worker Polymorphism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0212085

Award Number: 0212085
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399971             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter R. Tschinkel tschinkel@bio.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Fire ant colony fitness and worker polymorphism
Walter R. Tschinkel

Project
              Summary

	Darwin considered the existence of a sterile worker caste in social
              insects to be a challenge to his theory of evolution by natural selection. 
              After all, how could the traits of an individual that did not reproduce be
              passed on to the next generation?  The answer that Darwin and his followers
              have generally accepted is that the colony is the reproductive unit on which
              natural selection acts.  Thus, whatever worker traits allowed the colony to
              place more new colonies in the next generation would be favored by natural
              selection.  The great majority of ant species have only two physical castes:
              reproductive individuals (queens), and more-or-less sterile workers of a single
              size and shape. In about 15% of ant species, the workers are present in a great
              range of sizes (up to 1000-fold difference in weight) and shapes.  Such worker
              polymorphism, as it is called, is always associated with further division of
              labor within the worker caste.  It has long been assumed that worker
              polymorphism benefits the colony by increasing colony efficiency, so that the
              savings can be invested in additional reproductives, enhancing colony fitness
              (sexual production). Several tests of surrogates for fitness (foraging,
              brood-rearing, etc.) have yielded equivocal results, but none of these
              surrogates are tightly linked to sexual production.  There has never been a
              direct test of the effects of worker polymorphism on colony fitness, that is,
              on the production of sexuals. 

	The proposed experiments will be the first
              direct test of the value of worker polymorphism to colony fitness.  In a large,
              2-yr field experiment on the fire ant, Solenopsis invicta, worker pupae of
              selected sizes will be transferred among colonies such that one set of colonies
              will be enhanced in large workers, another in small workers, a third will serve
              as unaltered control, and a fourth as undisturbed control.  The colony fitness
              of these experimental colonies will be measured by collecting the total annual
              sexual production using tent-traps. Effects (if any) of altering the worker
              polymorphism might be either direct through involvement of large workers in
              sexual production, or indirect through altered territorial defense or foraging.
               Therefore, the food quantity and quality, as well as territory size will also
              be monitored and compared to controls.  The results of these field experiments
              will be supplemented with a series of laboratory experiments that will test
              each possible link (direct, food, territory) between worker polymorphism and
              colony sexual production.  The results will address a fundamental issue of
              great interest to evolutionary biology and social insect biology. 


