Title       : How Bacteria Colonize Ticks: The Role of Antimicrobial Peptides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0212901

Award Number: 0212901
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440063             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne L. Hynes   (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel E. Sonenshine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1155,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Ticks are vectors of a number of important diseases, and with mechanisms for
              controlling ticks often less effective than those for controlling insects,
              these arachnids may be more of a health problem for humans and wildlife than
              insects. The long term goals of the these studies are to aid in the development
              of mechanisms for preventing transmission of disease-causing microbes from the
              tick to its next host, and to exploit differences between tick genera to
              develop control measures for the spread of infectious diseases or to control
              the microorganisms themselves.
This study addresses the fundamental issue of
              the tick response to bacterial infection and also addresses the question of why
              some microbes have been able to successfully colonize blood-feeding arthropods
              and become the agents of vector-borne diseases. Specifically the proposal
              examines the hypothesis that Dermacentor variabilis (American dog tick)
              expresses a robust antimicrobial response following bacterial challenge. In
              contrast Ixodes scapularis (deer tick) and Amblyomma americanum (Lone Star
              tick) do not appear to express this response, at least to the same microbes.
              The proposed studies will provide information on how and why these ticks
              respond differently to assorted microbes. 
This project will concentrate on
              one fundamental mechanism by which blood-feeding arthropods resist infection by
              invading microbes. This is the use of antimicrobial peptides, in particular the
              defensins, a key component of an organism's innate immune response. The project
              will use ticks because they harbor and transmit a greater variety of microbes
              than any other arthropod group. Many arthropods possess a well-developed immune
              system that rejects most invading microbes, however, little is known about the
              immune system in ticks. More precise knowledge is needed to understand the
              limitations in the tick's immune system that have encouraged the ability to
              harbor such a variety of microorganisms. 
Ticks of the genus Ixodes tolerate a
              greater diversity of microbial species than other tick genera. Other genera,
              including Dermacentor and Amblyomma are noted for their association with one,
              or at most two specific types of microbe.  Most Ixodes spp. that are
              microbe-tolerant are generalists, feeding on a diverse array of hosts ranging
              from cold-blooded vertebrates to almost any type of bird or mammal.  It is
              proposed that these tick generalists have a less efficient immune system that
              facilitates colonization by a diverse array of invading microbes. It is
              hypothesized that differences in the tick innate immune mechanisms are
              important determinants of their ability to function as vectors of pathogenic
              agents. By using the Lyme disease-causing spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi, and
              a non-pathogenic bacterium, Rickettsia montana, and comparing the response to
              these microbes in Ixodes scapularis (the vector for B. burgdorferi),
              Dermacentor variabilis (host for R. montana) and Amblyomma americanum (vector
              for Ehrlichia), the role of defensin will be examined. 
The hypothesis will be
              explored within four aims, concentrating on the tick defensin, varisin. The
              aims are: (1) Characterize the tick defensin gene (vsnD) from D. variabilis.
              (2) Determine in which tissues of the adult tick the varisin gene is expressed,
              and whether the defensin is expressed by nymphs, perhaps giving an indication
              that defensin is important throughout the various life stages of the tick. (3)
              Determine whether other tick genera (Ixodes and Amblyomma) have and selectively
              express a defensin gene in response to different bacteria. (4) Compare the
              response of the different ticks to Rickettsia montana, an intracellular
              organism normally found in D. variabilis. 
Results of these studies will
              improve our understanding of the role of defensin in the innate immune response
              of ticks following challenge with various microbes. Elucidation of this
              critically important defensive system will provide information regarding the
              reason some of these ticks transmit disease-causing microorganisms. 

