Title       : RUI: Proteins that Control Rab GDI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0212730

Award Number: 0212730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clarissa M. Cheney cmc04747@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexander Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8328

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1132,9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns how cells regulate intracellular membrane trafficking,
              including the formation of intracellular vesicles by budding from larger
              intracellular membrane compartments, movement of vesicles from one region of
              the cell to another, and the fusion of intracellular membrane compartments with
              one another.  Rab GTPases play a multitude of roles in vesicular transport,
              including regulation of vesicle formation, vesicle motility, vesicle tethering,
              membrane fusion and membrane remodeling. Rab GDP dissociation inhibitor (GDI)
              is a protein that binds to rabs, keeping rab in the GDP-bound state, as well as
              delivering and placing rabs in the correct membrane compartment. The mechanism
              for releasing rab from GDI and delivering the rab to the correct membrane is
              unknown and is likely to involve proteins that bind and interact with GDI.  Dr.
              Cheney's laboratory and collaborators have previously cloned the Drosophila GDI
              gene, determined the Drosophila GDI crystal structure, isolated and
              characterized Drosophila GDI mutations and located the GDI mutations within the
              GDI crystal structure (Ricard et al., 2001). Prior work supported by NSF
              (#9874626, "RUI: Proteins that control interaction of rab GTPases and GDIls")
              resulted in the discovery of candidate proteins that interact with GDI and
              potentially could regulate the release of rab from GDI. The research that will
              be conducted under this award will extend this project by further
              characterizing the interacting proteins and investigating the nature of their
              interaction with GDI and role in rab delivery. The prior work has isolated a 30
              kD protein that bound to mutant, but not wild-type, GDI in a GST-GDI pulldown
              assay. This protein could be GDI displacement factor (GDF) or a rab. The prior
              work has also discovered 14 genomic regions that interact genetically with a
              GDI null allele. These regions include Myosin V, Myosin VIIa, rab26,
              Mp20/Calponin, and commissureless. Finally, this prior work has isolated 6
              mutations that interact with GDI.  The aims of the current project are:

1,
              to identify the 30 kD protein and determine whether it triggers rab release
              from GDI to membranes;  2, to find the candidate gene in ech of 4 interacting
              genomic regions and determine if the candidate gene product binds to GDI,
              affecting rab release from GDI; and 3, to clone the genes for one mutation that
              interacts with GDI and determine if the protein encoded by this gene binds
              directly to GDI, affecting in rab release.

This research will investigate
              proteins that interact with GDI and will shed light on how rab is released from
              GDI and delivered correctly to membrane compartments. Further, this project
              will integrally and actively involve undergraduates in an exciting area of
              research.

