Title       : Ribosomal Gene Repeats and Site-Specific Retrotransposons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0212452

Award Number: 0212452
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $565000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Eickbush eick@mail.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Transposable elements have played a major role in determining the size,
              structure and expression of eukaryotic genomes. R1 and R2 are two site-specific
              non-LTR retrotransposable elements that insert in the 28S ribosomal RNA genes
              of arthropods. The specificity of these elements has enabled them to serve as a
              convenient model system, such that R1 and R2 are now among the best
              characterized transposable elements. Taking advantage of the diverse array of
              5' truncations that frequently result from non-LTR retrotransposition,
              preliminary experiments have shown that individual R1 and R2 insertions and
              deletions can be scored among members of the same population as well as among
              19 Harwich mutation collection lines of Drosophila melanogaster. Therefore new
              copies are continually being inserted into and old elements eliminated from the
              rDNA loci. In this project, experiments are described to address a) the
              recombinational forces that bring about the concerted evolution of this locus,
              b) how R1 and R2 elements are affected by these recombinations, and c) how
              often and when R1 and R2 retrotranspose. Attempts to answer these questions
              will focus on the following specific aims. The rDNA loci from one Harwich line
              will be cloned as a series of overlapping bacterial artificial chromosomes
              (BACs). While the cloning of rDNA loci are avoided in genome projects, it
              should be achievable in this project because nearly 80 uniquely marked R1 and
              R2 insertions have been identified to serve as reference points for the
              assembly of overlapping clones. Based on this physical map, as well as the 18
              examples of how that locus has changed over a period of 350 generations, it can
              be determined where R1 and R2 insert into the loci and whether they are
              uniformly removed. Second, by scoring changes in the variable intergenic spacer
              region between the rRNA genes, a detailed view can be obtained of the
              recombinational processes responsible for the concerted evolution of the rDNA
              locus. Third, a study will be conducted of the differential replication of rDNA
              units in larval tissues. This latter experiment is of interest because
              Drosophila larvae grow normally even when large fractions of their rDNA units
              are inserted by under-replicating in polyploid tissues those units that have R1
              and R2 insertions. Finally, to determine the tempo and developmental timing of
              retrotransposition, R1 and R2 activity will be monitored from one generation to
              the next. R1 retrotransposition is sufficiently high in the Harwich lines that
              new events can be monitored per generation. A search will be made for a lab
              strain that will allow similar studies with the R2 elements. These studies
              should provide an unprecedented understanding of the life cycle of two
              retrotransposable elements. 

Because the target site for R1 and R2, the rDNA
              locus and the nucleolus that forms from it, plays a key role in all cellular
              metabolism, these studies will also provide insights into the evolution,
              replication and function of this critical cellular component.



