Title       : Axial Patterning in Embryogenesis, Regeneration, and Asexual Reproduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0212773

Award Number: 0212773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262484             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Finnerty jrf3@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1080,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0212773
Finerty

Every person that has ever walked the earth developed from
              an embryo. However, many animals such as sea anemones can develop by three
              alternate developmental pathways: from an embryo (embryogenesis), from a piece
              of an adult that has been fragmented by injury (regeneration), or from an
              autonomously produced offshoot of an adult (asexual reproduction). How are
              three alternate developmental pathways encoded in the genomes of animals such
              as sea anemones? Why is this kind of developmental flexibility lacking in
              animals such as humans? Answers to these fundamental questions will come from
              understanding the similarities and differences between embryogenesis,
              regeneration, and asexual reproduction at the molecular level.

Towards this
              end, the Finnerty lab will compare the roles of specific axial patterning genes
              in sea anemones during embryogenesis, regeneration, and asexual reproduction.
              Axial patterning is the process whereby an animal's body is divided into
              distinct regions along its primary axis. For example, the relatively simple
              body of a sea anemone has three main regions: a head, a central body column,
              and a foot. Importantly, axial patterning is a process that must be performed
              during embryogenesis, regeneration, and asexual reproduction. This study seeks
              to reveal whether conserved molecular mechanisms are used to accomplish axial
              patterning in these alternate pathways. The following specific questions will
              be addressed. (1) Are the same genes used to accomplish axial patterning in
              each developmental pathway? (2) Are the temporal and spatial patterns of gene
              expression consistent between pathways? (3) What are the consequences for
              embryogenesis of "turning off" a given gene by experimental means? 
To address
              questions one and two, the expression of several homeobox transcription factors
              will be assayed using the techniques of in situ hybridization and quantitative
              RT-PCR. To address question three, gene expression will be "silenced" using the
              technique of RNA interference.

