Title       : Collaborative Research: Taxonomy, Phylogeny, and the Evolution of Feeding
               Strategies in Fossil and Living Mysticete Cetaceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0212238

Award Number: 0212238
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130091             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Demere tdemere@sdnhm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego Soc Nat History
	      
	      San Diego, CA  92112    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Thomas Demere at the San Diego Natural History
              Museum (SDNHM) to study the fossil record of baleen whales and to document the
              dramatic anatomical modifications that members of this group have undergone
              over the past 35 million years.  Given the popular interest in living baleen
              whales, it is surprising that we still lack a clear understanding of the
              genealogical relationships of the modern species.  It is also surprising that
              the baleen whale "family tree" is so poorly resolved, with many fossil
              "branches" based on rather sketchy evidence or, even worse, currently unknown. 
              Dr. Demere's study will include descriptions of critical new fossil specimens,
              a re-analysis of named fossil baleen whale specimens housed at foreign and
              domestic museums, and determination of specific anatomical features that
              document the evolutionary changes that have occurred to the baleen whale skull,
              lower jaw, "arm," and body.  
This study will be conducted within the context
              of a broader collaborative study of baleen whale evolution.  The broader study
              will include analysis of genealogical relationships of all living species of
              baleen whales using data derived from molecular studies, soft anatomical
              studies, and osteological studies.  When these results are combined with those
              based on the fossil record, the outcome will provide the most comprehensive
              view yet realized of the evolutionary history of baleen whales.  A final aspect
              of this collaborative research will be to utilize the vastly improved
              genealogical history of baleen whales to track the anatomical and functional
              changes that occurred during the development of the diverse feeding styles
              exhibited by the modern species (i.e., surface skimming right whales,
              engulfment feeding fin whales, and suction feeding gray whales).  Highlights of
              this research will be incorporated into public education efforts at SDNHM
              including website pages (www.sdnhm.org) and exhibit galleries. 

