Title       : Electron-Ion Recombination Chemistry: Determination of Fragmentation and Product
               Distributions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0212368

Award Number: 0212368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400497             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel G. Adams   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lucia M. Babcock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Adams will develop an independent technique to determine
              dissociative electron-ion recombination rates and product distributions. The
              method is designed to circumvent difficulties that have caused contradictory
              results from previous studies with flowing-afterglow and storage ring
              experiments. After initial tests on well understood systems, the technique will
              be applied to those for which controversial results have been reported in the
              literature. New systems where dissociative recombination plays a major role
              will be investigated.

The molecules of interstellar and cometary gases, and
              of the earth's upper as well as lower atmosphere, continually undergo
              dissociative ionization followed by recombination.  The rates of recombination
              as well distributions of the dissociation products are experimentally
              determined and provide the basis for theoretical modeling. Conventional methods
              for determining these parameters have often given disparate results. This
              project is designed to develop a new method to generate reliable data for
              testing of existing theories and the development of new ones. The work will be
              performed with the assistance of graduate and undergraduate students and
              postdoctoral research associates.

In this project, funded by the
              Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Adams will
              develop an independent technique to determine dissociative electron-ion
              recombination rates and product distributions. The method is designed to
              circumvent difficulties that have caused contradictory results from previous
              studies with flowing-afterglow and storage ring experiments. After initial
              tests on well understood systems, the technique will be applied to those for
              which controversial results have been reported in the literature. New systems
              where dissociative recombination plays a major role will be
              investigated.

The molecules of interstellar and cometary gases, of the
              earth's upper as well as lower atmosphere, continually undergo dissociative
              ionization followed by recombination.  The rates of recombination as well
              distributions of the dissociation products are experimentally determined and
              provide the basis for theoretical modeling. Conventional methods for
              determining these parameters have often given disparate results. This project
              is designed to develop a new method to generate reliable data for testing of
              existing theories and the development of new ones. The work will be performed
              with the assistance of graduate and undergraduate students, and postdoctoral
              research associates.

