Title       : RUI: Effects of the Antimicrobial Agent Triclosan on the Emergence of Antibiotic
               Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0212205

Award Number: 0212205
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181144             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcy Kelly mkelly@ramapo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ramapo College
	      505 Ramapo Valley Road
	      Mahwah, NJ  074301623    201/684-7500

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Triclosan is a broad spectrum antimicrobial agent that is currently found in
              many consumer goods.  Triclosan inhibits the bacterial enzyme enoyl acyl
              carrier protein (ACP) reductase.  This enzyme catalyzes the last step in fatty
              acid biosynthesis in microorganisms.  Several studies have indicated that
              decreased susceptibility to triclosan correlates with quinolone antibiotic
              resistance.  The quinolones inhibit the bacterial DNA metabolic enzymes, DNA
              gyrase and topoisomerase IV.  Resistance to the quinolone antibiotics maps to
              the genes encoding DNA gyrase, topoisomerase IV, or to genes encoding
              multi-drug efflux pumps.  Triclosan resistance also maps to genes encoding
              multi-drug efflux pumps or to genes encoding regulatory proteins that control
              the expression of these pumps.  The primary focus of this project is to
              determine whether triclosan resistance contributes to antibiotic resistance in
              Staphylococcus aureus.  S. aureus is a human pathogen for which therapeutic
              options for the treatment of infections caused by this organism have become
              limited.  Preliminary studies by this laboratory have demonstrated the
              triclosan susceptibility profiles of 12 S. aureus clinical and laboratory
              strains.  Triclosan resistance was detected in 10 of these strains.  Among the
              10 triclosan resistant strains, 4 are also resistant to the quinolone
              antibiotics.  This project will use molecular biological and biochemical
              experiments to further characterize the nature of these triclosan resistant
              strains.  The emergence of antibiotic resistance is a growing problem among
              pathogenic bacteria.  The results of this project will lead to a deeper
              understanding of the impact of antimicrobial product usage by consumers on the
              emergence of antibiotic resistant bacteria.    

