Title       : Collaborative Research on the Effects of Plant Species and Functional Types on
               Diversity, Ecosystem Function, and Ecosystem Response to Perturbation in Arctic
               Tundra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0212749

Award Number: 0212749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nancy C. Tuchman                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179454             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle C. Mack mcmack@botany.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              0521400   Plant Productivity                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Human activities are increasingly affecting earth's environment and ecosystems
              not only through direct impacts on climate and element cycling, but also by
              increasing the pace of introductions and extinctions of species.  Because
              carbon and nutrients are cycled through the biosphere and plant species differ
              in traits that affect the rates of cycling of these elements, the abundance and
              diversity of species must affect ecosystem function.  However, the extent to
              which individual plant species affect ecosystem function and the relationship
              between species diversity and ecosystem response to perturbation are still
              largely unknown.  To what extent can plant species substitute for each other in
              ecosystem function?  What key traits determine whether a plant species' effect
              on nutrient cycling can be substituted by other species?  
A field experiment
              in Alaskan tussock tundra will examine these questions by removing different
              combinations of plant species in the presence and absence of fertilization. 
              The investigators will obtain a detailed picture of how interactions between
              plant species control how nutrients are redistributed under fertilization,
              because nutrients are a primary control over carbon storage in this highly
              nutrient-limited ecosystem.  They will also track potential introductions of
              new species as plant community composition shifts because of the removals or
              fertilization. The results will help reveal how human-induced environmental
              perturbations may change the mechanisms controlling ecosystem carbon storage
              and plant species abundance and diversity.
This is a collaborative project
              with Syndonia Bret-Harte (DEB-0213130)
