Title       : Sox-Domain and Homeodomain Proteins: Coordinate Regulation of DV Patterning of
               the Drosophila Nervous System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0212282

Award Number: 0212282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359997             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Skeath jskeath@genetics.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    /   -

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1190,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sox-domain and Homeodomain proteins:  Coordinate
Regulation of DV patterning of
              the Drosophila Nervous System.

The elucidation of the molecular pathways
              that regulate the development of the central nervous system is critical to our
              understanding of nervous system formation and function.  In humans, defects in
              neuronal development and function lead to a wide variety of congenital as well
              as inherited neurological diseases.  The genetic and molecular events that
              regulate CNS development are just now being explored in vertebrate and
              invertebrate model systems.  Initial insights from this work demonstrate a
              remarkable conservation of structure, expression and function between
              Drosophila genes expressed in the developing CNS and their vertebrate/mammalian
              homologs.  These studies support the idea that the fundamental architecture of
              many biological processes are conserved between flies and humans.  

The
              focus of this grant is to elucidate the molecular basis of CNS patterning in
              the early Drosophila embryo.  Specifically, the expression and function of a
              set of evolutionarily conserved transcription factors, collectively referred to
              as the columnar genes/proteins, subdivides the early Drosophila CNS into three
              longitudinal domains from which distinct neuronal populations arise.  In order
              to understand how these proteins partition the developing CNS into distinct
              domains it is essential to identify regulatory targets of the columnar proteins
              and to elucidate how the columnar proteins act at the molecular level to
              regulate the regions specific expression of these genes. However to date, no
              such target genes have been identified.  This proposal focuses on the
              identification of direct regulatory targets of the columnar genes and on the
              dissection of the regulatory regions of these genes in order to provide an
              initial glimpse into the molecular mechanisms that pattern the early CNS in the
              Drosophila embryo.  Of note, the Drosophila columnar genes and their mammalian
              counterparts perform nearly identical roles during the initial patterning of
              the Drosophila and mammalian early CNS, respectively.  Thus, it is likely that
              the clarification of the molecular mechanisms through which these transcription
              factors regulate pattern in the Drosophila CNS will have far reaching
              implications for our understanding of CNS development in mammals. 





