Title       : Collaborative: Reliability of Ferroelectric Thin Films: A Systematic Study of
               Point Defect Phenomena and Local Electronic Structure Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0212829

Award Number: 0212829
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel D. Browning   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) portion of a collaborative
              research project on the connections between the point defect chemistry and
              electronic structure of ferroelectric thin films and the fatigue and imprint
              processes that limit their reliability in non-volatile memory devices. A key
              objective of the research program is to understand the relative contributions
              of field-induced electronic charge injection/carrier trapping and charged
              oxygen vacancy redistribution during fatigue and imprint of state-of-the-art
              Pb(Zr,Ti)O3 (PZT) films.  We will use atomic resolution STEM and EELS to study
              the changes in atomic arrangements and local electronic structure that result
              from ferroelectric fatigue and imprint electrical testing. Examples of such
              changes might include development of locally-high oxygen non-stoichiometry near
              electrode interfaces and grain boundaries, and changes in bonding arrangements
              and the local density of states at these interfaces.  Atomic structure
              determinations will be made using the Z-contrast imaging technique. 
              Simultaneous acquisition of electron energy loss spectra will allow electronic
              structure information in the spectrum to be correlated with individual atomic
              columns in PZT thin film specimens.  Electrical testing of the PZT capacitors
              prior to STEM/EELS studies will be performed by our collaborators at Stanford. 
              Quantitative interpretation of EELS features will be facilitated by ab initio
              calculations (also performed at Stanford) of the local electronic structure at
              ferroelectric/electrode interfaces and the energies of carrier trap states
              associated with point defects.

Ferroelectric materials exhibit a spontaneous
              polarization which can be used in a variety of different applications in
              microelectronics and communications.  For example, thin film ferroelectric
              materials are the key enabler for a new generation of non-volatile
              semiconductor memories which are currently being developed (and, increasingly,
              brought to market) by major microelectronics firms worldwide.  The physics of
              switching the ferroelectric polarization state in small-dimension, thin film
              structures is also an important topic of fundamental scientific interest.  Both
              the science and the technology of ferroelectric thin films provide motivation
              for better-understanding phenomena that interfere with reliable polarization
              switching in these materials.  Such phenomena include ferroelectric fatigue,
              the loss of switchable polarization after repeated switching by applied voltage
              pulses, and imprint, a shift in coercive voltage resulting from repeated
              voltage pulses of one polarity.  A host of experimental observations and
              theoretical models for ferroelectric fatigue and imprint have been reported
              over the years.  However, the detailed mechanisms responsible for these
              reliability-limiting processes remain uncertain.  This research program will
              investigate the underlying mechanisms of ferroelectric fatigue and imprint in
              state-of-the art ferroelectric films provided by our collaborators in the
              semiconductor industry. The research will be directed by three co-principal
              investigators based at Stanford University and UIC with complimentary expertise
              in measurements of charged defect migration and polarization switching of
              ferroelectric thin films, atomic resolution imaging and spectroscopy using the
              electron microscope, and simulations of the electronic properties of solids.
              The UIC portion of the research will focus on direct examination of local
              bonding and electronic structure changes induced by fatigue and imprint
              electrical testing of PZT thin films. This research program will also
              strengthen our existing educational outreach activities to Chicago-area high
              school students, an effort that has, over the last 4 years, provided research
              positions for 32 students from groups typically under-represented in
              engineering and the natural sciences.

