Title       : Functional Analysis of Vacuolar Potassium Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0212663

Award Number: 0212663
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354528             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald Schoenknecht schoenk@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeanmarie Verchot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1136,9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ion transport across the surrounding membrane of the central vacuole of a plant
              cell plays an essential role in turgor-driven movements, in intracellular
              signal transduction, and in plant growth and nutrition.  The PI has recently
              identified the first vacuolar ion channel, the two-pore-domain K+ channel KCO1
              of Arabidopsis thaliana.  An Arabidopsis insertion mutant (kco1) lacking KCO1
              was used for patch clamp analysis.  Currents mediated by slow-vacuolar (SV)
              channels of mesophyll cell vacuoles were significantly smaller in kco1 plants
              compared tot the wild-type, indicating that KCO1 might be involved in the
              formation of SV channels.  By quantitative RT-PCR it was shown that transcripts
              of KCO1 and KCO6 dominate in Arabidopsis mesophyll and guard cells.  By a
              combination of reverse genetic, biophysical, and physiological approaches, the
              function of KCO1 and KCO6 in mesophyll and guard cells of Arabidopsis will be
              explored.  The specific objectives are (1) to establish whether KCO6--Like
              KCO1--is targeted to the vacuolar membrane, (2) to identify which vacuolar ion
              channel is formed by KCB1 and KCO6 -- determine whether it is the SV channel or
              another vacuolar ion channel, and (3) to relate physiological function(s) to
              KCO channels.  To pursue these aims, plants lacking or overexpressing KCO1
              and/or KCO6 will be used.

These studies will give insight into the molecular
              nature and physiological function of vacuolar potassium channels.  This will
              have a major impact on plant physiology in general and on the understanding of
              plant growth in particular.  For a systematic improvement of plant growth and
              nutritional composition (e.g. 'fortified foods') insight onto the molecular
              mechanisms of vacuolar ion transport is of vital importance.  Undergraduate
              students, graduate students, and post-doctoral associates will be trained, and
              the new insights into vacuolar potassium ion transport resulting from this
              project will be integrated into the plant mineral nutrition and plant
              physiology classes given by the PI.  
