Title       : Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Investigations in Fuel Cell Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0212216

Award Number: 0212216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251896             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrzej Wieckowski andrzej@scs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Oldfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is to use electrochemical nuclear magnetic
              resonance (EC-NMR) to study the influence of various platinum alloys on the
              electronic properties of Pt surfaces.  Candidate electrocatalyst materials for
              fuel-cell applications will be synthesized through the spontaneous deposition
              of monolayer quantities of Pt and other noble metal (Ru, Ir, Os, and Re)
              nanoparticles.  EC-NMR studies will probe the metal surfaces and poisoning
              adsorbates.  Carbon monoxide tolerance on Pd/Pt electrodes will also be
              studied.  Electronic-level information, obtained from EC-NMR, will be
              correlated with the results of electrochemical measurements in an effort to
              better understand the mechanisms of CO-poisoning.  Such correlations are
              expected to help guide the preparation of anodes for methanol
              electro-oxidation.  Reviewers recognized the PIs as pioneers in the development
              of EC-NMR for examining changes in the electronic state of the substrate and
              adsorbate-structure bonding.  A correlation of the surface work function
              changes as a function of adsorption and overpotential is important in the
              fundamental understanding of the thermodynamics and kinetics of an electrode
              process. The broader impacts of this project will be to train graduate and
              undergraduate students in the methods of electrocatalysis.  This research could
              help guide the development of improved fuel-cell catalysts for applications in
              transportation and mobile applications.
