Title       : Protein Phosphorylation as a Biophysical Switch: Structural, Dynamic and
               Thermodynamic Responses to Phosphorylation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0212597

Award Number: 0212597
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450445             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda K. Nicholson lkn2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nature has designed a broad array of protein-based molecular switches that
              direct and control the flow of information, energy, and molecular cargo through
              living cells. One of the most important questions regarding functional
              switching of proteins is how the covalent attachment of a phosphate group so
              dramatically alters activity. The overall goal of this research is to elucidate
              biophysical mechanisms by which specific proteins are regulated by
              phosphorylation. Two model systems will be investigated, moesin and the c-Src
              SH3 domain. Moesin is a member of the ERM family of proteins that are involved
              in dynamic interactions with the actin cytoskeleton and the plasma membrane. 
              SH3 domains are small, modular binding domains that mediate protein-protein
              interactions through binding to proline-rich sequence motifs.  The moesin model
              system employed in this research consists of two interacting domains, N-FERM
              and C-ERMAD that comprise the N/C complex.  Formation of the N/C complex
              prevents interactions between moesin and its cellular binding partners, and is
              regulated by phopshorylation of residue T558 in C-ERMAD and by PIP2 binding to
              N-FERM. This model system represents a "regulatory rheostat" where
              phosphorylation is coupled with additional regulatory factors to elicit
              variable activation.  In a second model system, the ligand binding function of
              the c-Src SH3 domain is regulated by phosphorylation of residue Y57. This
              represents a prototype molecular switch where phosphorylation of a residue in
              or near the binding surface alters specificity and affinity of a modular
              binding domain. For each of the two model systems, multidimensional NMR
              spectroscopy will be used to observe phosphorylation-induced changes in
              structure, stability and dynamics, and isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC)
              for quantifying phosphorylation-induced changes in function. The biophysical
              mechanism by which each protein is regulated will be determined through amide
              exchange measurements, backbone and side chain dynamics studies, and
              determination of macroscopic and site-specific pKas.  These investigations will
              provide a structural, dynamic and thermodynamic framework for understanding
              molecular switching mechanisms that have not yet been elucidated.
              

Reversible protein phosphorylation is a ubiquitous mechanism utilized by
              all cells to switch protein function on and off.  In order to visualize how
              protein phosphorylation regulates function, the structure, dynamics and
              thermodynamics of proteins in both phosphorylated and unphosphorylated states
              must be examined.  Although a few detailed mechanisms are now characterized,
              our understanding of the varied mechanisms by which regulation by
              phosphorylation is accomplished is far from complete.  This project aims to
              determine the biophysical mechanisms by which two particular proteins are
              regulated by phosphorylation. Coupling of the thermodynamic and site-specific
              perspectives obtained from ITC and NMR, respectively, will yield valuable
              insights into potential origins of binding energy, and the mechanisms used to
              alter this energy in biological molecular switches.  These studies will advance
              our understanding of how biological processes are regulated by phosphorylation,
              and will impact important areas of research such as signal transduction,
              intracellular trafficking, and regulation of membrane structure.  The research
              objectives will be accomplished primarily through the participation of graduate
              and undergraduate students who will receive education and training in molecular
              biology, protein chemistry, physical chemistry, computer technology, and
              multidimensional NMR spectroscopy. 

