Title       : An Investigation of Protein Dimerization by Exploiting the Unique Properties of
               Chemokines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0212700

Award Number: 0212700
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $412148             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia J. LiWang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1166,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Chemokines (chemotactic cytokines) function in immune response and are often
              found to be dimers. The goal of this research is to investigate the
              protein-protein interactions involved in dimerization of the chemokine family
              of proteins. The chemokine family has two main subfamilies, the CC subfamily
              and the CXC subfamily. However, despite sharing the same overall fold and
              having moderate sequence identity, the proteins in each subfamily dimerize
              quite differently, using different amino acids in different regions of the
              protein. This structural situation is nearly unique and provides an excellent
              opportunity to study the details of dimer formation. Previous work supported by
              an NSF CAREER award has allowed the successful design and study of folded
              monomeric variants derived from chemokine dimers. This funding has also led to
              the development of several strategies designed to switch the dimer type of a
              chemokine variant. Experiments in the current project are designed to study the
              protein-protein interactions leading to dimerization. First, a screening system
              has been established that allows for rapid screening of randomly mutated
              chemokines to select for those having an alternate dimer interface. Second, the
              new chemokine dimers will be characterized biochemically to confirm the dimer
              dissociation constant and stability of the variant. Finally, nuclear magnetic
              resonance will be used to determine the structure of the altered dimer(s),
              thereby elucidating the specific amino acid contacts that allow dimerization.
              This work will exploit the characteristics of chemokines (having identical
              folds but two different dimer types) to reveal details of amino acid
              interactions necessary for protein dimerization that is not obtainable from
              simply observing known structures of dimers or from destabilizing known dimers.
              The work will allow a greater understanding of protein-protein interactions at
              a molecular level and will also provide an excellent educational experience for
              undergraduates, as such students, including a participant in a minority student
              summer program, have contributed significantly to the preliminary results that
              lay the groundwork for these experiments.
