Title       : IRCEB: The Life History-Physiology Nexus--Constraints on the Evolutionary
               Diversification of Avian Life Histories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0212587

Award Number: 0212587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Ricklefs ricklefs@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kirk C. Klasing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph B. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin C. Wikelski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,1181,1356,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project brings together a team of ecologists and physiologists to
              investigate how physiological mechanisms constrain the evolution of parental
              investment and self-maintenance in tropical and temperate environments.
              Life-history theory predicts that long-lived organisms should allocate more
              resources to enhancing survival, thereby protecting future reproduction, at the
              expense of current reproduction. Many of the predicted responses of physiology
              and behavior are controlled by endocrine and immune system mechanisms that
              establish incompatible physiological states and limit individual responses of
              organisms and evolved responses of populations. This collaborative study will
              compare related species of birds living in contrasting tropical and temperate
              environments to determine population parameters (adult survival and
              reproductive rate) and physiological and behavioral responses. Incorporating a
              strongly developed student-training component in the project, measurements will
              include activity, metabolism, health status, and endocrine profiles in the
              field, and metabolism, hormonal stress response, and immune system response in
              the laboratory. Analysis and interpretation of these data will relate variation
              in life-history attributes to phylogenetic relationship, region, and ecological
              measures of habitat, diet, and predator environment. This project is unique in
              that it integrates studies in ecology, physiology, and demography to focus on
              major patterns of diversification of life histories. 
