Title       : Organization of F Plasmid Tra Proteins in E. coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0212365

Award Number: 0212365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip M. Silverman silvermanp@omrf.ouhsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret Clarke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Okla Medical Res Found
	      825 N.E. 13th Street
	      Oklahoma City, OK  73104    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1114,1132,1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
A grant has been awarded to Dr. Philip Silverman of the Oklahoma Medical
              Research Foundation to elucidate the structural biology of conjugal (lateral) 
              DNA transfer between F+ and F- strains of Escherichia coli. This research seeks
              to define how the 30 or so DNA transfer (Tra) proteins encoded by the F plasmid
              are organized at the bacterial cell surface and tests the hypothesis that these
              proteins constitute a molecular machine that mediates conjugal DNA transfer.
              The first specific aim is to characterize the interactions among the Tra
              proteins with the goal of understanding what the Tra protein machine looks like
              from a biochemical perspective. The second specific aim of the research is to
              apply indirect immunofluorescence microscopy to determine how many Tra machines
              there are on each bacterial cell and how they are related spatially to each
              other, to F DNA, and to the bacterial cell surface as a whole. This research is
              the first step towards a detailed structure/function analysis of conjugal DNA
              transfer mediated by the F plasmid.
To broaden the impact of our research to
              science education in Oklahoma's underserved rural schools, a third specific aim
              of the project is to survey antibiotic resistance plasmids in bacteria from the
              intestinal flora of livestock throughout Oklahoma. These R plasmids will be
              isolated and partially characterized by rural high school science students in
              conjunction with The Oklahoma Science Project, which Dr. Silverman founded and
              directs. 
Several considerations make this project both timely and important.
              First,  conjugal DNA transfer is connected to the dissemination of antibiotic
              resistance, an increasingly alarming public health problem. Second, it is one
              of several mechanisms by which bacterial cells secrete macromolecules across
              their surface barriers; these mechanisms are responsible for the pathogenicity
              of many bacteria. Third, conjugal DNA transfer has applications in
              biotechnology; a better understanding of the process will increase the number
              and scope of such applications. Finally, the project will create more
              opportunities for Oklahoma's rural students, including its sizable Native
              American cohort, to enter technology career paths.

