Title       : Energy Functions for Spectroscopy and Dynamics Studies of Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a0212232

Award Number: 0212232
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel Krimm skrimm@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1164,1248,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Accurate potential energy functions for polypeptide chains have two important
              uses.  For spectroscopy, they provide the means to calculate reliable normal
              mode frequencies of peptides and proteins for fundamental analyses of structure
              and interactions from infrared and Raman spectra.  For molecular mechanics (MM)
              and dynamics (MD) studies, they provide the physical accuracy needed for
              reliable predictions of structures, energies, and dynamics of proteins. 
              Current standard functions do not meet such standards since they give
              spectroscopically poor reproduction of vibrational frequencies.  Using a method
              developed in his laboratory, called a spectroscopically determined force field
              (SDFF), such deficiencies have been overcome.  The goal of this project is to
              determine and incorporate into an SDFF for the polypeptide chain those
              components of an MM energy function that will give it the needed accuracy for
              reliable simulations of proteins.  Polarizability will be fully included in the
              SDFF, based on a recently developed electrostatic model for this property of
              polar groups.  Structural features of the peptide group that depend on
              pyramidalization at the nitrogen atom will be further elucidated and
              parameterized.  These include the explicit incorporation of charge fluxes,
              i.e., the dependence of charge on conformation, which are also essential to
              computing reliable infrared band intensities.  Previous studies of typical
              N-H...O hydrogen bonds will be extended to include C-H...O hydrogen bonds,
              which have recently been found to be important in protein structures.  SDFF
              descriptions of O-H...O hydrogen bonding in water and alcohols will be
              developed.

The results of this research will have broad scientific and
              educational impacts.  The ability to more reliably calculate structural and
              energetic, as well as spectroscopic, characteristics of proteins will lead to
              more accurate predictions of their properties.  This will lead to deeper
              insights into functions of these biologically important molecules.  The
              developments from this research will be disseminated to the scientific
              community, will result in the advanced training of graduate students and
              postdocs, and will be reflected in curricular themes in undergraduate courses,
              thus contributing to the integration of research and education.  This project
              is supported by the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular
              and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the
              Division of Physics in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate. 

