Title       : Computational Analysis of Peptide/lipid Interactions and Organization at
               Membrane Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0212362

Award Number: 0212362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388314             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana Murray dim2007@med.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Weill Med Coll of Cornell
	      1300 York Avenue
	      New York, NY  100214805    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this project is the development of numerical procedures for
              calculating the physical basis of the association of peptides with the membrane
              interface, the electrostatic forces involved in lateral redistribution of
              lipids, and detailed electrostatic properties of membrane systems based on more
              realistic models than have been used in the past. This project is based on two
              main hypotheses: 1) Physical forces-electrostatics and hydrophobicity-mediate
              the membrane association of amphipathic peptides: the electrostatic
              interactions occur between basic residues and acidic phospholipids, and the
              hydrophobic interactions are mediated via aromatic residues which partition
              into the polar headgroup region of the membrane. 2) Nonspecific electrostatic
              interactions provide the driving force for the observed lateral sequestration
              of multivalent acidic phospholipids by clusters of basic residues on
              membrane-adsorbed peptides corresponding to these basic domains. The finite
              difference Poisson-Boltzmann (FDPB) method, which is based on a continuum
              description of the aqueous solvent and a more detailed, atomic-level
              description of the macromolecules, has been remarkably successful in its
              ability to reproduce experimental measurements of the binding free energies of
              simple basic peptides that do not penetrate the membrane interface. Here, the
              continuum approach will be extended to peptides containing basic and aromatic
              residues that do penetrate the membrane interface. In addition, more realistic
              structural and theoretical models of peptide/membrane systems will be developed
              by incorporating snapshots from molecular dynamics simulations of membranes
              into FDPB calculations. Comparison with experiments at all levels will allow
              refinement of the theoretical methodology and provide valuable input to the
              experimental studies. 

The research described here is based on computational
              approaches and aims ultimately to provide a detailed theoretical description of
              the interactions between peripheral proteins and membranes. This research is
              important both because of the significance of the general area of
              peptide/membrane interactions and because many of the questions posed can only
              be approached with computational methods. This project involves the combined
              development and application of biophysical tools to describe problems that have
              not previously been studied with computational techniques and close
              collaborative interactions between computational and experimental work. The
              principal investigator is involved in a number of graduate programs such as the
              Program for Chemical Biology, the Biochemistry and Structural Biology Graduate
              Program, and the Keck Program in Cellular and Molecular Biophysics of Signal
              Transduction. The computational and research infrastructure being developed
              through projects such as this one is contributing to the enrichment of the
              graduate training environment.

