Title       : Of Moths and Mice: The Influence of Dispersal Distance and Local Predation Risk
               on Persistence of a Sparse Prey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0212215

Award Number: 0212215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan J. Tessier                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clive G. Jones jonesc@ecostudies.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brett J. Goodwin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric M. Schauber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard S. Ostfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Ecosyst Stud
	      Box AB
	      Millbrook, NY  125450129    914/677-5343

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Of Moths and Mice: The Influence of Dispersal Distance and Local
Predation Risk
              on Persistence of a Sparse Prey

Clive G. Jones, Brett J. Goodwin, Richard S.
              Ostfeld and Eric M. Schauber.

Predators can potentially exterminate
              populations of their prey.  Understanding how prey populations persist in the
              face of predation can help us sustain populations of endangered species and
              control pest populations.  For example, gypsy moths are introduced insect pests
              that cause much damage in hardwood forests of eastern North America. 
              White-footed mice, which are abundant in these forests, are voracious predators
              on gypsy moth pupae and are capable of driving moths locally to extinction. 
              Since moth extinction has not actually happened over larger areas, how do moths
              persist in the face of intense predation by mice? The combined effects of two
              factors are important:  (1) the likelihood of a gypsy moth pupa being attacked
              varies from place to place and (2) gypsy moth caterpillars do not disperse very
              far during their lifetimes.  Computer simulations indicate that combining these
              two factors can substantially increase the chances that moth populations will
              persist.  During this project, data will be collected in oak forests in New
              York State that will allow the development, refinement and testing of these
              simulation models.  The dispersal distances of gypsy moth caterpillars and the
              predation risk for gypsy moth pupae at several sites will be measured.  These
              measurements will be incorporated into the computer simulation to predict how
              changing the spatial pattern of predation risk would affect gypsy moth
              populations.  Finally, predictions will be tested in areas where there are
              different numbers of dispersing moth caterpillars by putting out feeding
              stations to manipulate the patterns of mouse foraging. This procedure will
              alter the risk of predation for gypsy moth pupae and should change the
              likelihood of local moth population persistence in a predictable way.

