Title       : SGER: Exploration of a Novel Nuclear Domain Tightly Associated with PML Bodies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0212963

Award Number: 0212963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97319              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne Lawrence Jeanne.Lawrence@umassmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kelly Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Med Sch Worceste
	      55 Lake Avenue North
	      Worcester, MA  016550002    508/856-2119

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1132,1154,9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research.

Dr. Lawrence will pursue
              recent preliminary evidence of a novel nuclear "domain" or "body," which
              typically positions immediately adjacent to PML bodies and appears to form a
              "doublet" structure with the PML body. In recent years, there has been
              increasing appreciation for the complexity and importance of internal nuclear
              structures and growing evidence of their fundamental roles in diverse nuclear
              functions. At the forefront has been intense interest in PML bodies (also
              called ND10, PODs, or PML domains), because these structures are enriched for a
              collection of important gene regulatory proteins.  Dr. Lawrence's laboratory
              has been studying the characterization of distinct nuclear compartments and
              their structural and functional relationship to gene expression. In the course
              of her very recent work she fortuitously uncovered evidence that there exists
              an essentially unknown and uncharacterized nuclear "body" that is structurally
              linked to PML bodies. The evidence for this is at a very preliminary state, and
              there are major questions to be sorted out in order to establish conclusively
              the existence of this as a bona fide nuclear body containing multiple nuclear
              factors and having defined structure. The potential significance of the work is
              that it may demonstrate a previously unknown part of cell structure, the
              equivalent of a nuclear "organelle" with an unexplored role in basic nuclear
              function. In addition, these bodies are structurally coupled with a body that
              is clearly implicated in cell cycle regulation. Dr. Lawrence and her colleagues
              initially discovered a regularly spaced pattern of ~10-20 very bright nuclear
              "dots" (immediately abutting but not overlapping PML bodies) using an antibody
              to the FLAG-epitope in cells engineered to express flag-tagged c-myc
              oncoprotein at physiological levels. However, recent evidence suggests that the
              antigen detected is probably not the myc oncoprotein but rather an endogenous
              protein, possibly induced as part of a cellular reaction to MuLV virus (murine
              leukemia virus). The first aim is to investigate the hypothesis that
              PML-associated bodies indeed exist and are found in a variety of cells, using
              both ultrastructural analysis and immunofluorescence to several other specific
              proteins that prior evidence suggests may co-localize to these bodies. Second,
              she will investigate the relationship between MuLV vectors or MuLV expression
              and the induction of the relevant protein and/or body.  Depending on results,
              it would also be feasible to identify an unknown cellular protein detected by
              the anti-flag antibodies and localized to these structures.  

