Title       : RUI: Control of CIITA Function and Immune System Gene Expression by
               Phosphorylation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0212067

Award Number: 0212067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271391             (Estimated)
Investigator: Drew E. Cressman dcressma@mail.slc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sarah Lawrence College
	      One Meadway
	      Bronxville, NY  107085931    914/337-0700

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1114,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
When a body is threatened by foreign pathogens, expression of a variety of
              immune system genes allows cells to react to this threat and initiate an immune
              response.  Central to inducing this immune response is the activation of the
              master regulator factor, the class II transactivator (CIITA).  CIITA acts in
              the nucleus of cells to induce the expression of genes necessary for the
              presentation of foreign peptides on the cell surface.  The CIITA protein is
              know to be present in both the cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments of cells,
              although the significance for this bimodal distribution and the factors that
              regulate it are unclear.  It has been well established that the addition or
              subtraction of phosphate group moieties to a cellular protein can modify the
              activity and localization of that particular protein.  Preliminary data
              indicates that CIITA is indeed subject to phosphorylation; however, the effect
              this phosphorylation has on regulating the function of the CIITA protein is
              unknown.  One hypothesis is that phosphorylation of CIITA specifically present
              in the nucleus shuts down CIITA-regulated gene expression and subsequently
              induces the export of CIITA from the nucleus out to the cytoplasm.  This may
              allow the organism to rapidly and precisely control the timing and extent of
              CIITA activity, and therefore mediate the magnitude of the immune response. 
              This project will examine this hypothesis by: 1) identifying the cellular
              mechanisms and factors that mediate phosphorylation of CIITA; 2) determining
              the effect phosphorylation has on CIITA activity; and 3) identifying the
              protein domains that mediate the export of CIITA from the nucleus. 
              Understanding the cellular and molecular mechanisms that control CIITA activity
              will be crucial to devising strategies to manipulate the immune system and
              alter immune responses.
This project will identify the cellular mechanisms by
              which the immune system is regulated and signaled to respond to the presence of
              foreign pathogens.  Laboratory experiments will determine how the central
              control protein, CIITA, is structurally modified and regulated and what effect
              these modifications have on the function of the protein within cells.  This
              research will provide a basis for generating therapeutic strategies to modify
              and enhance the therapeutic abilities of the immune system at the molecular and
              cellular level.  Additionally, during the three-year timeframe of this project,
              undergraduate students will participate in the program as summer or academic
              year interns, establishing the foundation for further curricular development
              and strengthening undergraduate scientific training at Sarah Lawrence College. 
              

