Title       : Interaction Effects of Solar Ultraviolet Radiation and the Nutrient Environment
               on the Dynamics of Growth of Freshwater Bacteria and Phytoplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0212710

Award Number: 0212710
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99957              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford A. Ochs byochs@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1182,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Exposure to solar ultraviolet radiation (UVR) is a fact of life for organisms
              living in
the photic zone of aquatic environments. It is increasingly evident
              that zooplankton,
phytoplankton, protozoa, and bacterioplankton exhibit
              taxon-specific differences in
physiological and behavioral responses to UVR
              exposure. Although competition for
nutrients is recognized as a critical
              factor in structuring plankton community
composition, nothing is known of the
              significance of UVR under natural conditions for the
intensity of competition
              among plankton for limiting mineral nutrients. The proposed
research will help
              to fill this gap in knowledge. We will examine the main and
interaction
              effects of the nutrient and UVR regime on the growth rates and competition
              for
phosphorus of naturally occurring phytoplankton and bacterioplankton. A
              model is
presented and predictions made regarding the severity of nutrient
              competition under a
range in conditions of nutrient (organic carbon and
              phosphorus) ratios and UVR exposure.
We predict that, because of differential
              effects on bacterioplankton and phytoplankton
growth rates, UVR will modify
              the severity of competition between phytoplankton and
bacterioplankton for
              phosphorus. Using samples collected from a low-altitude reservoir in
north
              Mississippi, experiments will be conducted to test the model predictions.
              This
study fulfills two needs. It will be the first to evaluate by
              experimentation using
natural sunlight the interaction effects of UVR and the
              nutrient regime on growth rates of
autotrophic and heterotrophic plankton
              under various degrees of nutrient limitation.
Second, it will provide
              knowledge of the influence of the UVR regime on the relative
importance of
              autotrophic and bacterial heterotrophic production in a southern U.S.
aquatic
              ecosystem, where, compared to higher latitudes, there has been very
              little
research on the ecological significance of UVR. Students will be
              involved in all aspects
of the project, from planning to sampling to data
              analysis to presentation. With
anticipated continued increases of UVR in
              temperate regions due to ozone depletion, the
effect of UVR on plankton
              trophic-level relationships constitutes a timely and important
problem.
