Title       : Mass Torts and Bankruptcy: Asbestos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0212444

Award Number: 0212444
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177879             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle J. White miwhite@weber.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Several million U.S. workers were exposed to asbestos, which causes a variety of
              diseases that range from non-disabling to fatal.  At least 500,000 individuals
              have filed tort claims related to asbestos exposure and, because a typical
              claimant files claims against 20 defendants, as many as 10 million claims may
              have been filed.  Liability costs have caused about 75 large firms to file for
              bankruptcy.  The eventual cost of asbestos liability is estimated to be as high
              as $200 billion.  

Because the large volume of asbestos lawsuits has clogged
              the dockets of many courts, judges have tried new legal procedures to encourage
              quick resolution of claims-including consolidation of multiple lawsuits for
              trial, bifurcation of trials into multiple phases, and "bouquet" trials.  Part
              of the project involves collecting a dataset of asbestos trials and using
              regression analysis to examine how these new legal procedures affect trial
              outcomes and incentives for additional plaintiffs to file lawsuits.  Also, a
              large fraction of asbestos trials result in punitive damages compared to other
              types of trials.  The project will estimate the frequency of punitive damage
              awards in asbestos trials, the degree of concentration of punitive damage
              awards on a few firms and whether punitive damage awards have been a
              significant factor in asbestos firms' bankruptcies.   Other parts of the
              project will examine how asbestos settlements are influenced by trial outcomes,
              how firms with large asbestos liabilities decide whether to file for
              bankruptcy, and how insurers affect asbestos firms' litigation strategies.  A
              final part of the research involves comparing compensation of asbestos victims
              to compensation of victims of a different mass tort.  The comparison will show
              whether the asbestos mass tort is qualitatively different from other mass torts
              or merely larger.  

   The project will advance scientific knowledge of mass
              torts and how the court system and the bankruptcy system deal with them.  In
              particular it will determine the extent to which asbestos liabilities and
              bankruptcies have increased as a result of procedural innovations that were
              developed to deal with congested court dockets.  The research will provide
              information and analysis to inform the policy debate concerning how asbestos
              and other mass torts should be handled and whether a new approach, such as an
              administrative compensation scheme, is needed.   


