Title       : Demise of the Shell Mound Archaic: Ecological Circumstances Attending Regional
               Abandonment of the Middle Savannah at 3500 BP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0212228

Award Number: 0212228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100289             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth E. Sassaman sassaman@anthro.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Kenneth E. Sassaman and colleagues
              will investigate the circumstances surrounding abandonment of the middle
              Savannah River valley (Georgia and South Carolina) by the fourth millennium  BC
              Stallings Culture. As part of the Shell Mound Archaic, Stallings Culture
              developed over several centuries to include stationary riverine settlements, an
              intensive, aquatic-based subsistence economy, and numerous technological
              innovations, including the first pottery in the North America.  Around 3500
              years ago, major habitation sites were abandoned as groups dispersed into the
              adjacent uplands to resume a mobile lifestyle.  Archaeological research on
              foragers shows how local resource abundance contributes to sociopolitical
              complexity, but we know comparatively little about the sustainability of such
              institutions relative to the ecological conditions that enabled them.  The
              proposed work is designed to ascertain the local environmental impacts
              attending increasingly intensive land-use and the extent to which such impacts
              contributed to regional abandonment.  Over the past decade, excavations at four
              Stallings habitation sites in the middle Savannah region have yielded a large
              inventory of paleoecological and artifactual data spanning the rise,
              florescence, and demise of local Stallings communities.  Analyses of the animal
              and plant remains, wood charcoal, land snails, and material culture from these
              sites are designed to test five hypotheses: (1) subsistence economies over the
              course of Stallings prehistory diversified; (2) diversification resulted from
              diminishing returns on high-ranking resources; (3) diminishing returns on
              high-ranking resources resulted from overexploitation by Stallings communities;
              (4) overexploitation resulted from permanent use of local environments; (5)
              technological innovations contributed to, rather than alleviated, economic
              stress.  All analyses will be conducted by graduate research assistants under
              the supervision of faculty consultants in archaeobotany, zooarchaeology,
              malecology, and prehistoric technology.  The relevance of the proposed work is
              manifold.  Stallings prehistory represents one of the few cases worldwide of a
              truncated historical sequence of increasing sociopolitical complexity.  Whereas
              archaeologists have devoted much attention to the transition from foraging to
              farming, and thence the rise of the state, virtually no studies have been
              conducted to examine the failure of increasingly intensified forager economies
              and societies to "evolve."  A related issue is changing perceptions of human
              ecology.  Ethnographic foragers have long been conscripted as evolutionary
              ideals whose patterns of mobility, food-sharing, and simple technology were a
              keen adaptation to preagricultural conditions. A growing body of evidence shows
              that some ancient forgers engaged in land-use practices that irrevocably
              changed entire ecosystems and historical trajectories.  This, in turn, bears
              relevance on modern environmental restoration policy. Just as there are
              arguably no "pristine" foragers in the ethnographic present to model
              pre-Western society, there are arguably no "pristine" ecosystems over the
              course of human history for which to model environmental restoration efforts. 
              Accurate portrayal of both ecosystem and cultural diversity requires deep
              historical context, and the Stallings archaeological record offers an
              unparalleled opportunity to assemble a detailed ecological history for
              comparative uses in anthropology, conservation, and environmental
              policy.






