Title       : Collaborative Research: Taxonomy, Phylogeny, and the Evolution of Feeding
               Strategies in Fossil and Living Mysticete Cetaceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0212572

Award Number: 0212572
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Gatesy johnga@citrus.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. John Gatesy at the University of California,
              Riverside to study the evolutionary history of Mysticeti (baleen whales), the
              largest animals on earth.  Evolutionary relationships among baleen whale are,
              at present, unresolved.  The proposed study combines the detailed analysis of
              poorly understood fossil whale species, many of which were found in southern
              California, with comprehensive genetic characterization of living mysticetes. 
              The diverse paleontological and molecular data will be used to examine how
              these giant animals have evolved over the past thirty million years of earth
              history.
	Whales have long captured the interest and attention of the public. 
              Therefore, an important objective of this study is education and public
              outreach.  Results from this grant will be used as a framework to interpret the
              radical transformation from ancestral toothed whales to the more derived
              baleen-bearing whales.  This remarkable example of evolution will be
              incorporated into a new exhibit planned at the San Diego Natural History
              Museum.  In addition, undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in
              all phases of the research and will receive broad training in modern biological
              techniques.  Finally, most mysticetes are highly endangered, and several are on
              the brink of extinction.  The data collected in this study will offer critical
              information for the conservation of baleen whales.

