Title       : Regulation of Cell Phospholipid Metabolism by Phospholipase A2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0212213

Award Number: 0212213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $384998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne E. Barbour sbarbour@hsc.vcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The regulation of glycerophospholipid metabolism is fundamental to cell
              homeostasis as these molecules have important roles in both membrane structure
              and cell signaling.  Recent studies indicate that the 80 kDa
              calcium-independent phospholipase A2 (iPLA2) plays a fundamental role in the
              regulation of phospholipid metabolism.  This study  is intended to further
              elucidate the mechanisms of regulation of the expression and catalytic activity
              of this essential enzyme.  Experiments are designed to determine if iPLA2
              activity is regulated by the accumulation of truncated forms of the protein
              that are encoded by alternatively spliced iPLA2 messages.  These studies will
              focus on the cell cycle dependence of iPLA2 activity, as this is likely to have
              important implications for the accumulation of phospholipid mass for daughter
              cell membranes and potentially for the regulation of cell cycle progression.
              Among the studies to be performed are the quantification of full length and
              splice variant mRNAs and proteins at each phase of the cell cycle and the over
              expression of the splice variants to determine if this reduces the catalytic
              activity of endogenous iPLA2.  Other experiments are focused on the potential
              regulation of iPLA2 expression by Sterol Response Element Binding Proteins
              (SREBP) and sterol metabolism.  Several recent reports suggest that
              glycerophospholipid and sterol metabolism are coordinately regulated and
              preliminary experiments suggest that iPLA2 expression may be modulated by
              changes in sterol mass. To address this question, a putative Sterol Response
              Element (SRE) in the iPLA2 promoter will be characterized.  In addition,
              experiments will be performed to determine if iPLA2 expression is induced in
              cells with low sterol content and if this is can be attributed to SREBP. 
              Together these studies should provide important insights into the regulation of
              iPLA2 in mammalian cells. Given the essential role that iPLA2 plays in
              glycerophospholipid metabolism, these studies should provide information that
              is fundamental to our understanding of cell homeostasis.

 

Cell membranes
              are largely composed of lipid molecules that until recently were thought to
              play a simple structural role in cell physiology.  However, recent studies
              indicate that lipids have information content and can be broken down into other
              molecules that can regulate cell behavior.  This research is intended to
              further our understanding of a critical enzyme, iPLA2, which regulates a
              subclass of lipids, the phospholipid molecules.  As this enzyme controls the
              phospholipid content of cell membranes, it can have dramatic effects on both
              the integrity of a cell and its ability to respond to changes in its
              environment.  These studies are designed to further elucidate mechanisms
              controlling both the amount of iPLA2 in cells (expression) and the functioning
              of the enzyme (activity).  Together, these studies should provide insights into
              the regulation of an enzyme that plays a critical role in phospholipid
              metabolism. Given the importance of these molecules in controlling cell
              integrity and responsiveness, this information will be crucial to further our
              knowledge of how cells function.


