Title       : Collaborative Research: Understanding the Diversity of Parasites and Infectious
               Diseases in Three Mammalian Orders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0212096

Award Number: 0212096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189112             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sonia M. Altizer saltize@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1182,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Pathogens and parasites are a major component of biological diversity, and
              have
important impacts on natural populations. A central question in
              host-parasite ecology concerns
what features of host behavior, life history,
              and environment best explain the diversity and
evolution of infectious
              diseases. Significant theoretical progress has advanced our understanding
of
              factors that influence infectious disease dynamics within populations, yet
              relatively few
studies have analyzed ecological variables that underlie
              observed variation in pathogen diversity
and characteristics. This project
              will examine patterns of parasite diversity across three
mammalian orders to
              explicitly test predictions derived from both epidemiological models
              and
island biogeography theory. Major questions this project will address
              include (1) What are the
key ecological variables that determine variation in
              the types and diversity of parasites in wild
mammal populations? (2) How do
              parasite transmission mode and the degree of specificity
depend on host
              ecology? (3) Does evolutionary diversification of hosts correlate with patterns
              of
parasite species richness? (4) Does knowledge of parasite diversity have
              important implications
for wildlife conservation?
Establishing a large
              database on the pathogens and parasites infecting wild mammals is
critical to
              conducting comprehensive analyses and represents a major goal of this project.
              The
investigators have recently assembled a large database on the pathogens
              and parasites of
primates and will extend this effort to two other
              well-studied groups - carnivores and ungulates.
These databases capture (i)
              ecological, behavioral and life history traits relevant to theoretical
models
              of disease spread, (ii) records of parasites and pathogens recovered from
              wild
populations, (iii) data on parasite transmission mode and degree of host
              specificity, and (iv)
phylogenetic information on the hosts. Database
              development requires an immense effort and
following this study all data will
              be made freely available over the World Wide Web so that
other scientists can
              access the fruits of this labor.
Understanding factors that underlie parasite
              diversity and characteristics is vital to
managing vulnerable wildlife
              populations and mitigating threats to human health. This study
extends the
              scope of previous host-parasite comparative work by examining a rich diversity
              of
both micro- and macroparasites, including information on parasite
              characteristics, and by
assessing phylogenetic information involving tree
              topology, branch lengths and rates of host
diversification. Analytical
              comparative methods will control for sampling effort, test multiple
variables
              simultaneously, and will assess whether host and parasite traits are correlated
              with
phylogeny. A synthetic approach that links ecology, parasitology,
              epidemiology, and
phylogenetic comparative methods is crucial for developing a
              broad conceptual framework to
explain parasite diversity and characteristics
              in relation to host features. To advance these goals,
the investigators will
              organize three annual workshops composed of experts from each of
              these
disciplines to refine predictions for comparative research, explore
              methods for examining
ecological and evolutionary interactions in
              host-parasite assemblages, and chart future directions
for both theoretical
              and empirical work.
