Title       : Comparative Phylogeography of Eurasian Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2002      
File        : a0212832

Award Number: 0212832
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274464             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Zink   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sievert A. Rohwer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5939,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Robert M. Zink and Sievert A. Rohwer of the University of Minnesota have been
              awarded a grant to use DNA sequencing technology to analyze patterns of genetic
              variation within 25 bird species that have been sampled across Russia.  DNA
              studies clarify whether each species is actually a single species, or whether
              genetic discontinuities exist.  For example, the PIs have already shown that
              what was thought to be a common Eurasian species is in fact three species.  
              Such findings have important implications for documenting biodiversity.   By
              comparing a large number of species, it is possible to determine if genetic
              discontinuities are congruent, which, if so, can be related to the climatic and
              geological history of this region over the last million years.   The PIs
              sampling design allows assessment of whether geographical barriers such as the
              Ural Mountains played a role in the evolution of diversity within these bird
              species.  Using estimates of rates of molecular evolution, dates of origin of
              genetic discontinuities can be compared to those in North American
              birds.

Essentially nothing is known about the evolutionary history of bird
              species across Eurasia, because, until recently, some important study sites
              were not easily accessible.   The available samples provide the first
              opportunity for broad-scale analyses of genetic variation and species limits
              across Eurasia.  This provides a firmer base for interpreting the significance
              of patterns of genetic variation in North America, the other large temperate
              land mass.   That is, the PIs will be able to compare units of biodiversity on
              a common DNA scale on the two great north temperate landmasses, North America
              and Eurasia.  The effects of climatic change, including glaciation, on the
              origin of species will also be revealed.  The PIs collaboration with Russian
              scientists through exchange of personnel and joint fieldwork further enriches
              this research program.


