Title       : Tackling a Taxonomic Giant - the Genus Croton (Euphorbiaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0212481

Award Number: 0212481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Berry peberry@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0212481
Berry
Under the direction of Prof. Paul Berry at University of
              Wisconsin-Madison, this project will study the species and relationships of
              Croton, one of the world's largest plant genera, with about 1,300 described
              species worldwide. This group was selected because it represents a significant
              segment of plant diversity (0.5% of all flowering plants), it is ecologically
              and medicinally important (especially in the tropics), yet the species are
              notoriously difficult to identify, and nobody has applied modern techniques to
              understand the genealogical relationships within the group. The project will
              conduct a broad molecular-based phylogenetic study of the genus, targeting
              about a fifth of the total species to determine how they relate in an
              evolutionary and geographical context. It will systematize a huge body of
              descriptive literature and specimens and provide an online database to names,
              distributions, and images of crotons. This should facilitate species
              identification and generation of regional checklists of the genus for any
              region of the world. There is a strong collaborative element in the project, as
              it will form a research network drawing upon scores of botanists worldwide who
              have worked on Croton, as well as training new students in molecular
              systematics, database management, and field work.
This project is significant
              to biology because it will provide a much better understanding of the species
              and relationships of one of the largest and least well understood groups of
              flowering plants. Croton is used medicinally, and this project could pinpoint
              promising groups in the genus for more intensive pharmacological research. In a
              broader context, the project seeks to provide an effective model on how to deal
              with other large and difficult groups of organisms - using Internet resources
              to display images, databases, and identification aids; forming a research
              network of investigators worldwide, including training of graduate and
              undergraduate students in the U.S. and other countries; and utilizing
              cutting-edge molecular tools to establish a solid scientific framework for
              naming species and establishing their genealogical relationships. In this way,
              the Croton project should contribute significantly towards the societal goal of
              cataloging and understanding global biodiversity and presenting it to the
              public in a timely fashion and in a readily accessible format.

