Title       : Genomic Studies of Blue-Light Signaling Pathways Controlling Seedling Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0212496

Award Number: 0212496
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399561             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edgar P. Spalding spalding@wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1136,1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A detailed description of the mechanisms plants use to sense and respond to
              their light environment is necessary for a complete understanding of plant
              development, which is important to those concerned with the practical uses of
              plants in agriculture and biotechnology as well as to academic researchers. The
              processes that control the growth of seedlings exposed to blue light do not
              function properly in Arabidopsis thaliana mutants that lack the cryptochrome
              photoreceptors. Understanding the molecular-level differences responsible for
              the differences in growth rates between the wild-type and cryptochrome mutant
              seedlings will lead to a better understanding of what controls the fundamental
              process of plant growth. The funding provided by this award will enable
              measurements of the expression levels of thousands of genes at once using DNA
              microarray technology at a point during the seedling's response to light that
              previous work has shown to be critical. Those genes found to differ in
              expression will be manipulated to test the hypothesis that they function in
              growth control. Finding genes that affect the rate of seedling growth in
              specific light conditions could provide plant breeders and biotechnologists
              with promising targets for their studies. In addition to such a genomic
              approach, specific hypotheses about the role of the hormone gibberellic acid in
              the phenomenon of blue-light controlled growth will be tested. Also, the role
              of calcium in the earliest phase of the response, which is mediated by the
              phototropin 1 photoreceptor, will be investigated using cell biological
              techniques.
A central theme in the experimental design is that a detailed
              understanding of the biology under study should guide the genomics experiments,
              the results of which should be brought back to the biological system for
              validation. The cycle can then be repeated. In this iterative fashion, a very
              detailed, molecular-level description of how light controls growth can be
              obtained during the next funding cycle. In the process, undergraduate,
              graduate, and postdoctoral students will receive training in modern biological
              research, which adds to the country's scientific infrastructure.


