Title       : Phylogenetics of Life History and Development in Bombycoidea [Lepidoptera]
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0212910

Award Number: 0212910
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles W. Mitter cm42@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian J. Kitching  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome C. Regier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard S. Peigler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Charles Mitter and Jerome Regier of the
              University of Maryland, Dr. Richard Peigler of the University of the Incarnate
              Word, and Dr. Ian Kitching of the Natural History Museum (London) to study the
              evolution of moths in the superfamily Bombycoidea, the silkmoths, hornworms,
              and  relatives.  A relatively new source of evidence,  DNA sequences in the
              cell nucleus that encode proteins, will be used to reconstruct the major
              branches of the phylogeny (= evolutionary tree) of these moths.  The phylogeny
              will then be used in two kinds of evolutionary studies.  The first will test
              hypotheses about the evolution of food plant use, including the postulate that
              in species evolving a short-lived, non-feeding adult moth, unlike the typical
              habit of drinking nectar with a long proboscis, the caterpillars are likely to
              feed on large, easy-to-find plant species, or on many different plant species,
              or both.  The second study will address the genetic and developmental basis of
              anatomical  "innovations" during evolution, using a novel surface structure on
              the eggshell of some wild silkmoth species as a model. 
						
This work is
              part of long-term effort to reconstruct the phylogeny of the mega-diverse
              insect order Lepidoptera (~160,000 known species).  Lepidoptera play a major
              role in terrestrial ecosystems, as herbivores, pollinators, and food for birds
              and many other animals.  They include innumerable crop pest species, and
              provide model systems for fundamental studies of ecology, genetics, and
              physiology. A reliable phylogeny will be an essential tool for organizing and
              guiding research on Lepidoptera, including the search for environmentally sound
              pest management strategies. A phylogeny is also prerequisite for understanding
              the spectacular diversification of lepidopteran species and their key
              ecological features such as specialization on different food plants.

