Title       : Importance of Buried Charges in Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0212696

Award Number: 0212696
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilyn Gunner gunner@sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A central problem in structural biology is to connect the structure of a protein
              to its function.  To accomplish this, photosynthetic reaction centers of
              photosystem I and bacterial type II, the intramembrane F0 ATPase, and
              dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) will be studied.  These are electron, proton, or
              hydride transfer proteins where residues, cofactors and/or substrates change
              charge or position during reaction.  The primary tool for analysis will be MCCE
              (Multi Conformation Continuum Electrostatics). This program, written with prior
              NSF support, combines continuum electrostatics and molecular mechanics for
              calculation of reaction free energy changes, residue pKa's and electrochemical
              midpoints (Em's). MCCE will provide the ionization state of residues and
              changes in protein conformation or ionization state that modify the reaction.
              This information will establish the structural determinates of function for
              each protein. The photosynthetic and ATPase proteins will be embedded in
              different membrane models to see how membrane structure and charge affect the
              proteins.  The role of loop motions on catalysis will be studied in DHFR. 
              Where possible, calculated pKa's and Em's for side chains and cofactors will be
              compared with experiment. Molecular dynamics will be used to generate modified
              structures and QM/MM simulations will be used to obtain new cofactor and
              substrate charge distributions.  In addition, the protein structural data bank
              will be surveyed to identify motifs that stabilize buried charges.  A data set
              of 5000 buried charges in 300 proteins will be used to characterize the
              distribution of buried ionizable residues.  Ionization states at physiological
              pH will be calculated and the aspects of the protein structure that control
              ionization will be identified. Motifs identified in the detailed
              structure/function analysis of specific proteins will be placed in context by
              comparison with data-bank statistics. Lastly, MCCE will be made easier for
              non-expert users by enhancing error reporting and analysis of the output.
              

The structural database is growing rapidly.  The next challenge would be to
              fully analyze this information to connect structure to function.  It will be
              necessary to calculate functional properties of proteins, with known
              structures, to identify most important aspects of the structure for a given
              property. The overall objective of this project is to accomplish this goal. 
              The work will be carried out at City College of New York, a school with a
              significant population of underrepresented groups. Initial protein data bank
              analysis was carried out exclusively by undergraduates.  The aim is to continue
              to integrate undergraduate training into these projects. Detailed information
              about buried acidic and basic residues and their predicted in situ pKa's will
              be distributed on the internet.

