Title       : Multi-threaded Instruction: Forming Multi-disciplinary Research Groups to
               Improve Undergraduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a0212046

Award Number: 0212046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372972             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris Rogers Crogers@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric L. Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marina Bers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Caroline Cao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Morrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of the creation of the Robotics Academy is to form a new
              multi-disciplinary, project-based teaching and learning environment for
              undergraduate students, involving students from different disciplines in the
              discovery process and exposing them to the joy of research and design through
              hands-on experience with real world problems.  The Academy will include
              students (and teachers) from multiple universities (Tufts University and
              University of Nevada, Reno), giving the students and teachers the opportunity
              to benefit from specialties at other universities, as well as to collaborate
              with others remotely over the Internet.


Under the proposed system, junior
              students from multiple disciplines (i.e., mechanical engineering, electrical
              engineering/computer science, human factors, biochemistry/chemistry, and child
              development/education) will join the Robotics Academy, completing their major
              program of studies through a pre-defined "robotics thread". The "robotics
              thread" in each discipline consists of a set of courses that introduces the
              students to robotics and how it applies to their chosen fields. During their
              two years in the Academy, they will work in a team, composed of four students
              from different disciplines, on a common robotics project. This project will
              constitute their undergraduate honors thesis.


Each multi-disciplinary
              Academy team will work on a robotic project in one of 4 areas:
              Medical
Robotics, Tele-robotics, Nanorobotics, and Robotic Toys. Medical
              robotic projects will be led by the responsible faculty in the Academy, in
              conjunction with surgeons (Tufts School of Medicine and the New England Medical
              Centre), veterinarians (with Tufts Veterinary School), or occupational
              therapists (Tufts University Boston School of Occupational Therapy). Through
              their robotics solution, students in these projects will aim to improve the
              quality of life of the patient, or improve the safety and productivity for a
              particular medical application. Tele-robotics projects will introduce students
              to concepts and applications of remote control and manipulation. This work will
              be done in conjunction with NASA scientists and will teach students about
              remote exploration. The Nanorobotics project will put students at the forefront
              of modern robotics, involving them in the cutting edge of nano-fabrication and
              control techniques. The final project area will be in the design of educational
              robotic toys. This project will build on the highly successful collaboration
              with the LEGO Corporation and the development of ROBOLAB at Tufts.


As a
              team, each team member will learn from and contribute to the process in the
              life cycle of the robotic solution. For instance, the mechanical engineering
              student will work on robot design and fabrication; the computer
              science/electrical engineering student will design the circuitry and program
              the intelligence of the robot. The human factors student will design the user
              interface to ensure safe and effective use, while the pre-service teacher on
              the team will implement the engineering education outreach efforts.


In
              addition, senior students in the Academy will act as mentors to junior students
              from another discipline.  This arrangement allows for the students to receive
              individual attention, while encouraging communication across the disciplines.
              Each senior will also be responsible for teaching one Academy Hands-On Seminar,
              an afternoon class in some practical aspect of robotics that will be useful to
              all students in the academy. For instance, a mechanical engineering senior
              might offer a course in ProEngineer and CAD, whereas a child development
              student might offer a class in cognition and learning strategies.

Five
              robotics projects are planned for the first year, with two new projects being
              introduced in each subsequent year. Progress of the proposed program will be
              assessed throughout the three years of proposed funding. Results of the
              robotics projects will be documented on the Academy website and disseminated at
              conferences. The Academy is expected to be self-sustaining after three years,
              through industrial support for individual projects.

