Title       : Characterization of the CO2 Concentrating Mechanism of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0212093

Award Number: 0212093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James V. Moroney btmoro@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Aquatic photosynthetic organisms account for almost 50% of the Earth's CO2
              fixation and O2 evolution. The fixation of CO2 by algae plays an important role
              in the global carbon cycle, and most photosynthesis in the ocean is
              accomplished by phytoplankton, single-celled photosynthetic organisms.  Carbon
              dioxide diffusion is almost 10,000 times faster in air than in water and almost
              all phytoplankton and macroalgae have a mechanism that concentrates CO2 from
              the environment for photosynthesis.  The CO2 concentrating mechanism is
              essential for photosynthesis at atmospheric levels of CO2 and for the survival
              of phytoplankton. In this study, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii will be used to
              identify components of the CO2 concentrating mechanism. C. reinhardtii will be
              used as the experimental organism since it is a simple unicellular green alga
              with a single chloroplast. C. reinhardtii also possesses a robust CO2
              concentrating system and can be grown photoautophically using CO2 as the carbon
              source or heterotrophically using acetate as the carbon source. The CO2
              concentrating mechanism of C. reinahrdtii will be studied using an insertional
              mutagenesis approach. Insertional mutagenesis allows for the direct isolation
              of genes associated with a mutant phenotype, thus permitting a genetic and
              biochemical analysis of function. 

In previous work from our laboratory, a
              large number of mutants that cannot grow on low concentrations of CO2 were
              generated by transforming C. reinhardtii cells with BleR, a gene encoding
              resistance to the antibiotic Zeocin.  In these mutants that cannot grow on low
              CO2 concentrations, we hypothesize that the inserted BleR gene has disrupted a
              gene essential to the CO2 concentrating mechanism.  We now propose to
              characterize these mutants physiologically and genetically and identify the
              interrupted genes.  Mutants exhibiting linkage of the BleR insert to poor
              growth on low CO2 will be tested for CO2 fixation and inorganic carbon
              accumulation. Once inserted into the C. reinhardtii genome, BleR offers unique
              sequences allowing the use of inverse PCR or TAIL-PCR and these methods will be
              used to identify the interrupted gene. It is expected that some of the
              insertions will be in genes encoding transport proteins or carbonic anhydrases
              required for the delivery of CO2 to the enzyme that fixes CO2,
              ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase. It is also expected that genes
              encoding proteins involved in photorespiration and the low CO2 signal
              transduction pathway will be disrupted.  The characterization of the proteins
              of the CO2 concentrating mechanism will add to our understanding of how algae
              have increased their efficiency of CO2 fixation. An understanding of this
              process will also help scientists predict how marine organisms might respond to
              increasing global CO2 concentrations.  

This research will also contribute
              to the training of students at the undergraduate and graduate level.  Graduate
              students will learn molecular biology methods and apply these methods to the
              ecophysiological question of how algae acquire CO2 for photosynthesis. 
              Undergraduates researchers will also contribute to this project, gaining
              valuable research experience.  Our research program has attracted a number of
              undergraduates from underrepresented groups and we will continue to recruit
              from these groups.  


