Title       : A Genetic and Molecular Approach to Investigating the Relationship Between Root
               and Nodule Development in the Model Legume, Medicago Truncatula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0212992

Award Number: 0212992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359951             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne Harris jmharris@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1118,9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0212992
Harris

The long-term goal of this project is to understand how
              nitrogen-fixing nodules develop on the roots of legumes.  Since nodule
              formation is a plant developmental program, and is a normal part of the
              development of most legumes, this process should be studied within the context
              of normal root development.  Why is it that only legumes form nitrogen-fixing
              nodules with rhizobia?  Perhaps a difference in development lies at the root of
              their ability to interact with rhizobia.  In particular, lateral roots have
              been proposed as a potential evolutionary precursor of nitrogen-fixing nodules,
              based on their developmental similarities. 

The immediate goal of this
              project is to examine the relationship between root development and nodulation.
               The specific aims of this project are:
1.	Determine the role of root
              development genes in the process of nodulation.
This problem will be addressed
              using a combined genetic and molecular approach.  The mutant screen for genes
              required both for nodule and root development will be continued.  In parallel,
              the expression of known root development genes will be examined in the
              developing nodule.  Finally, the phenotype of the lat1-1 mutant, identified in
              above screen, will be characterized in more detail.  
2.	Map LAT1, a gene
              required for both nodule and root development and identify genomic BAC clones
              that span this genetic interval.
LAT1 is one of the few genes currently
              identified that links lateral root development and nodule formation.  Thus this
              gene provides a tool to examine the intersection between the genetic programs
              for nodulation and root development. During the period of this project, the
              LAT1 gene will be finely mapped and genomic BAC clones spanning this interval
              identified, laying the groundwork for the future cloning of the LAT1 gene. 
              
3.	Characterize lateral root development in a legume using morphological and
              molecular markers: Are there any unique features? 
To address this question,
              molecular markers will be generated that label lateral roots at a very early
              stage and allow the observation of the marked cells through lateral root
              development.  In this way, stages of lateral root development in M. truncatula
              will be identified, and can be used as a framework to examine lateral root
              development in mutants identified in response Specific Aim 1.

