Title       : Miniature Combustor with Liquid-Fuel Film
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0212163

Award Number: 0212163
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354742             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Sirignano sirignan@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Derek Dunn-Rankin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0212163
W. Sirignano and D. Dunn-Rankin, University of
              California-Irvine
Title:  Miniature Combustor with Liquid-Fuel Film

A new
              concept is advanced for the miniaturization of direct-injection liquid-fueled
              combustors wherein the fuel is flowed in a wall film that reduces heat losses,
              optimizes vaporization rate, and inhibits quenching. The new alternative for
              high surface/volume combustors is the delivery of the liquid fuel as a film on
              the combustor surfaces.  This delivery simultaneously cools the combustor walls
              and exposes the fuel for vaporization.  A simple analysis indicates that if the
              combustor were part of a miniature engine, power levels from ten watts to ten
              kilowatts would be achievable with combustor volumes varying from a few hundred
              cubic millimeters to a few cubic centimeters and fuel flow rates varying from
              about a milligram per second to a gram per second.  The liquid-film burning
              concept extends beyond compact power devices and applies to any combustor where
              high surface-to-volume ratio is imposed or desired.  Studies analyze
              the
combustor over a range of laminar and turbulent conditions using both
              experimental and computational methods.  The goals are to maximize the
              combustor efficiency and stability while minimizing size and emissions. 
              Although proof-of-concept studies are promising, a substantial amount of
              research is needed to bring the film-combustion strategy forward.  This
              includes fundamental issues regarding swirl flows interacting with filming
              surfaces, heat transfer and vaporization under these conditions, fuel/air
              mixing in the chamber, and minimizing reaction times.  A range of technical
              issues are also examined, including fuel filming approaches (e.g., porous
              cylinders or wall sprays), moving to high pressure conditions, flame stability,
              ignition strategies, and tolerance of different fuel types.  Small combustors
              are quite sensitive to operating conditions, so it is likely that control of
              the system will be important. Control of the fuel and air flow rates, heat flux
              control through wall cooling, and swirl control are examples of potentially
              important system inputs needed to maintain optimal combustor
              performance.

The growing market of ideas that require personal power ranges
              from electronic and telecommunication equipment (e.g., cellular telephones and
              laptop computers) to small, mobile reconnaissance robots that can safely
              explore potentially hazardous environments.  Many of these lightweight devices
              demand tens of watts of power for durations on the order of tens of hours,
              thereby driving the power source considerations towards those with highest
              energy density. Because internal combustion has the potential to simultaneously
              provide high power density and high energy density, it is natural to explore
              this method of power generation. The micro-gas turbine (combustor volume
              0.04cc), the mini (0.078 cc displacement) and micro (0.0017 cc displacement)
              rotary engine , the microrocket (0.1 cc combustion chamber) , and the micro
              Swiss roll
burner  are examples of such exploration. These devices are not yet
              performing at efficiencies that make them competitive with the best available
              batteries, but they have demonstrated the plausibility of internal combustion
              as a personal power source.

