Title       : International Symbiosis Society Congress Support, August 17-23, 2003, Saint
               Mary's University, Halifax, Nova Scotia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0212896

Award Number: 0212896
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas Zook dzook@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1182,1305,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
The International Symbiosis Society based at Boston University requests
              support for the
planning and convening of its next scientific research
              Congress set for August 17 - 23,
2003 at Saint Mary's University, Halifax,
              Nova Scotia. Five hundred participants are expected, most working in specific
              symbiotic systems such as mycorrhizae-plant interactions, endophytic fungi and
              grasses, nitrogen fixing bacteria/cyanobacteria and their hosts, hermatypic
              corals and dinoflagellates, lichens, insect and rumen gut microfauna,
              Azolla/Oryza sativa growth enhancement, and orchid ecology.

Keynote
              speakers/leaders for the symposia include David Read, U. of Sussex,
              UK;
Birgitta Bergman, Stockholm U.; Margaret McFall-Ngai, U. of Hawaii; Angela
              Douglas,York
U., UK; Jan Sapp, U. of Montreal; Lynn Margulis, U. of
              Massachusetts; and Ove
Hoegh-Guldberg, Queensland U., Australia, among others.
              Congress organizers are Society
President Douglas Zook biologist and science
              educator at Boston University and who is the
P.I., and David Richardson, Dean
              of Science and lichenologist at Saint Mary's University,
Halifax.

The
              Society is particularly unique in that it by its very nature it builds
              bridges
among biologists/ecologists who would otherwise remain separated.
              Therefore, the main
objective of the Congress is to provide a special world
              forum where symbiologists can
optimally exchange knowledge and ideas. Also,
              its dialogue and outcomes will contribute to
a greater understanding of global
              ecology, regional ecosystem function, and cell biology;
encourage involvement
              in ecology in general and symbiosis in particular by students; and,
actively
              promote content and curriculum enhancement in symbiosis for both pre-college
              and
university teachers.

A focus theme of the Congress will be global
              threats to keystone symbionts, such as
bleaching of zooxanthellae, lichen
              susceptibility to sulfur dioxide and related emissions,
and the demise of
              larger symbiont-containing foraminifera. This theme further emphasizes
the
              deep but often ignored role symbiosis plays in earth systems and human
              society.
Agriculture, forestry, biome establishment, restoration ecology,
              coral reef existence, and
fundamental understandings of the eukarya cell are
              all substantiually dependent on
symbiosis.

More then fifty per cent of the
              funds for the Congress will be covered by registrant
fees and some projected
              private corporate support. The ISS seeks additional support from
the NSF to
              help defray travel costs for graduate students; to provide travel and
              related
support for featured speakers; to assist teacher attendance and
              support a symbiosis
teacher workshop at the Congress; and to cover costs of
              key publications, such as special
editions of the ISS newsletter, Symbiosis
              International, which will highlight Congress
announcements, conference
              schedule booklet, and the Congress abstract book.
Ongoing post-Congress
              contact will be mainained through a web exchange network on the
ISS web sites
              (Congress web site is http://people.bu.edu/dzook/), and selected papers
              from
the Congress will be published during 2004 in a special issue of the ISS
              affiliated
journal, Symbiosis, published out of Tel Aviv.

