Title       : New Hydrogen Bonding Modules for Supramolecular Polymer Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0212772

Award Number: 0212772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $445000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven C. Zimmerman sczimmer@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this work are to develop DNA base-pair analogs which can self
              assemble (using hydrogen bonding) into oligomers and polymers that adopt
              defined three dimensional structures.  They will start this investigation by
              preparing new base-pair analogs and study the structural factors that determine
              base-pair stability.  They will also work to develop a model to predict analog
              base-pair stability.  Oligomers and polymers of these base pair analogs will
              then be synthesized with the goal being the preparation of self assembled
              polymers which can equilibrate between folded and sheet-like structures. 
              Molecules which can use light to accomplish this equilibration are particularly
              desirable and will be studied in detail.  These self assembling polymeric
              materials may have properties, such as self healing, which are not currently
              available with traditional covalently bonded polymers.  The incorporation of
              these small molecules with defined hydrogen bonding capabilities into bulk
              commerical polymers may one day lead to higher performance materials.

With
              this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
              research of Dr. Steven C. Zimmerman of the Department of Chemistry at the
              University of Illinois.  Dr. Zimmerman and his students will work on the
              development of DNA base-pair analogs which can self assemble into oligomers and
              polymers that adopt defined three dimensional structures.  Polymers of these
              base-pair analogs will then be prepared with the goal being the preparation of
              self assembled polymers which can equilibrate between folded and sheet-like
              structures.  Molecules which can use light to accomplish this equilibration are
              particularly desirable and will be studied in detail.  These self assembling
              polymeric materials may have properties, such as self healing, which are not
              currently available with traditional covalently bonded polymers.  The
              incorporation of these small molecules with defined hydrogen bonding
              capabilities into bulk commerical polymers may one day lead to higher
              performance materials.  Students trained during the course of this
              interdisciplinary work will gain skills needed by the pharmaceutical, polymer
              and speciality chemicals industries. 




