Title       : The Enriched Learning Environment Model: A Community for Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0212293

Award Number: 0212293
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald F. Elger delger@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin M. Odom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Trevisan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven W. Beyerlein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald M. Blackketter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed work seeks to create a new way to educate prospective engineers.
              This idea is founded on the concepts of an enriched learning environment, which
              is a system of education that provides an interconnected focus on the learner,
              on the teaching process, on discipline knowledge and on the community. Specific
              aims are to

1. Create a change process that leads faculty towards the ideas
              embodied in the enriched
learning environment model. This task will involve a
              set of ongoing workshops (2-4 per
year) facilitated by specialists in faculty
              development. Workshops will be interdisciplinary with participation from
              disciplines such as engineering, education, mathematics, and English.
2.
              Create a mentor program, organized in tiers. A professor mentors a limited
              number of
experienced mentors, each an undergraduate. Experienced mentors
              supervise beginning
mentors, and the mentors guide students in engineering
              classes.
3. Design and build a creativity incubator, the Idaho Mind Works.
              Patterned after the highly successful Idaho Engineering Works (IEWorks), the
              Idaho Mind Works will be located in a physical space that promotes social,
              cultural and experiential learning.
4. Implement the enriched learning
              environment model in engineering science, lab and design classes.
5. Gather
              validated evidence that informs the relevant scientific and educational
              communities of the results of this research.

This project will create a
              prototype of a new engineering education system-one that is based on new
              assumptions and foundations. Knowledge will be documented and disseminated,
              including transfer to an innovative company that specializes in faculty
              development.

Intellectual Merit. While ideas of the enriched learning
              environment have been achieved in some classrooms, this proposal seeks change
              across a community of educators.  The proposed objectives are each an extension
              of significant ongoing work, and the project team contains engineering
              educators, assessment specialists and personnel from the College of Education. 
              Through commitment from faculty and students across disciplines, the proposed
              work will create an environment based on inquiry, investigation, and discovery,
              where faculty and students learn and research together.  In addition, the
              proposal team seeks to reduce the cost of education and to develop a method for
              transferring the enriched learning environment model to other universities.
To
              improve quality while decreasing costs is the way of the engineer--this
              proposal is founded on the belief that this is possible.

