Title       : Integration of Axial and Appendicular Function in a Model Mammalian System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a0212141

Award Number: 0212141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $361437             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Carrier carrier@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Vertebrate biologists have often studied the axial and appendicular
              musculoskeletal systems as though they were independent entities. Increasingly,
              however, evidence is emerging that provides a clear illustration that an
              atomistic approach to the musculoskeletal system can be misleading. For
              example, recent attempts to 1) document and understand a possible mechanical
              constraint on simultaneous running and breathing in ectothermic tetrapods; 2)
              document the extent to which locomotion interferes with venous return to the
              heart; 3) unravel the nature and causes of back injury and pain in humans; and
              4) identify and test possible locomotor and ventilatory functions of the
              epaxial and hypaxial muscles have been limited by our understanding of how the
              extrinsic appendicular muscles load the trunk. If we seek to understand the
              function and evolution of the vertebrate musculoskeletal system, it is clear
              that we cannot examine the axial and appendicular systems separately.
The work
              outlined in this proposal will monitor muscle activity under controlled
              manipulations of locomotor forces to determine: 1) how the extrinsic muscles of
              the pectoral and pelvic limbs load the axial musculoskeletal system during
              steady state locomotion, and 2) how the axial muscles stabilize the trunk
              against the locomotor loads imposed by the extrinsic appendicular muscles. The
              rationale of the method is that changes in a particular aspect of the locomotor
              forces must be met by correlated changes in the recruitment of the muscles
              responsible for the locomotor force. Hence, correlated changes in locomotor
              force and muscle recruitment are interpreted to reflect a functional role for
              the muscle being examined. 
At a fundamental level, the information we gain
              from this work on dogs will be applicable to tetrapods in general and to
              mammals. First, the basal running gait of tetrapods was a trot. Although there
              is much variation in body configuration, level of work produced by the axial
              musculoskeletal system, and integration of running and breathing, the basic
              mechanics of trotting appear to be largely uniform across tetrapods. Hence, an
              understanding of the interaction and function of the axial and appendicular
              muscles of trotting dogs should also provide insight to that of other groups of
              tetrapods as well. Second, bounding gaits such as the gallop characterize the
              locomotion of mammals. Improving our understanding of how locomotor forces are
              transferred between the limbs and trunk and how the trunk is stabilized during
              galloping in dogs can be expected to provide insight to mammalian body design
              and locomotion. 


