Title       : Influence of Host Genotype and Growth Traits on Mycorrhizal Community Structure
               in Loblolly Pine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0212892

Award Number: 0212892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary A. Topa mat8@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boyce Thompson Institute
	      1 Tower Road
	      Ithaca, NY  148531801    607/254-1225

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The biotic and abiotic interactions that occur between roots and the soil
              rhizosphere environment are easily the most complex and least understood
              interactions in plants.  Roots of many trees, in particular pines, are usually
              colonized by a large number of mycorrhizal species that are generally regarded
              as beneficial to both the host and fungus.  Mycorrhizas generally improve
              access to limiting soil nutrient and water resources, and offer protective
              benefits against root pathogens, in exchange for the tree's carbon.  However,
              the association can become less beneficial and even parasitic when tree
              development or environmental conditions results in carbon costs becoming
              greater than benefits, or when fungal genotypes do not form beneficial
              associations with the host genotype.  Loblolly pine (Pinus taeda L.), the most
              widely-planted tree species in the Atlantic Coastal Plain, has co-evolved a
              high dependency on ectomycorrhizal associations because its natural range
              includes dry soils that are P- and/or N-deficient.  However, rates of
              colonization by individual fungal species are dynamic, mediated by a hierarchy
              of biotic and abiotic factors at the rhizosphere, community and ecosystem
              levels, with some fungal species more beneficial to the tree than others. 
              Since roots of an individual tree can be colonized by 20-35 different
              ectomycorrhizal species, it is the tree genotype + fungal community interaction
              with its soil environment that determines the potential functioning of
              mycorrhizal roots along this mutualism-parasitism continuum.  
Elucidating the
              roles that mycorrhizal biodiversity plays in tree physiology and growth, and in
              the carbon/nutrient cycles of forested ecosystems are essential for predicting
              soil carbon sequestration under various global climate change scenarios.  Our
              experiments are designed to test the hypothesis that there is a wide variation
              in how roots respond to their environment because tree origin (i.e. ecotype)
              and growth traits influence fungal diversity and mycorrhizal community
              structure.  We are using molecular identification techniques to characterize
              mycorrhizal species diversity and community structure in ten families of
              loblolly pine, and to determine whether specific mycorrhizal communities are
              associated with faster tree growth.  The proposed research represents a
              mid-career training opportunity for the PI in an exciting new methodology and
              area of root research, and will also train a postdoctoral associate.  In
              addition, Dr. Topa's lab will participate in a local outreach program (New
              Visions: Explorations in the Biological Sciences) that is designed for
              college-bound high school seniors who have a strong interest in research and
              experimentation in the biological sciences.

