Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Psycholinguistic Approach to Second Language
               Reading
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0212571

Award Number: 0212571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11622              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith F. Kroll JFK7@PSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Judith Kroll, Ms. Ana Schwartz will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. Her research will examine reading in a second
              language. For many bilinguals, reading proficiency in a second language does
              not reach the same level of fluency as in the first language. One reason for
              this might be that word recognition processes are not as automatic in the
              second language as they are in the first language. Further, when reading in a
              second language, bilinguals are unable to "turn off" some information from
              their first language. The competition between the two languages makes it
              difficult for the second language reader to ignore first language influences.
              Ms. Schwartz will investigate how bilingual readers use sentence context to
              negotiate the competition between their two languages. One set of experiments
              uses response time measures to ask what type of information is available during
              reading in the second language. A second set of experiments uses eye movement
              measures to ask when that information is available. These experiments will
              involve English-Spanish and Spanish-English bilinguals, as well as a
              monolingual comparison group. An additional set of measures will assess the
              degree to which the answers to these research questions are affected by
              individual differences in the ability to allocate cognitive resources during
              reading. 

This research contributes to the development of more comprehensive
              models of the reading process. It also has important implications for how
              reading is taught in multi-lingual classrooms. Given the increasing number of
              students in American schools whose first language is not English, and the
              central importance that reading holds for academic success, it is critical to
              understand the cognitive characteristics of second language reading. 

