Title       : Morphogenetic Domains and Signaling Centers in Zebrafish Organizer Endoderm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0212258

Award Number: 0212258
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Cooper mscooper@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this study is to determine the morphological transformations and
              inductive signaling functions of Zebrafish Organizer Endoderm during embryonic
              axis formation. 
The zebrafish Nieuwkoop Center (inducer of dorsal cell fate
              in the Organizer Region), as well as a putative signaling center involved in
              head induction, are thought to reside in the dorsal Yolk Syncytial Layer (YSL)
              (i.e. the dorsal cortex) of the zebrafish embryo's giant endodermal yolk cell.
              During blastulation and gastrulation, several hundred YSL nuclei within the
              zebrafish syncytial yolk cell undergo highly-organized morphogenetic movements.
               These movements may serve to spatially transform and translocate early-acting
              inductive signaling centers located within the dorsal YSL.  Laser photoablation
              will be used to selectively inactivate specific domains of
              fluorescently-labeled dorsal YSL nuclei, to determine whether putative
              signaling centers in the dorsal YSL actually induce and/or maintain gene
              expression in the overlying zebrafish blastoderm

Actomyosin-based
              contractility within the YSL may serve to drive directional flows of (i) YSL
              nuclei, (ii) the YSL plasma membrane, as well as (iii) mesendodermal cells that
              are directly attached to the YSL plasma membrane. Cytoskeletal inhibitors will
              be applied to the YSL to test for these putative mechanical interactions. In
              separate experiments, the blastoderm will be mechanically removed from the yolk
              cell to determine whether the yolk cell is capable of expressing its
              characteristic morphogenetic domains without inductive or mechanical influences
              from the blastoderm. These combined experiments will determine the extent to
              which the morphogenesis of the endodermal yolk cell is coupled to the overlying
              blastoderm.  

The morphogenesis of the zebrafish yolk cell will also be
              examined in double mutant embryos that are deficient in cellular endoderm and
              dorsal mesoderm.  By studying YSL morphogenesis in mutants with these specific
              genetic deficiencies, altered morphogenetic movements of YSL nuclei may be
              identified and linked to failed gene expression. NEM/forerunner cells, a small
              endocytic cellular domain derived from the putative zebrafish Nieuwkoop Center,
              have recently been implicated in the establishment of right-left asymmetry in
              the zebrafish embryo.  Experiments will be performed to determine whether
              secreted signals from the dorsal YSL and/or Eph/ephrin interactions are
              involved in the endocytic and morphogenetic behaviors of the endodermal
              NEM/forerunner cell cluster.  

The results of the above project should
              reveal (1) the sequence of endodermal cell behaviors that are involved in the
              morphological transformation the zebrafish dorsal axis, and (2) whether the
              signaling activities of the dorsal YSL and associated NEM/forerunner cells play
              roles in organizing zebrafish morphogenesis.  Resolving these issues will
              contribute to a fundamental understanding of the sequence of endodermal cell
              behaviors involved in the construction of a vertebrate Organizer Region, as
              well as the restructuring of germ layers that lie near the Organizer Region
              during the course of gastrulation and segmentation.
