Title       : Advanced Computing and Programming in the Mechanical Engineering Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0212201

Award Number: 0212201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255662             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brianno D. Coller coller@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ugo A. Buy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Francis Loth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Scott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is the meaningful integration of advanced
              computing knowledge and techniques into the undergraduate mechanical
              engineering curriculum. The vehicle for this integration is the creation of an
              innovative and engaging advanced computing track or specialization for
              mechanical engineering students. The first implementation will be at the
              University of Illinois at Chicago; however, the project will be developed for
              portability, so that deliverables, especially a new capstone course, will
              greatly aid other schools in implementing curricular changes tailored to their
              particular needs. It will thus impact students well beyond the UIC
              campus.

The project is motivated by the lasting roles that computing and
              information technologies have claimed in mechanical engineering: embedded
              microprocessors have become commonplace in engineered systems, and the
              enterprise of engineering design and testing have been migrating to virtual and
              simulated environments.  These trends underscore the fact that good computing
              practice is becoming as important to engineers as good laboratory practice and
              sound mathematics.

The proposal addresses the fact that the undergraduate
              engineer's training in programming has evolved little over the last few
              decades. And, while students are being exposed to powerful commercial software
              tools at an increasing rate, the underlying fundamental computational
              principles are generally overlooked.

The proposed project may be summarized
              by the following list of outcomes, which will be assessed by an independent
              evaluator to determine if the activity is a success:

Outcome # 1: Instill
              advanced computing and programming skills. Mechanical engineering students will
              learn skills and concepts that are normally only taught to computer scientists:
              object-oriented programming, data structures, algorithm design, graphical
              interfaces, large scale scientific computing, and more. A capstone course,
              which constitutes the centerpiece of the proposal, will integrate the computer
              science topics with mechanical engineering science and mechanical engineering
              design.

Outcome # 2: Develop better engineers. Although students will be
              learning computer science, the goal is to make them better engineers. Since
              engineers can only use what they know, the investigators hypothesize that these
              students will be better equipped for the information age, recognizing how IT
              tools and concepts can be used and exploited in the design of mechanical and
              thermal/fluid devices and systems.

Outcome #3: Engage minority middle school
              students. The investigators capitalize on great opportunities for middle school
              students to participate in the project in a meaningful way: as pilots of
              virtual aircraft the undergraduates design. The students are exposed to the
              exciting world of engineering, learning the important roles of high-level
              mathematics and physics.

Outcome #4: Create a portable product. The final
              objective of the project is to create a deliverable: the foundation for an
              advanced computing track that mechanical engineering departments at other
              institutions may adopt and adapt to suit their own purposes with relative ease
              and little cost. The capstone course, in particular, can be used for this
              purpose. We shall produce a considerable amount of software infrastructure  and
              educational materials to distribute freely over the web and we have a strategy
              to publicize it.

The investigators' areas of expertise span much of the
              broad discipline of mechanical engineering. The team is complemented by a
              computer scientist, a specialist in software engineering. They are
              well-positioned to create the valuable educational experience for mechanical
              engineering undergraduates at UIC and beyond.
0

