Title       : LTREB: The Population and Community Dynamics of Desert Winter Annuals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0212782

Award Number: 0212782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Lawrence Venable venable@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0212782
Venable
This LTREB proposal is to extend the continuous record of
              population and community dynamics
of desert winter annual plants on permanent
              plots at a Sonoran Desert site at the Desert
Laboratory near Tucson, AZ, USA.
              It will clarify and extend the understanding of demographic
variation and
              covariation and its role in population and community processes. Data
              on
germination, survival and reproduction of desert annual plants will be
              continuously monitored on
long-term plots established from 10 to 19 years ago
              at locations both under shrub canopies and in
the open at this field station.
              Delayed germination and between year seed carry over are thought
to be
              important for the persistence of desert annuals, so the magnitude of the soil
              seed reserves
will be monitored and determine what fraction germinate in each
              year for each species under
shrubs and in the open. Seeds will be separated
              from standardized soil samples and tested for
viability. The results of this
              research will be analyzed together with weather data to determine
how climatic
              variation determines population variation for these annual plant species.
              The
investigators will then construct population and community models of this
              desert annual system.
These models will be used to explore the role of soil
              seed banks in buffering populations in the
face of environmental variation.
              They will also be used to investigate how life history
differences among
              species promote their coexistence and species diversity.
Desert annual plants
              have played an important role as model organisms in the development of
              our
understanding of how organisms adapt to variable and unpredictable
              environments. They have
also been used to exemplify ideas about
              non-equilibrium community dynamics in variable
environments. Yet their
              dynamics are not well known empirically, especially the behavior of
seeds.
              This project will provide the best available long-term data for evaluating
              these ideas.
There has been considerable theoretical and experimental work
              carried out on the evolutionary
ecology, population ecology and community
              ecology of this system. Such combinations of
theoretical and experimental work
              with long-term observations are proving to be a powerful
approach to yield new
              insights and syntheses in plant ecology.
This research will further the goal
              of combining research and education by virtue of occurring in
the academic
              environment of a major research university. Graduate and undergraduate
              students
will be involved in capacities that fosters hands-on training and
              research experience that
complements formal coursework. Ph.D., Masters, and
              undergraduate honors projects will be
facilitated as part of or offshoots of
              this research. REU support will be sought for related
undergraduate projects.
              In the first phase of this research more than half of the undergraduate
and
              graduate participants in this project were women and an attempt will be made to
              include a
high percentage of women in the proposed research. The PI will
              endeavor to include
underrepresented ethnic and cultural groups in this
              research by working with minority access
programs on campus.
