Title       : Coordinating Developmental Gene Expression in Myxococcus Xanthus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0212052

Award Number: 0212052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony G. Garza aggarza@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Multicellular development depends on cell-cell signaling and the consequences of
              this dialogue between cells, which are often large-scale changes in gene
              expression. Hence, a fundamental goal of developmental biologists is to
              determine how cell-cell signals orchestrate global changes in gene
              transcription. The multicellular nature of the Myxococcus xanthus developmental
              cycle makes it an excellent model system for studying this basic problem in
              developmental biology. During M. xanthus development, large groups of cells
              migrate to focal points and begin constructing a multicellular structure called
              a fruiting body. Once the fruiting body is molded into its final form, cells
              inside this structure differentiate into dormant, stress-resistant spores. Many
              M. xanthus genes are developmentally regulated, and cell-cell signaling is
              required for the temporal expression of these genes. However, what happens
              between production of these cell-cell signals and transcription of
              developmental genes has remained relatively uncharted territory. This project
              focuses on a family of proteins that play a prominent role in regulating these
              coordinated changes in gene expression, the NtrC family of transcriptional
              activators. It has been proposed that M. xanthus uses a series of NtrC-like
              proteins to activate expression of specific sets of genes at specific times in
              development; seven different NtrC-like activators that are required for
              development have been uncovered. Using genetic and biochemical approaches, this
              research project will examine the role that NtrC-like activators play in
              orchestrating developmental gene expression in M. xanthus.
