Title       : Biodiversity Inventory of Asian Genera of Convolvulaceae (Morning Glory Family)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0212762

Award Number: 0212762
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204564             (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Staples gstaples@bishopmuseum.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bernice P Bishop Museum
	      1525 Bernice Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968172704    808/847-3511

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Convolvulaceae (morning glory family) is a moderate-size family (50-60
              genera, 2000 species worldwide) of mostly tropical plants, which has received
              only sporadic attention from taxonomists. Consequently, the identity of species
              and the classification of these into reliably identifiable genera are
              problematic. A specialist on the group, Dr. George Staples of the Bishop Museum
              in Hawaii, is studying the mostly Asian members of the family, focusing
              especially on the genera Operculina, Rivea, and Blinkworthia. If this process
              of verifying purportedly new taxa could be streamlined then the completion of a
              global biodiversity inventory could be expedited through greater efficiency of
              research effort.  The activities include the compilation of an
              Internet-accessible and authenticated nomenclator for all described taxa of
              Convolvulaceae in tropical and subtropical Asia (Pakistan east to the
              Philippines and China south to Queensland, Australia). Where a genus has an
              accepted classification and the taxonomy has been reconciled with recently
              collected specimens housed in the major museum collections, those species and
              infraspecific taxon names will be incorporated into the nomenclator. Where no
              accepted classification exists (the genera Argyreia, Merremia, and
              Jacquemontia), revisionary work will commence on the Asian taxa, as a basis for
              worldwide treatments later. Special research attention will be paid to early
              scientific names (usually by European taxonomists) that have not been taken
              into account in contemporary classifications. The nomenclator will endeavor to
              trace all scientific names and provide their current disposition, with
              documentation via literature and selected specimen citations.
This research
              will be carried out primarily in European and British herbaria and libraries,
              with recourse to specimen loans for more detailed study at the PI's home
              institution. The products will be a series of taxonomic revisions that provide
              better methods of taxonomic identification, improve classification at the
              specific, generic, and tribal levels, and contribute to nomenclatural reform.
              The nomenclator itself will provide the first inventory of Asian taxa of
              Convolvulaceae.  And the process for creating the nomenclator will shed light
              onto how the process for taxonomic verification of new, undescribed species can
              be made more efficient and thereby enhance the taxonomic enterprise.

