Title       : Understanding Maternal Effects in a Natural Population of a Long-Lived Organism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0212935

Award Number: 0212935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fredric J. Janzen fjanzen@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rachel M. Bowden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              In several major groups of vertebrate animals, offspring sex is determined
              permanently by environmental temperatures experienced during embryonic
              development. Little is understood about the importance of many aspects of this
              phenomenon (known as TSD). The roles of genetic and nongenetic maternal
              effects, like reproductive physiology and behavior under natural conditions,
              are particularly in need of critical evaluation. The proposed research will
              investigate several significant maternal aspects of the biology of TSD in a
              natural population of long-lived vertebrates that has been studied in detail
              since 1988: (1) the impact of maternally-derived yolk hormones and how such
              hormones might vary with maternal age, (2) the genetically inherited component
              of nesting behavior of females with TSD, and (3) the genetically inherited
              component of offspring sex determination under TSD.

These questions will be
              addressed with a series of multi-year field and laboratory projects. A team of
              postdoctoral and student researchers will gather crucial new physiological,
              behavioral, and genetic data. The research team will study animals from a
              natural population during nesting events. Vegetation cover over nests, which
              accurately predicts offspring sex ratio, and nesting date will be recorded.
              Data will then be obtained for offspring sex ratio for each nest, and
              incubation temperature, yolk hormone levels in eggs, and offspring paternity
              for a focal subset of nests. The findings of this research will have important
              implications for the impacts of climate change and human habitat use on the
              biology and conservation of species with TSD. This research program will also
              provide extensive educational opportunities for numerous students (including
              underrepresented minorities, persons with disabilities, and women) and the
              public.


