Title       : Urochordate Origins of Neural Crest and Muscle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0212110

Award Number: 0212110
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Jeffery WJ33@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0212110
Jeffery

Little is known about the origins of vertebrate features in
              the Phylum Chordata.  Here, the focus is on aspects of urochordate development
              that are expected to shed new light on this important problem in evolution and
              development.  The overall goal is to assess the origins of two key vertebrate
              features in the ascidian urochordates: (1) migratory neural crest cells and (2)
              larval musculature specified by inductive processes.  The ascidian species used
              in contemporary developmental biology (e. g., Ciona, Molgula, Styela, and
              Halocynthia) exhibit rapidly developing, highly streamlined tadpole larvae. 
              These derived larva appear to lack migratory neural crest cells and contain
              only about 40 tail muscle cells, which are primarily specified by localized
              cytoplasmic determinants.  The streamlined tadpoles, which have evolved for
              rapid dispersal, are not representative of most ascidian larvae.  Most ascidian
              species have larger, slowly developing tadpoles with more complex heads and
              robust tails, which are likely to represent the true ancestral state. 
              Accordingly, Dr. Jeffery will introduce here the ascidian Ecteinascidia
              turbinata as an experimental system to study the origin of key vertebrate
              features in the urochordates.  Ecteinascidia, a close relative of Ciona, has a
              giant tadpole larva exhibiting a head with preformed siphon rudiments, enlarged
              sensory organs, and pharyngeal gill slits, and a robust tail with 1134 muscle
              cells.  The development of ascidians with highly differentiated tadpoles has
              been virtually ignored and is ripe for analysis using modern technologies.  The
              Ecteinascidia system will permit him to combine a variety of experimental
              embryological and molecular approaches, including use of ongoing Ciona genomic
              and EST databases, to study the evolution of development.  This proposal
              specifically addresses neural crest and muscle development in Ecteinascidia
              embryos.  First, he will determine whether Ecteinascidia embryos have migratory
              cells homologous to vertebrate neural crest cells using a combination of vital
              dye and gene marking studies.  He already has strong evidence from DiI marking
              experiments that migratory neural crest-like cells are present.  He will
              determine the embryonic sources, regional migration patterns, and developmental
              fates of the neural crest-like cells, and compare their properties to
              vertebrate neural crest cells.  Second, he will determine whether the
              development of tail muscle cells in Ecteinascidia is controlled by cytoplasmic
              determinants, the predominant means of tail muscle specification in ascidians
              with streamlined larvae, or by inductive processes, the method of muscle
              specification characteristic of vertebrates.  These studies will be carried out
              by a combination of cell lineage tracing, in situ mRNA and protein
              localization, and blastomere isolation and recombination.  The intellectual
              merit of these studies is that they will provide new information on the
              evolutionary history of neural crest cells and the mechanisms of tail muscle
              development in the urochordates.  The broader impacts of the proposed activity
              is that it will address the origin of key vertebrate features in the Phylum
              Chordata and focus our future attention on particular chordate or non-chordate
              groups in order to chart the evolutionary beginnings of the complex vertebrate
              body plan.  Finally, the research is planned to foster general education in
              research by incorporating undergraduate students into the investigative
              process. 


