Title       : Small RNAs in Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a0212189

Award Number: 0212189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $378453             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth S. Kosik kosik@cnd.bwh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham & Womens Hosp Inc
	      75 Francis Street
	      Boston, MA  021156195    617/525-3160

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Nerve cells, or neurons, extend complex branches that communicate with many
              other neurons by sending and capturing signals at functional contacts called
              synapses, specialized small sites where membranes of two nerve cells are very
              close together.  When the presynaptic cell is active, chemical
              neurotransmitters are released to act on the post-synaptic cell membrane, to
              excite or inhibit activity in the postsynaptic cell.  A single neuron can have
              thousands of synapses with hundreds or thousands of other neurons in the brain,
              and each synapse is potentially capable of changing its efficacy in
              transmitting signals.  It is believed that a fundamental mechanism underlying
              neural functions such as memory formation is a strengthening of synapses
              through repeated activity.  That strengthening requires synthesis of new
              proteins, which probably remodel the synapse.  Recently a subcellular neuronal
              organelle called an RNA granule has been suggested to harbor messenger RNA
              (mRNA) molecules that provide templates for such remodeling proteins, with
              translocation and release of this mRNA locally at activated synapses in
              response to neural depolarization.  This project uses molecular biological
              techniques on cultured neurons to define the functional roles of specific RNA
              granule proteins in a novel conceptual framework.  First, the new RNAi
              (RNA-interference) technique allows selective inactivation or 'knock-down' of
              specific gene expression, and is used to investigate the role of a particular
              granule protein called Staufen, to see how it is involved in granule assembly. 
              Second, micro-RNAs (miRNA) are a type of short RNA that can regulate gene
              expression post-transcriptionally, so miRNAs in the granule will be identified
              to see how they might modify the local protein synthesis.  
   This project
              has some technological risks, but potentially very high impact, because results
              will be important for understanding molecular mechanisms of modifying neural
              functions, and so of networks involved in memory and learning.  The impact is
              likely to extend beyond neuroscience to cell biology and physiology in general.
               The project also continues active involvement of this highly regarded PI with
              training a postdoctoral researcher, with international collaborations, and with
              public outreach.


