Title       : CRB: Effects of Harvesting and White-Tailed Deer Browsing on Demography and
               Population Viability of American Ginseng
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2002      
File        : a0212411

Award Number: 0212411
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. McGraw   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0212411
McGraw

American ginseng an uncommon perennial plant native to the
              eastern deciduous forest.  Harvest of natural populations occurs in response to
              demand for roots of this slow-growing, medicinally active plant from the Asian
              market.  Its harvest by rural, often poor, Appalachian people serves several
              economic, social and cultural functions.  Multiple lines of evidence suggest
              ginseng as a natural resource of our forests has declined in both abundance and
              stature over the past two centuries.  Ginseng is potentially a victim of a dual
              problem - one caused by competition among harvesters for the root, and a second
              caused by collateral effects of too many white-tailed deer.  The federal
              government, in cooperation with states, is required to certify the
              sustainability of harvest since ginseng is listed on Appendix II of CITES (the
              Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species).  However, no
              standardized monitoring procedure, demographic statistics, or population
              viability estimates are available for ginseng in the U.S.  The primary goal of
              this research is to fill this gap by assessing population growth rates,
              diagnosing causes of low population growth rates where they occur (focusing on
              harvest and browsing as possible factors), and evaluating possible
              prescriptions for reversing population decline.  This study will also provide a
              prognosis for ginseng in terms of extinction probabilities as they may vary
              with management schemes.  Natural ginseng populations from a four-state area
              (Indiana, Kentucky, Virginia, and West Virginia) will be studied over a
              four-year period (2002 - 2005), continuing a data collection process begun in
              2000. Using the analysis and modeling tools of population biology, the research
              goals described above will be addressed. 

This research will be the most
              extensive, in-depth effort to evaluate the status and potential conservation
              strategies for ginseng to date.  The research has the potential to impact tens
              of thousands of ginseng harvesters as well as numerous local, state, and
              federal land managers and regulatory agencies.  In the science of conservation
              biology and population biology, the example of ginseng could become a model for
              how knowledge of population biology can be applied to preserve both a native
              plant species and the cultural traditions that have developed around that
              species.  Undergraduate and graduate student involvement with research on this
              charismatic native plant will develop further expertise and interest in
              conservation biology. 



