Title       : Intramolecular Dynamics of Organic Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0212149

Award Number: 0212149
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry K. Carpenter bkc1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              Barry K. Carpenter, of the Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology at
              Cornell University, is studying the intramolecular dynamics of organic
              reactions. Through a combination of ab initio electronic structure theory,
              molecular dynamics simulations, and experimental organic chemistry, Professor
              Carpenter addresses the question of what factors control the behavior of
              reactive intermediates, including radical ions, carbenes, and biradicals,
              generated in thermal and photochemical reactions. Specific questions under
              investigation include what controls the behavior of molecules that encounter
              bifurcation points on their reaction paths; what controls the potential energy
              well depth in which an intermediate finds itself, and how does the reaction
              dynamics depend on the well depth; what theoretical methods can be developed to
              allow nonexperts to explore the dynamic issues of an organic reaction
              mechanism; and what kinds of experimental evidence provide the clearest
              distinction between traditional transition state theory (TST) behavior and
              behavior governed by non-TST dynamics.

Development of a detailed,
              fundamental understanding of how organic reactions occur requires a combination
              of experimental and theoretical/calculational approaches, with theory
              suggesting important molecules for synthesis and study and with the study of
              various organic reactions in turn suggesting theoretical approaches and/or
              advances necessary to understand them. Professor Barry K. Carpenter, of the
              Deparment of Chemistry and Chemical Biology at Cornell University, carries out
              both synthetic and theoretical studies designed to address the reactivity of
              highly reactive intermediates, of only fleeting existence, generated in the
              course of chemical reactions. Through these studies, Professor Carpenter
              contributes to our fundamental understanding of how molecules react and
              provides calculational tools applicable by others in the continuing advancement
              of knowledge about organic chemical reactions.
