Title       : Identification of Targets of Apetala3 and Pistillata Floral Homeotic Gene Action
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0212222

Award Number: 0212222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vivian F. Irish vivian.irish@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0212222
Irish, V.F.

Floral organs arise as lateral outgrowths from the
              florally determined meristem, and differentiate with distinct identities.  The
              specification of these organs as sepals, petals, stamens or carpels depends on
              the action of several floral homeotic genes which act as master regulators of
              these developmental pathways.  Two such genes, APETALA3 (AP3) and PISTILLATA
              (PI), encode MADS domain-containing transcription factors that regulate the
              specification of petal and stamen identity in Arabidopsis. The proposed work
              will focus on identifying other genes involved in petal and stamen development,
              with a particular emphasis on identifying several candidate target genes
              regulated by AP3 and PI. The analysis of such genes can serve as a model for
              dissecting the genetic hierarchies by which particular organs and tissue types
              are specified during plant development. 

In order to identify a set of
              target genes regulated in vivo by these transcription factors, Dr. Irish
              proposes three complementary approaches.  Microarray analyses comparing the
              expression of a set of Arabidopsis ESTs  in various mutant backgrounds will be
              carried out in order to define those genes that are up- or down-regulated in
              response to AP3 and PI action.  This should define a set of reasonably highly
              expressed petal and/or stamen specific genes that are directly or indirectly
              regulated by these floral homeotic gene products. Second, chromatin
              immunoprecipitation will be employed to identify DNA sequences that are bound
              in vivo by AP3/PI proteins.  Sequences identified by this approach are good
              candidates for being direct targets of AP3/PI regulation.  Third, a
              gain-of-function genetic approach will be employed, using activation tagging,
              to mutationally identify genes that are involved in the floral developmental
              pathway.  This approach has the advantage that it can result in the recovery of
              downstream target genes that act in a redundant fashion, which would preclude
              their recovery by traditional forward genetic screens. 

Potentially hundreds
              of candidate target genes may be recovered by these three approaches.  These
              approaches are not meant to be exhaustive, as it is likely that only abundantly
              expressed genes are likely to be recovered.  Dr. Irish plans to initially focus
              further analyses on a limited number of candidates, focussingon those recovered
              by more than one method.  Such genes will be examined to determine whether
              their transcription is directly dependent on AP3/PI function.  This will define
              a set of direct targets that will in turn be valuable in beginning to assess
              the spectrum of developmental processes controlled by AP3/PI.  In turn these
              analyses will shed light on the question of whether the floral homeotic gene
              products act at the top of a long regulatory cascade, or whether these gene
              products act directly to regulate a wide array of downstream targets
              responsible for various aspects of morphogenesis.  Characterizing how such
              master regulatory genes effect their functions will be crucial for a detailed
              understanding of how organogenesis and morphogenesis ensue, and should serve as
              a model for these processes in other plant systems. 
 


