Title       : Structure/Function Studies of Antifreeze Proteins and Their Enhancers from the
               Beetle Dendroides canadensis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0212907

Award Number: 0212907
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Duman john.g.duman.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	The most active antifreeze proteins (AFPs) are found in certain insects, such
              as larvae of the beetle Dendroides canadensis where they function to prevent
              inoculative freezing initiated by external ice across the cuticle and to
              promote supercooling by inhibiting potential ice nucleators in hemolymph and
              gut fluid.  Overwintering D. canadensis produce 12 AFPs which consist of 12-
              and 13- mer repeat sequences which differ somewhat in sequence and number of
              repeats.  Certain of these AFPs are produced in the fat body (analogous to the
              vertebrate liver) and secreted into the hemolymph, while others are produced in
              the midgut epithelium and secreted into the gut fluid.  The single layer of
              epidermal cells, which lie under the cuticle and help to prevent inoculative
              freezing, also produces a unique combination of AFPs, as does the Malpighian
              tubule epithelium which produces the urine.  The latter AFPs are presumable
              secreted into the tubule lumen to promote supercooling of the urine.  The
              unique combinations of the different DAFPs present in these different sites
              suggest that certain D. canadensis AFPs (DAFPs) have evolved specifically to
              function in these tissues.  This study will continue earlier work attempting to
              better understand the functions and mechanisms of the DAFPs in relation to
              those sites.  In addition, this work will clarify the reasons for seasonal and
              yearly variations in antifreeze protein activity.
	Recent studies have shown
              that to achieve optimal levels of DAFP activity (freezing point depression,
              inhibition of ice nucleators, prevention of inoculative freezing) requires the
              presence of certain enhancers, protein enhancers and/or low molecular mass
              enhancers such as glycerol.  While glycerol and certain protein enhancers have
              been identified in hemolymph, other unidentified protein enhancers are also
              present there, and the nature of the enhancers in other sites (midgut fluid,
              etc.) is unknown.  This study will identify these enhancers.
	Because of their
              high specific activities, insect AFPs have tremendous potential for
              applications, such as agriculture and the cryopreservation of biomedical
              materials.  Transgenic Arabidopsis plants have been produced which express
              DAFPs that lower the freezing temperatures of the plants.  Improved
              understanding of the factors which control AFP activity in D. canadensis larvae
              has the potential to greatly improve the performance of the insect AFPs in
              these applications.

