Title       : Circadian Rhythms in Neurospora Crassa: Genetic Studies on Two Oscillator Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0212190

Award Number: 0212190
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284469             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart Brody sbrody@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The fungus Neurospora crassa serves as a model system for studying the genetics
              and molecular biology of biological clocks. In this fungus the clock is
              expressed as areas of asexual spore formation (conidiation) alternating with
              areas of hyphal extension that show no conidiation. There is evidence that this
              clock has two oscillator loops. The products of the frq/wc loci are components
              of the first oscillator loop, but no components of the second have yet been
              described.  The objectives of this project are to isolate new mutations
              affecting the clock and to classify the existing clock mutants according to
              their site of action. Both objectives are steps toward identifying components
              of the second oscillator. The study of the second oscillator can now be
              advanced by employing a new culture technique developed by the investigator. 
              It allows the expression of the second oscillator in the absence of the first. 
              The clock "null" strains (frq10, wc-1, wc-2) lack the first oscillator. When
              these strains are provided low (10-5M) concentrations of farnesol or geraniol
              (compounds related to intermediates in the steroid pathway), a clear,
              reproducible, and synchronous conidiation rhythm can be seen on Petri plates or
              growth tubes (normal length).  New mutants in the clock system will be sought
              by screening for mutations that alter or abolish the rhythmicity of frq10
              mutants grown on farnesol.
 
If successful, these experiments will reveal new
              genes that affect the biological clock of this micro-organism.  The insights
              gained from these genes and their products should lead to significant advances
              in our understanding of the functioning of biological clocks.  The investigator
              is very active in training undergraduates, both through teaching their courses
              and mentoring their research projects in his laboratory.


