Title       : Regulation of the Chloroplast ATP Synthase Rotary Motor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0212908

Award Number: 0212908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark L. Richter markl@kuhub.cc.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The F1-ATPase is a tiny molecular rotary motor driven by binding and hydrolysis
              of ATP in one direction and by trans-membrane proton flux in the other
              direction. Preliminary studies using single molecule fluorescence
              microspectroscopy demonstrate that a hybrid ATPase assembled from recombinant
              F1 subunits from photosynthetic organisms is capable of generating sufficient
              torque to propel large (1-2 micrometer) actin filaments through solution in a
              manner similar in most respects to its bacterial counterpart.  Remarkably,
              rotation can be driven either by hydrolysis of CaATP or MgATP yet calcium,
              unlike magnesium, is known to be an ineffective co-substrate for proton coupled
              ATP hydrolysis or ATP synthesis.  The fact that CaATP hydrolysis can drive the
              fully cooperative catalytic process without being coupled to proton movement
              has suggested a new catalytic model in which MgATP/ADP binding to the enzyme
              induces a special conformation of the enzyme which is required for proton
              coupling but not ATP hydrolysis.  This project has the following two specific
              aims to test the new model and to identify the dynamic events leading to torque
              generation: 1. To identify the specific interactions between the gamma and
              epsilon subunits and the core hexameric alpha3 beta3 structure of the F1-ATPase
              that define the intermediate states of the catalytic sites involved in the
              catalytic cycle and its regulation.  This will be addressed using a combination
              of site-directed mutagenesis and biochemical approaches; 2. To determine the
              magnitude and direction of relative movements of the gamma and epsilon subunits
              during catalysis and regulation of the F1-ATPase using real-time single
              molecule fluorescence microspectroscopy. 

The photosynthetic ATP synthase
              has several unique properties which separate it from its mitochondrial and
              bacterial counterparts and that offer new inroads to examine the remarkable
              rotary mechanism of the enzyme.  One such property is the presence of a special
              regulatory segment located in the gamma subunit that has evolved in higher
              plant species to provide a molecular "switch" mechanism that tightly controls
              the catalytic activity of the enzyme.  The switch is designed to block futile
              energy loss during photosynthesis.  A major goal of this research is to
              identify the productive binding interactions between the gamma subunit and
              other subunits within the enzyme structure that are involved in the molecular
              switch mechanism.  The information to be gained from this work is likely to
              prove seminal in understanding natural processes that have evolved to regulate
              the rotary motor, identifying different intermediate structural states that
              occur during rotation and the molecular steps involved in achieving these
              structural states.  This in turn will provide the template to design gated
              "nanomachines" for a wide variety of important future practical applications. 
              The research will also provide training in critical research skills for two
              doctoral students and at least two semesters of laboratory research experience
              for a minimum of eight undergraduate students, most of whom are likely to
              pursue graduate studies and to develop into independent scientists.  

