Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Interactions of Tribal
               Governments and Local Authorities: What are the Consequences of Federal
               Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0212421

Award Number: 0212421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy E. Burns nburns@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This doctoral dissertation research project  examines the ways in which racial
              animosity, economic disparity, and institutions shape relations between Native
              American tribal governments and neighboring local governments. More broadly,
              this project speaks to the ways that social disadvantage shapes local
              intergovernmental relations, and how institutional 
arrangements can
              subsequently alter those relations. With tribal-local relations, historical
              circumstances have produced institutions that can offset social disadvantage.
              This project assesses the bargaining resources that tribal governments gain
              through those institutions.
 
Political science has long been concerned with
              the ways that social disadvantage translates into political marginalization in
              local government-usually, strong voices are amplified, weak voices are
              diminished in local politics. Scholars have been equally interested in the ways
              that institutions and federal interventions structure local politics, and have
              often documented how these arrangements can attenuate social disadvantage in a
              region. This study addresses both literatures by examining how institutions and
              federal interventions, in special circumstances, can counteract social
              disadvantage in local politics. While there is much to be learned from the
              scholarship that has documented how those with power become even more powerful,
              it is also important to understand how politically weak groups marshal and
              deploy those resources that they have at hand. 

Through the intensive study
              of six tribal governments and their neighboring authorities, this project
              identifies how the differing circumstances of tribal governments cause
              tribal-local relations to vary. Specifically, this analysis examines how
              differences in federal interventions, tribal governing institutions, and tribal
              resources affect tribal-local interactions. These findings illuminate how
              tribal activists can parlay their institutional circumstances into a more
              powerful Native American voice in local politics. 


