Title       : Creation of the Imaginal Eye Disc in Manduca
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2002  
File        : a0212072

Award Number: 0212072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David T. Champlin champlin@usm.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Southern Maine
	      96 Falmouth St
	      Portland, ME  041049300    207/780-4411

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1119,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Champlin

Analysis of the development of adult-specific tissues during
              
insect metamorphosis is providing a wealth of information regarding
              
mechanisms used to coordinate growth, patterning and differentiation 
in
              animals.  Adult development begins in the larva and precursors for
              
adult-specific structures such as the wing and compound eye are 
typically
              present at the time of pupation in the form of discrete 
packets of cells
              called imaginal discs.  The familiar and 
well-characterized example provided
              by the fruit fly, Drosophila 
melanogaster, in which the imaginal discs are
              present through the 
entire larval stage, appears to be a derived condition. 
              In contrast, 
imaginal discs in apparently the majority of holometabolous
              species 
are not created until the final larval instar.  Little is known about
              
the development of these "late-forming" imaginal discs.  The current
              
studies focus on the late-forming imaginal eye disc of the moth, 
Manduca
              sexta.  Prior to forming the imaginal eye disc early in the 
final larval
              instar, the adult eye precursor cells in Manduca 
function as
              fully-differentiated larval epidermal cells.  Members of 
the Pax-6 and Six
              gene families are thought to play essential early 
roles in eye development of
              all animals.  Portions of these genes 
have been isolated and their expression
              will be characterized as the 
eye disc is being formed.  A combination of in
              vivo and in vitro 
studies will be done to follow gene expression as the
              larval 
epidermal program is turned off and the adult eye developmental
              
program is activated.  A central goal of these studies will be to 
establish
              the regulation of these events by the hormones that control 
insect
              metamorphosis, juvenile hormone and ecdysteroid.
	
Scientists and
              nonscientists of all ages and backgrounds find 
insect metamorphosis a
              particularly appealing issue.  This attracts 
undergraduates from a variety of
              backgrounds to participate in the 
research program.  Undergraduates as well
              as graduate students will 
be integral participants and it is anticipated that
              they will be 
coauthors on primary research papers.  The proposed studies are
              
expected to significantly broaden our understanding of the regulation 
of
              insect metamorphosis and the findings will be communicated to the 
general
              public as well as the scientific community



