Title       : Soil Respiration and Microbial Diversity in a Subalpine Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0212267

Award Number: 0212267
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell K. Monson monsonr@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Lipson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven K. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              We will investigate the causes of high versus low rates of respiration (CO2
              loss) by soil microorganisms (fungi and bacteria) in a subalpine forest
              ecosystem in Colorado.  Soil respiration is one of the dominant processes
              affecting ecosystem carbon balance, and thus affecting the capacity for
              ecosystems to absorb carbon dioxide that is emitted to the atmosphere from
              fossil fuel and biomass burning.  In the subalpine forest ecosystem of
              Colorado, soil respiration is responsible for returning 40-60% of the CO2 that
              is absorbed by the photosynthetic trees of the forest, to the atmosphere each
              year.  It is likely that this value changes significantly from wet to dry years
              and in response to long-term climate warming.  We will seek to understand why
              it changes so much by studying changes in the soil microorganisms that release
              the CO2 in response to spatial and temporal variation.  We will combine modern
              DNA "fingerprinting" techniques to determine which, and how many,
              microorganisms are present at any point in time and at any point in space, and
              the magnitude of soil respiration associated with those organisms.  We will
              also study the influences of simulated treatments for long-term climate change
              in the form of warming lamps and altered snow pack to determine the response of
              soil respiration rate to climate change, and the causes of such responses due
              to changes in the diversity and amounts of microorganisms.  overall, the
              research will provide us with an improved understanding of soil microorganism
              dynamics and their relationship to soil respiration, one of the critical
              components of the global carbon cycle.

The studies will provide for the
              training of two graduate students through Research Assistant support, and they
              will significantly advance the development of techniques to probe soil samples
              for the presence of microorganisms.  This latter capability may turn out to be
              very useful to future efforts in Homeland Security, especially with regard to
              detecting trace amounts of potentially dangerous microorganisms.  The grant
              will also support the career of a beginning faculty member (David Lipson) at
              San Diego State University.

