Title       : Expression of Olfactory SNMPs in Drosophila Melanogaster and Manduca Sexta
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0212510

Award Number: 0212510
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $447268             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Vogt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1185,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Insects use olfactory systems to gather information about their external
              environment, information critical for locating mates, host plants and animals,
              sites for overwintering and egg deposition, and for social interaction. Insects
              discriminate odors using hundreds to thousands of sensory organs, called
              sensilla, which differ with respect to which odors each can detect.  Sensilla
              express ensembles of proteins, including Odorant Binding Proteins (OBPs),
              Olfactory Receptors (ORs), Odor Degrading Enzymes (ODEs) and Sensory Neuron
              Membrane Proteins (SNMPs). These proteins belong to multigene families which
              express in specific combinations, and these combinations determine what odors a
              sensillum can detect.  Each sensillum is hollow and contains 2-3 neurons. Odor
              molecules pass through holes in the cuticle walls of a sensillum, entering an
              aqueous space where they are transported to neuronal ORs by soluble OBPs and
              finally degraded by ODEs. These are the first biochemical processes in odor
              detection; these proteins are a genetic interface between the animal and its
              environment. The genome of Drosophila melanogaster contains about 30 OBP and 60
              OR genes which differentially express among about 1000 olfactory sensilla.
              While the functions of OBPs, ORs and ODEs are generally understood, the
              function of SNMPs is not.  Nevertheless, the properties of SNMPs suggest they
              play a central role in odor detection.  
The proposed studies characterize the
              expression of SNMPs in the moth Manduca sexta (Lepidoptera) and SNMP homologues
              in the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster (Diptera). We have identified 5 SNMPs
              from 4 moth species; these genes only express in olfactory neurons, and their
              proteins (around 525 amino acids) are localized to the receptor membranes where
              odors are detected.  SNMPs are related to the CD36 family of receptor proteins
              which have roles in fatty acid transport, lysosomal transport and cell death in
              animals ranging from humans to nematodes. SNMPs are the only CD36 family
              members known in neurons.  In this project, 13 identified SNMP-related genes of
              Drosophila will be characterized with respect to when and where they express
              and with which other genes they associate, and two identified SNMPs of  Manduca
              will be characterized to further understand their interactions and roles in
              odor detection.
Manduca and Drosophila belong to insect Orders that include
              nearly 250,000 named species, about 25% of the animal group insects that
              includes about 2/3 of all known eukaryotic species. Moths such as Manduca have
              long been among the most important model systems for understanding the
              behavioral, physiological and biochemical processes involved in pheromone
              detection in insects, and are an important comparative model for understanding
              pheromone detection in mammals and other vertebrates.  Drosophila has recently
              emerged as an important olfactory model system, due in part to the
              identification of complete families of olfactory genes from the fully sequenced
              genome and in part to the experimental genetic manipulations possible in
              Drosophila. Manduca and Drosophila are highly complementary and provide a
              comparison to identify both similarities and differences between insect
              olfactory systems. 
This study will enhance understanding of the SNMP/CD36
              gene family in several physiological systems, especially olfaction and the
              nervous system.  The study introduces new technologies to the PI's lab, the
              genetic tools of Drosophila, empowering the PI and his students to integrate
              Drosophila data into studies of other insects and systems.  The studies offer
              training opportunities for students, including those of underrepresented groups
              who are members of the PI's laboratory. The project will enrich understanding
              of basic regulatory processes underlying odor detection, providing insight for
              designing new strategies for insect control in olfactory-based predation of
              crop plants and host and mate seeking behaviors. Improved understanding of the
              molecular mechanisms underlying odor detection contributes to many disciplines
              including agricultural and chemical ecology, entomology, neurobiology,
              neuroethology, sensory biology, signal transduction and remote sensing.



