Title       : Regulation of Monoterpene Emission in Snapdragon Flowers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0212802

Award Number: 0212802
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Natalia Doudareva dudareva@hort.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Rhodes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              			

Floral scent plays a vital role in the reproductive cycle of higher
              plants by attracting pollinators to flowers. The long-term goal of this
              research is to fill important gaps in our knowledge of biochemical pathways
              leading to the formation of floral volatiles and the molecular mechanisms
              controlling their accumulation and release in plants. Although monoterpenes,
              the C10 members of the terpenoid family of natural products, are very common
              constituents of floral scent, little is known about how floral tissues regulate
              their developmental and rhythmic emission. This project will focus on
              investigation of the role of geranyl pyrophosphate (GPP), the key precursor of
              monoterpene biosynthesis, in the regulation of developmental and rhythmic
              emission of trans-b-ocimene and myrcene, the two major scent components of
              snapdragon scent. GPP, the starting point leading to the synthesis of many
              monoterpene end products, is the result of condensation of dimethylallyl
              diphosphate and isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) in a reaction catalyzed by GPP
              synthase (GPPS). Plant cells have two different IPP biosynthetic pathways
              located in two different compartments. Biochemical pathway(s) leading to GPP
              biosynthesis in snapdragon petal tissue will be elucidated and the possibility
              of compensation of one pathway by the other one through the exchange between
              cytosolic and plastidic IPP pools will be examined. In contrast to other
              homodimeric short-chain prenyltransferases, GPPS is a functional heterodimer in
              which small and large subunits are absolutely required for enzymatic activity.
              In this project, the complexity of the GPPS gene family in snapdragon will be
              characterized, the role of both subunits of GPPS in the regulation of the
              amount of GPP in cells will be analyzed and the involvement of subcellular
              localization in the regulation of GPPS activity will be determined. 
	Floral
              scent plays an important role in the crop economy since one-third of our total
              diet depends upon insect-pollinated plants including most fruit trees, berries,
              nuts, oilseeds, and vegetables. Pollination not only affects crop yield but
              also quality and efficiency of crop production. This research will result in
              new insights into the regulation of floral scent production in higher plants
              and also provide the knowledge for engineering plants with improved scent
              quality. This could increase the attraction of flowers to certain pollinators
              and lead to the more efficient pollination of crop plants cultivated for their
              seed, forage, or food value.

