Title       : Transfer Facilitation for Engineering Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  2002  
File        : a0212224

Award Number: 0212224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. W. Hines jhines2@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt C. Gramoll  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith A. Ahrens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the proposed project is to develop and deliver several
              internet-based freshman and sophomore level engineering courses through a
              partnership between The University of Tennessee (UT), The University of
              Oklahoma (OU) and area community colleges.  The proposed project will provide
              new opportunities for engineering students who wish to transfer to a four-year
              institution after completing a pre-engineering program in a Community College,
              Junior College or Liberal Arts College that offers most, but not all, of the
              freshman and sophomore requirements for an engineering degree. The development
              and delivery of asynchronous, open entry/open exit, self-paced courses via the
              Internet will enable these students to transfer into a university engineering
              program as a junior with all prerequisite requirements satisfied. The major
              impacts will be increasing student opportunities for timely completion of
              engineering degrees and serving the country's engineering workforce
              needs.

Approximately fifteen classes have been identified as typical
              prerequisites for junior level study in an engineering field that are not
              offered in pre-engineering programs. The reason that these courses are not
              offered is that they are commonly fairly specialized classes that do not draw
              substantial enrollments that make the offerings cost effective. We propose to
              develop web-based versions of the seven classes that provide the greatest
              impact to the engineering field.  Of these seven classes, two (Static's and
              Dynamics) have been previously developed at OU for asynchronous web delivery
              and will be implemented with improvements for this project.

The model
              identified for course development merges several technologies to meet the
              course delivery objectives. It integrates a phased development methodology to
              produce highly interactive animated modules designed to engage the student in
              an active learning process.  The University of Tennessee's Innovative
              Technology Center, Outreach and Continuing Education Division, Center for
              Advanced Educational Technology, and College of Engineering faculty have
              significant experience in developing interactive web-based courses. At the
              University of Oklahoma, the College of Engineering Media Laboratory is headed
              by the CO-PI of this grant proposal, who has been involved in web-based,
              asynchronous course delivery and training for close to ten years. The
              synergistic combination of these two institutions produces a team of
              educational professionals with the resources, experience, and desire to
              successfully attain the goals and objectives outlined in the proposal.


The
              long-term goal of this project is to facilitate the articulation of engineering
              students by developing and offering the entire set of prerequisite classes to
              engineering students enrolled in pre-engineering and engineering programs
              throughout the United States. The funding of this grant will result in the
              national availability of web-delivered courses to meet a majority the
              prerequisite needs and provide a significant step toward meeting the long-term
              goal. To provide project guidance and assist with information dissemination, a
              national advisory board composed of leaders in the field of education has been
              assembled.

