Title       : Independent Evolutionary Origins of Tetrodotoxin Resistance as a Test of the
               Geographic Mosaic of Coevolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0212065

Award Number: 0212065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund D. Brodie, Jr. brodie@biology.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Evidence for arms-race coevolution between predator and prey will be
evaluated
              in a unique natural interaction between  toxic newts and their
resistant snake
              predators. Newts possess the neurotoxin tetrodotoxin
(TTX), which blocks
              sodium channels in nerves and muscles. No known
predator can ingest TTX and
              survive except for garter snakes of the
genus Thamnophis. Previous work
              demonstrated that predator and prey have
matched levels of defensive and
              exploitative abilities, but the source
of newt toxicity is still unknown. High
              Performance Liquid
Chromatography (HPLC) will be used to assay levels of toxin
              in
laboratory bred and reared newts to determine whether the
              requisite
individual, genetic and population variation exists for newts to
              evolve
in response to predators, allowing an evaluation of whether
              observed
patterns of matching are consistent with an arms race view
              of
coevolution.
	Understanding the interactions between species that
              drive
coevolution is a major goal of evolutionary biology. Coevolution,
              in
which one species evolves in response to another species, is thought to
be
              one of the major engines of biodiversity. Although coevolution is
thought to
              be a common outcome of many ecological interaction, there are
strong
              theoretical and empirical reasons to suspect that predator-prey
interactions
              might be different. This research will shed important light
on natural
              variation in an important neurotoxin, TTX, which is used
widely in studies of
              nerve function and development, by identifying the
sources of TTX in
              amphibians.

