Title       : Term Limits in the State Legislatures: Analysis of a 50-State Survey and
               Collateral Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0212310

Award Number: 0212310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105941             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Niemi niemi@rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Carey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lynda W. Powell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary F. Moncrief  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Term limits are the most significant innovation in state legislatures since the
              legislative modernization movement of the 1960s and 1970s.  Currently, term
              limits have taken effect in 11 states; they will go into effect in seven more
              between 2002 and 2008.  By now, hundreds of legislators have been prevented
              from running for re-election.  New legislators, in turn, will be forced from
              office after as few as six years.  Legislative organization has also been
              affected, as term limited legislatures can no longer rely heavily on seniority
              to pick their leaders.

Because term limits are new, there is little evidence
              about their effects.  There has been one comprehensive, 50-state study, but it
              was carried out in 1995, before any legislators were actually turned out of
              office.  Other studies have now begun to appear, but they have typically been
              based on one or two legislatures.  Now that term limits are in effect in 11
              states, with others shortly joining the list, the effects can be gauged more
              fully.

This project draws on a new, 50-state survey of legislators along
              with election data and demographic data about the legislators.  It examines
              electoral effects (e.g., competition), influence patterns (e.g.,
              executive-legislative relations), and procedural effects (e.g., constituent
              service).  The methodology includes over-time comparisons (using the earlier
              survey as a base) as well as comparisons between term limited and non-term
              limited states.  Multivariate statistical methods allow the investigators to
              control for possible confounding factors, including characteristics of the
              legislators themselves, of states and chambers, and of legislative
              districts.

The research is part of a cooperative venture between academic
              political scientists and the National Conference of State Legislatures, the
              Council of State Governments, and the State Legislative Leaders Foundation. 
              Through this cooperation, it is anticipated that there will be considerable
              feedback to the legislatures.  In particular, team members will identify and
              evaluate ways in which various states have adapted to term limits and
              disseminate this information to all term limited states.  Non-term limited
              states will also benefit from learning about and possibly adopting newly
              implemented training, professional development, and procedural
              changes.






