Title       : Molecular Analysis of Meiotic Recombination and Genomic Organization in the
               Bronze Region of Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0212785

Award Number: 0212785
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $575000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugo K. Dooner dooner@waksman.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Homologous meiotic recombination is an important process for
              sexually
reproducing organisms: it creates new genotypes by shuffling
              chromosomal
segments that otherwise would be inherited as a unit and promotes
              fertility by
ensuring that chromosomes segregate properly at meiosis.  For
              close to a century,
geneticists have been using recombination as a tool to
              construct genetic maps,
which now find practical applications ranging from
              risk prediction for inherited
deleterious alleles to marker-assisted selection
              of desirable genotypes in
agriculture and map-based cloning of valuable genes
              in plants and animals. Yet,
in spite of its importance, our knowledge of the
              process of homologous meiotic
recombination in higher plants is rudimentary
              compared to other organisms, like
yeast. This project will increase our
              understanding of this basic biological
process in maize, a plant that is both
              an excellent model organism
for studies of recombination, and an economically
              important crop in American agriculture and industry.
The genetic system being
              used in the project is the bz locus, which affects seed
pigmentation and is
              uniquely advantageous for studies of recombination. This
project will continue
              the analysis of meiotic recombination in maize by combining the power of the
              genetics of the bz region with that of modern molecular tools. It is greatly
              influenced by the recent finding that the organization of genes and
              retrotransposons in the bz genomic region is polymorphic in different maize
              lines. There are five specific objectives of the project:
1. To analyze
              conversion tract lengths within the bz gene island in heterozygotes
lacking
              heterologies and extend the analysis to adjacent retrotransposon blocks.
2. To
              determine if the apparent conversion polarity at bz, detected with
              small
insertion mutations at the 5' and 3' ends of the gene, but not with more
              centrally
located point mutations, is due to the nature or the position of the
              mutations.
3. To test whether the presence of a highly methylated
              retrotransposon block
affects recombination in adjacent genes.
4. To
              determine if all recombination junctions in an interval made up of genes
and
              retrotransposons fall in genes.
5. To test if recombination between two sites
              in the genome separated by a
different number of genes in different lines is a
              function of the number of
common genes in the intervening segment.

