Title       : Signal Transduction in Root Gravitropism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0212099

Award Number: 0212099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon Gilroy sxg12@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1114,1136,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB0212099 PI: Gilroy, Simon
PROJECT ABSTRACT
Gravity is a fundamental signal
              that regulates plant growth and form. Despite its importance to plant success,
              the cellular and molecular events whereby higher plants sense and respond to
              this most pervasive and constant of environmental signals are essentially
              unknown. In the root, gravity is perceived in the columella cells of the root
              cap and this signal is converted to oriented growth in the elongation zone
              through a mechanism likely involving asymmetrical auxin redistribution. The
              goal of this research project is to define the cell and molecular nature of the
              initial gravity-related signaling events generated in the columella cells,
              using the roots of Arabidopsis thaliana as a model system. Previous research
              has identified changes in cytoplasmic and cell wall pH as important initial
              events in gravity signaling in the root cap columella cells. In addition,
              recent evidence suggests highly localized changes in Ca2+, likely close to
              membrane surfaces, also accompany some of the earliest events of gravity
              perception in these cells. Research will therefore concentrate on
              characterizing how these gravity-related H+ and Ca2+ fluxes are generated and
              how they are modulated by putative components of the gravity signal
              transduction system such as the actomyosin cytoskeleton. In addition,
              transgenic Ca2+ sensors based on the Cameleon green fluorescent protein Ca2+
              sensor will be constructed and targeted to the vacuolar, endoplasmic reticulum
              and plasma membranes. These novel sensors will be used to assess whether
              membrane-associated Ca2+ microdomains are indeed associated with gravity
              signaling. The final goal of the research program is to develop single cell
              mRNA profiling for the columella cells in order to catalog gene expression
              patterns within the different regions of the root cap. Initial analysis will be
              targeted at profiling the actin and myosin gene families as these represent
              strong candidates for encoding parts of the force transmissive network that
              generates the biochemical signaling events of gravity perception. 
	Plant
              growth and form are inextricably linked to the developmental impacts of
              gravity. Yet, despite its fundamental role in regulating development, the
              precise mechanism whereby plants sense and respond to gravity remains unknown.
              Results from this research program will therefore seek to define the molecular
              machinery of the root that allows it to sense gravitational forces. The project
              will focus on developing microscope-based imaging approaches to visualize the
              dynamic changes in the levels of ions that are thought to signal the gravity
              stimulus to the sensitive cells of the root. An understanding of these
              signaling events should not only help provide a more complete understanding of
              how plants sense and respond to their environment, but also holds the potential
              to uncover strategies to regulate plant development through manipulating the
              responsiveness of defined components of this plant gravity sensing system.

