Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effect of Attention on Memory for Negative and
               Neutral Words
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2002    
File        : a0212999

Award Number: 0212999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Parsons                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne Corkin corkin@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effect of Attention on Memory for Negative and
              Neutral Words.

Abstract

With National Science Foundation support,
              Elizabeth Kensinger and Dr. Suzanne Corkin will conduct a one-year neuroimaging
              study as part of Ms. Kensinger's doctoral dissertation.  The study is aimed at
              uniting two areas of research: the detrimental effects that divided attention
              has on a person's ability to learn information, and the memory enhancing
              effects of emotion.  When our attention is divided as we attempt to learn
              information, memory suffers.  Ample behavioral data support this conclusion,
              yet the changes that occur in the brain have not been fully explored.  Using
              functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) the proposed studies will
              investigate what network of brain regions is recruited as a person attempts to
              learn information while performing a difficult distractor task.  The studies
              will also examine the neural cirtuitry involved in later retrieval the
              information that was learned under that attention demanding condition.  It is
              also not known how divided attention affects memory for information that we
              typically remember very well, for example, emotional information.  Daily
              experiences are often infused with an emotional richness that has typically
              been absent, and even actively avoided, in experimental studies of learning and
              memory.  Although behavioral studies have shown that individuals remember
              emotional stimuli better than neutral, it is unclear how manipulating the
              attentional resources available at the time of learning affects memory for
              emotional stimuli.  The proposed studies will examine the behavioral effect of
              divided attention on memory for emotional as compared to neutral stimuli.  The
              proposed behavioral and fMRI studies together will advance knowledge about the
              effects of attention on memory for neutral and emotional verbal stimuli. 
              




