Title       : RUI: Pollen Developmental Evolution in the Basalmost Angiosperms - Nymphaeales
               and Amborella
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0212521

Award Number: 0212521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey M. Osborn josborn@truman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Truman State University
	      McClain Hall 203
	      Kirksville, MO  63501    816/785-4000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	An understanding of the evolutionary relationships of flowering plants, or
              angiosperms, has been greatly improved in recent years, and water lilies
              (Nymphaeales) and Amborella have been identified as the earliest diverging
              lineages. Water lilies have a cosmopolitan distribution, comprise two families
              and eight genera, and have interested botanists for many years in part because
              they have characteristics of both major classes of flowering plants (dicots and
              monocots). Amborella includes a single species and is an understory shrub that
              is limited in geographic distribution to montane tropical rain forests in
              central New Caledonia. 
	Comparative studies of pollen development in
              angiosperms are relatively rare, but make significant contributions to
              understanding the evolution of key characters, as well as evolutionary
              relationships, or phylogeny, when conducted.  Relatively few pollen studies of
              water lilies and Amborella have been carried out, however. Historically, the
              pollen wall of water lilies has been reported as granular, a character state
              thought to be primitive among angiosperms, whereas that of Amborella has an
              unusual structure that does not appear to occur in other extant flowering
              plants.  A recent study by the PI indicates that the mature pollen of all eight
              genera of water lilies is columellar, and that the developmental pattern and
              structure of these pollen wall elements makes them superficially resemble
              granules. The developmental pattern of these elements and that of other pollen
              characters in Nymphaeales and Amborella, however, are not well
              understood.
	Given the evolutionary importance of these two primitive groups,
              the overall focus of the PI's research is to study pollen developmental
              evolution in Nymphaeales and Amborella.  The principal objectives of the
              proposed project are to (1) provide a comprehensive investigation of pollen
              development in two key water lily genera (Cabomba and Nuphar) and (2) obtain
              preliminary results on other genera.  The proposed research will build on new
              data from the PI's laboratory about mature pollen structure in all eight water
              lily genera, as well as pollen development in three (Cabomba, Nuphar, and
              Euryale).  The research will use combined microscopical techniques, and it will
              yield data at a level of resolution that has not been documented before.  The
              new data will provide the foundation to examine the patterns of pollen
              developmental evolution within a phylogenetic context and determine functional
              correlations between pollen developmental characters and pollination biology.

