Title       : Molecular Regulation of the Capacity for Isoprene Synthesis in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0212204

Award Number: 0212204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390090             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Sharkey tsharkey@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
	Isoprene is emitted from many plants, especially trees. Isoprene emission has
              large effects on atmospheric chemistry and so its emission has been extensively
              studied but mechanisms of regulation of the rate of emission have not yet been
              determined. Isoprene emission from plants varies substantially with temperature
              and light. Experiments are proposed to test several hypotheses about how the
              rate of isoprene emission from plants is regulated. Short term regulation will
              be studied by measuring metabolites before, during, and after a change in light
              or temperature. The factors that control the instantaneous rate of isoprene
              emission will be assessed by analyzing (1) changes in metabolite levels during
              transients and (2) responses to feeding intermediates of the isoprene synthesis
              pathway. To keep track of isoprene coming from endogenous photosynthesis
              metabolites and that coming from exogenous intermediates, a laser-based
              photoacoustic system for detecting deuterium labeled isoprene from deuterated
              intermediates will be used by colleagues at the University of Bonn. Longer term
              induction phenomena will be studied in (1) leaves that have never made isoprene
              and in (2) leaves where the isoprene emission capacity has been reduced by
              moving the plants into low temperature and low light. Changes in precursor
              metabolite levels, enzyme activity, and transcript abundance for selected
              enzymes of the isoprene synthesis pathway will be included in the analysis.
              Finally, the steps required for the evolution of the capacity for isoprene
              emission will be studied. This will involve two approaches. First, isoprene
              synthase from the legume kudzu will be transformed into Arabidopsis on a
              constitutive promoter, on its own promoter, and on a heat-shock promoter. The
              regulation of the expression and activity of isoprene synthase and other
              selected genes in the isoprene synthesis pathway will be assessed to determine
              if non-emitting plants normally have the regulatory mechanisms needed for light
              and heat-dependent isoprene emission. Second, the differences between isoprene
              synthase and a similar sesquiterpene synthase will be determined by analyzing
              the crystal structure of isoprene synthase. These studies will provide basic
              information on regulation of isoprene synthesis to allow for altering isoprene
              synthesis by plants. It may be desirable to engineer plants or bacteria to make
              economically useful amounts of isoprene or it might be useful to engineer trees
              used in tree farming so that they do not produce isoprene. These studies will
              also be used to help predict isoprene emission from plants, which will improve
              our ability to predict atmospheric ozone production

