Title       : Reactions of Transition Metal Complexes with Silanes and Oxygen. Chemistry in
               Molecular Approaches to Silicon-Based Microelectronic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0212137

Award Number: 0212137
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ziling B. Xue xue@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Ziling B. Xue, Chemistry Department, University of Tennessee, is supported
              by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division for studies of early transition metal-silane chemistry.  The
              reactions of silanes with d0 imides and dn amides will be compared with those
              of d0 amides to determine how the pi character of the metal-imide bond and the
              d electron count in the metal-amides influence sigma bond metathesis. To
              explore the generality of the results obtained with the imides and amides, the
              study will be extended to reactions between silanes and early transition metal
              alkoxides.  Reactions of the alkoxides with silanes and of metal silyl
              complexes with oxygen will be developed as new routes to metal-silicon-oxygen
              phases. In collaboration with scientists at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, the
              compounds prepared in this investigation will be used as precursors to prepare
              silicon based microelectronic materials by chemical vapor deposition. During
              all stages of the project theoretical calculations will be carried out in order
              to understand the emerging chemistry.

The objective of the research is to
              develop the new precursors and routes to silicon-based microelectronic
              materials. The first portion of this study will develop fundamental chemistry
              that is relevant to the preparation of silicon based microelectronic materials.
              Then chemical processes to yield these advanced microelectronic materials will
              be developed. These materials include those used as diffusion barriers and high
              dielectric constant gate materials in very-large-scale-integration (VLSI)
              devices.


