Title       : Protein Biophysics in Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0212939

Award Number: 0212939
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $446735             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Pielak gary_pielak@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The inside of a cell is a crowded place where macromolecular solutes, mostly
              proteins, reach concentrations of hundreds of grams per liter. However, almost
              all in vitro studies of protein biophysics are conducted at solute
              concentrations that rarely exceed a fraction of a gram per liter. This
              discrepancy poses an important question: do the observations made in dilute
              solution always coincide with what happens inside cells? Preliminary data show
              that the answer is no. Specifically, NMR data show that FlgM, a protein that is
              unfolded in dilute solution, gains structure inside living Escherichia coli
              cells. Additional data show that FlgM gains structure in vitro on adding high
              concentrations (400 g/L) of glucose, bovine serum albumin, or ovalbumin. Given
              these data proving the biological significance of crowding, the objective of
              the research is to understand the effects of physiologically relevant crowded
              environments on protein equilibria, particularly direct studies in living
              cells. The proteins to be studied are FlgM, alpha -synuclein, and cytochrome c.
              Like FlgM, alpha -synuclein is unfolded in dilute solution. The first
              hypothesis is that there are two classes of natively unfolded proteins. Class 1
              (FlgM) collapses and folds under physiologically relevant crowded conditions.
              Class 2 (alpha -synuclein) collapses but does not fold under these conditions.
              The second hypothesis is that macromolecular crowding stabilizes globular
              proteins in cells. The globular protein cytochrome c will be used to test this
              hypothesis. The methods to be used include, heteronuclear multidimensional NMR,
              especially NMR detected amide proton exchange experiments, circular dichroism
              spectropolarimetry, and directed mutagenesis.
