Title       : The Physiological Regulation of Simultaneously Selected Traits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0212621

Award Number: 0212621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Goggy Davidowitz goggy@email.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Derek A. Roff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Frederik Nijhout  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Almost all biological traits have the potential to evolve in response to
              selection.  Some traits may not respond to selection as might be expected,
              however, because they are negatively correlated with other traits.  Such
              phenomena generate the tradeoffs that are the basis of life history evolution. 
              Typically in studies of life history evolution, one focal trait is allowed to
              experience selection, and correlations between it and other traits are used to
              estimate the tradeoffs.  However, selection tends to act on multiple traits
              simultaneously, necessitating studies of simultaneous selection on multiple
              traits rather than on correlations with one focal trait. Few studies have
              examined how the physiological or developmental mechanisms that underlie life
              history traits respond to selection on the focal traits and no study to date
              has examined the physiological regulation of simultaneous selection on multiple
              life history traits. This study will address these issues with studies of the
              well-known tobacco hornworm, Manduca sexta (Lepidoptera: Sphingidae).  This is
              one of very few species in which the physiological mechanisms regulating two
              important life history traits, body size and development time, are known,
              providing essential background for this study. A series of six directional
              selection experiments will be run for ten generations.  These will include all
              four possible combinations of simultaneous selection for increased and
              decreased development time and body size as well as selection to increase body
              size and selection to decrease development time. The three physiological
              factors that determine these traits (critical weight, PTTH delay time, and
              growth rate) will be measured before and after selection. This will be the
              first study to examine how the regulating physiological factors, constrain or
              engender, the evolution of multiple life history traits in response to
              simultaneous selection.
