Title       : New Early Transition Metal Metallocene Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0212210

Award Number: 0212210
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $417000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Jordan rfjordan@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1968,9146,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry program
              supports research by Professor Richard F. Jordan of the University of Chicago
              to develop efficient methods for the stereoselective synthesis of chiral
              ansa-metallocenes and to expand the fundamental understanding of the properties
              of d0 metal olefin complexes that are models for transient intermediates in
              olefin polymerization reactions.  Metallocene complexes of early transition
              metals, such as Ti, Zr and Hf, are important in organic synthesis and closely
              related cationic complexes are the active species in olefin polymerizations. 
              Chiral ansa-metallocenes, in which the two cyclopentadienyl rings are linked,
              are important stereoselective olefin polymerization catalysts and have been
              employed as enantioselective catalysts or reagents for other olefin reactions. 
              Metallocene compounds with ligands that can control the face-selectivity of
              cyclopentadienyl ligands will be prepared involving 6-membered chelate rings in
              bis-amide complexes that adopt twist conformations, which complement 2-fold
              symmetric rac-metallocenes and strongly disfavor meso-metallocene structures. 
              This first part of this research will: 1) develop streamlined ansa-metallocene
              syntheses based on chelate-controlled salt-elimination and amine-elimination
              reactions, 2) establish the generality of this approach for group 4 and group
              3/lanthanide ansa-metallocenes with diverse structures, 3) understand the
              stereocontrol mechanisms in chelate-controlled ansa-metallocenes with synthesis
              through studies of the conformational and dynamic properties of group 4 metal
              bis-amide complexes, and 4) design chiral group-4 metal bis-amide precursors
              for the enantioselective synthesis of ansa-metallocenes.

The second part of
              this research is to use alkoxy metallocene olefin complexes as models for the
              similar alkyl metallocene olefin cation complexes that are involved in olefin
              polymerization.  The alkoxide model systems exhibit enhanced thermal stability
              and do not undergo olefin insertion, which enables studies of the metal-olefin
              bonding.  Models are designed to provide a detailed picture of how d0 metal
              species bind and activate olefins.

This project will provide rigorous and
              broad training for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in challenging
              organometallic synthesis, modern spectroscopic methods and mechanistic studies,
              and facilitate the application of the targeted compounds in economically
              important catalytic syntheses.

Synthetic routes to enantioselective
              catalytic reagents will be devised and models of complexes that catalyze the
              polymerization of olefins will be used to gain insight as to how these
              catalysts operate.   


