Title       : Neurobehavioral Differences in Circadian Rhythms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0212322

Award Number: 0212322
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354059             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theresa M. Lee terrilee@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1193,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                 Circadian rhythms are cyclic biological activities that recur at the same
              time every day.  In mammals, a part of the brain called the suprachiasmatic
              nucleus (SCN) is important for these rhythms, and constitutes part of the
              biological clock mechanism.  These rhythms continue to run under constant
              conditions, but environmental cues such as timing of daylight can set, or
              entrain, the timing or phase-shifting of the cycles.  Sex differences have been
              described in the entrained circadian rhythms of most mammals that have been
              examined, and recent data suggest that steroid hormones can influence the
              function of the circadian clock biochemistry in the SCN.  Most animals used for
              circadian research are nocturnal rodents, but there are some data on two
              diurnal species, the human and a rodent called the degu.  In the degu, sexually
              dimorphic circadian effects are seen in responses to free-running periods,
              light stimuli, and modulation by hormones, among other factors.  The sexual
              dimorphism develops just after puberty, and appears to require changes in both
              sexes.  This project uses biochemical, molecular and behavioral approaches to
              determine whether sexual differentiation occurs when molecular receptors for
              estrogen and/or androgen are up-regulated in the SCN, and whether sexual
              differentiation of circadian rhythms is reflected in changed cycles of the gene
              expression of key cellular proteins (PER and CRY) that generate the cycles. 
 
               Results from this project will be important for general biology and psychology
              as well as neuroendocrinology, for understanding hormonal and genetic
              mechanisms of circadian rhythms in mammals, for evolutionary comparisons with
              nocturnal mammals, and potentially for better understanding of how human
              circadian rhythms develop during adolescence.  This project is also in a
              laboratory with an excellent record of research mentoring.


