Title       : Calcium-Dependent Homophilic Interactions of E-Cadherin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0212669

Award Number: 0212669
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367540             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Pedigo spedigo@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Cell adhesion is responsible for the formation of tissues and organs.  Cadherins
              are proteins that confer specificity to cells such that they adhere only to
              specific cell types.  They are membrane-bound calcium-binding proteins with
              independently folded extracellular domains that participate in the cell-cell
              interactions.  Calcium binds at the interface between the extracellular domains
              and changes their relative disposition.  Calcium is required for cell adhesion.
              Studies of cadherins fall into two main categories, cellular level studies and
              high-resolution structural studies.  Results from these approaches have not
              yielded a paradigm for the structural basis of the intermolecular interactions.
               At this point there is little understanding of the energetics of the molecular
              interactions involving cadherins.  This project includes the study of the
              stability and calcium-binding properties of the extracellular domains of
              epithelial cadherin. In addition, the project will address how the
              calcium-binding properties depend on dimerization.  These studies will
              elucidate the energetic origins of the calcium-linked interactions of cadherin
              that are critical for cell adhesion. The specific aims of this research are:
              characterization of the stability of the extracellular domains of
              epithelial-cadherin (ECAD12), determination of affinity and cooperative
              interactions for calcium binding to the sites between ECAD12, and establishing
              conditions under which cis-dimerization occurs for ECAD12. This project will
              have a broad positive impact on undergraduate and graduate education in
              physical biochemistry.
