Title       : Exploring the Development of Olfactory Sensitivity in a Procellariiform Seabird
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0212467

Award Number: 0212467
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314810             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabrielle A. Nevitt ganevitt@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1160,1185,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Procellariiform seabirds (the petrels, albatrosses and shearwaters) make their
              living foraging over vast expanses of open ocean hunting patchily distributed
              prey such as fish, squid and krill.  The secret to their success is an ability
              to locate prey by smell.  Over the past decade, much headway has been made in
              understanding olfactory foraging of Antarctic species, both at large (>100s of
              miles) and small (<10 miles) scales. Augmenting early work by leading
              scientists, the Principal Investigator's (PI) broadly integrative approach to
              studying olfactory foraging has expanded the picture of how seabirds "see" the
              world with their noses.
Now many questions arise. For example, how do
              olfactory foraging behaviors develop in chicks? While other pelagic seabirds
              spend months teaching offspring how and where to forage, procellariiform chicks
              fledge and survive the open seas weeks after their parents have dispersed.
              These birds appear to hatch knowing how and where to forage without aid or
              instruction from a parent. How is this possible? Drawing from disciplines as
              diverse as atmospheric chemistry and developmental neurobiology, this proposal
              explores the hypothesis that, during development, chicks become tuned to odors
              used in foraging by being exposed to them by their parents. This pre-tuning or
              "imprinting" provides birds with information about the olfactory landscape they
              will encounter after fledging, and, specifically, offers them clues about where
              foraging is likely to be productive.
This proposal investigates the
              development of olfactory sensitivity in the Leach's storm petrel (Oceanodroma
              leucorhoa). There are two primary objectives. First, chicks' behavioral
              responses to three prey-related odors (DMS - plankton scent, pyrazine - krill
              scent, and trimethyl amine - fish scent) and to one control odor (phenyl ethyl
              alcohol - rose scent) will be characterized. The second objective will
              determine whether chicks learn odor cues by pre-exposing chicks to a non-prey
              related odor during the egg stage, and then testing whether this early exposure
              increases sensitivity to that odor later in life.
Results from the proposed
              research will be among the first to address the development of olfaction in an
              ecologically important context. In addition to her seabird work, the PI has
              been a key player in developing new and highly integrative approaches to
              studying salmon imprinting, so extending these ideas to birds is a logical
              progression of her work. Overall, the results will greatly extend our knowledge
              of the sensory biology of these fascinating birds. Such knowledge not only is
              useful to basic science, but also may help bolster efforts to ensure the
              conservation of procellariiforms, given the threatened or endangered status of
              many species. Moreover, by establishing a study site at a University-sponsored
              field laboratory, student involvement in the work will be much more easily
              fostered. Relative to the remote sub-Antarctic, where virtually all of the PI's
              previous work has been conducted, Kent Island (New Brunswick, Canada) is easily
              and economically accessible. The location also provides access to lab
              facilities (not typically available on isolated islands where procellariiforms
              breed) and collaborators from around the world, as well as the ability to
              mentor graduate and undergraduate students in the field.



