Title       : RUI: Mating System Evolution at the Interface of Populations and Species in
               Linanthus (Polemoniaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0212903

Award Number: 0212903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146507             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol Goodwillie goodwilliec@mail.ecu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Carolina University
	      East Fifth Street
	      Greenville, NC  278584353    252/328-6452

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research continues an ongoing exploration of self-incompatibility
              and the evolution of self-fertilization in Linanthus (Polemoniaceae). 
              Self-incompatibility (SI), a genetic mechanism that allows plants to recognize
              and reject self-pollen, is a common feature of higher plants.  The breakdown of
              SI, resulting in self-fertilization, is known to have occurred frequently
              throughout the evolutionary history of flowering plants.  The proposed series
              of experiments will explore a newly discovered transient form of SI that may
              represent a "snapshot" in the breakdown of SI and evolution toward
              self-fertilization.  In L. jepsonii, self-fertilization is prevented for a few
              hours or days, after which flowers become fully capable of self-fertilization. 
              The proposed experiments will characterize this phenomenon, its genetic basis,
              and its effect on the rate of self-fertilization.  Molecular methods will be
              used to explore evolutionary relationships among populations that differ in the
              extent of transient SI.  

The proposed research will contribute basic
              knowledge about SI, a phenomenon that has important implications for crop plant
              breeding.  The genetic and physiological bases of this mechanism have received
              considerable study, yet we know little about the process by which SI breaks
              down.  The project has been designed to foster training of undergraduate
              students.  The modular nature of the research, comprising a series of discrete
              experiments, will allow undergraduates gain experience in a range of
              methodologies, including field studies, fluorescence microscopy, pollination
              experiments, and molecular techniques 

