Title       : Social and Gonadal Control of Neural Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0212449

Award Number: 0212449
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99666              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Godwin John_Godwin@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1193,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Differences between male and female brains and behavior result primarily from
              differences in the timing, level and location of gene expression.  Even in
              species where sex is determined chromosomally and the gonads play central roles
              in the differentiation process, the exact nature of gene expression is
              influenced by a host of environmental influences ranging from nutrition to
              social interactions.  Although we are building a solid understanding of how
              gonadal steroids influence the sexual differentiation of brain and behavior,
              the mechanisms by which social interactions affect this process remain poorly
              understood.  This project develops an integrative approach to how gene
              expression in the brain changes during sexual differentiation, in a model
              system where it is possible to experimentally dissect gonadal and social
              influences that regulate behavior.  A well-studied reef fish species, the
              bluehead wrasse, exhibits socially-controlled functional sex change.  When
              local dominant males are removed, a large female changes into a male, and even
              gonadectomized females change to male behavioral phenotypes.  The challenge is
              to identify those neural genes from the brain relevant to the behavior that are
              differentially expressed, between females that do not change sex and those that
              are induced to change sex in their natural environment.  This project has a
              focus on developing the molecular technology to successfully approach that
              question, to first identify some of the relevant genes that then can be
              targeted to look for changes in expression during the behavioral change. 
              Results will be important for further developing this system as a good genetic
              model to understand the neural basis of sexually dimorphic behavior.
   The
              impact of this work will extend beyond neuroscience to animal behavior, to
              psychology, and to potential use in aquaculture and fish breeding.  In
              addition, the project continues excellent field and laboratory training for
              students in an interesting project integrating animal behavior, endocrinology
              and molecular biology.


