Title       : LARSON, An Arabidopsis Homeobox Gene in Flower Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0212847

Award Number: 0212847
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhongchi Liu zl17@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1118,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0212847
Liu
	
The long-term objective is to reveal the mechanisms determining
              how cells in a multicellular organism assume their developmental fates.  Using
              Arabidopsis flower as a model, the focus of this proposal is to reveal the
              regulatory mechanism for the spatial and temporal-specific expression of
              AGAMOUS (AG), a gene for stamen and carpel identity specification.  AG mRNA is
              normally expressed in the inner two whorls of a flower and is absent from the
              outer two whorls.  LEUNIG (LUG), a putative transcriptional co-repressor with
              sequence similarity to the yeast co-repressor TUP, was previously shown to play
              a crucial role in repressing AG expression in the outer two whorls.  Since LUG
              does not encode a DNA binding domain, how LUG is recruited to the AG
              cis-regulatory element is unknown.  The newly identified LARSON (LSN) gene is
              an excellent candidate for being a DNA-binding partner of LUG.  lsn-1 mutation
              enhances the defects of lug mutation in AG regulation.  Further, preliminary
              data indicated that LSN encodes a homeobox protein, can bind to the AG
              cis-regulatory elements, and can interact with LUG in yeast.  In addition, as
              LUG mRNA is expressed in all floral whorls, the outer whorl-specific repression
              activity of LUG could be conferred by interaction with an outer-whorl-specific
              factor.  Could LSN hold the crucial role in providing the spatial and temporal
              specificity to the LUG co-repressor?  The proposed experiments are aimed at
              testing these hypotheses.  First, the molecular identity of LSN will be
              confirmed by transformation rescue of the lsn-1 mutant phenotype.  Several
              reverse genetic methods will be employed to identify additional alleles of lsn.
               Second, the RNA and protein expression profile of LSN will be determined by in
              situ hybridization and immuno-localization or LSN-GFP.  Third, by expressing
              LSN cDNA in ectopic whorls (where LUG is expressed), the ectopic co-repressor
              activity will be tested.  Fourth, to establish that LSN directly regulates AG,
              the electrophoretic mobility shift assay will be used to identify the binding
              sites of LSN within AG cis-regulatory elements.  Further, LSN-VP16 chimeric
              protein expressed in transgenic plants will be used to establish the functional
              relevance of LSN binding to AG in vivo.  Finally, physical interactions between
              LSN and LUG proteins will be tested using a co-immunoprecipitation assay. 
              Other LSN-interacting proteins will be identified by a yeast two-hybrid screen.
               The proposed study will elucidate the basic mechanism of transcriptional
              repression in higher plant development and provide excellent training
              opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.


