Title       : Molecular Analysis of Drosophila Neurotransmission in a Reconstituted Fusion
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0212605

Award Number: 0212605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480001             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. McNew mcnew@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1192,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nerve cells, or neurons, communicate and relay signals by the regulated release
              of chemicals called neurotransmitters.  This extremely complex process is
              tightly regulated and is required for all movement as well as higher brain
              functions such as learning and memory.  One method to study such a complicated
              process is to carefully dissect the problem into smaller units and gain a
              better understanding of the component parts.  The final step in the release of
              neurotransmitter is the merger of the membrane bound sac that contains these
              chemicals with the cell membrane, the barrier that separates the nerve cell
              from its environment.  The consequence of this membrane fusion event is the
              release of neurotransmitter to the space between neurons, resulting in
              communication between these cells.  We seek to understand the structural and
              functional basis of this membrane fusion event.  The process of membrane fusion
              can be further subdivided into discrete steps.  Many of the molecular
              components that drive the fusion process have been identified, but the precise
              way they interact to perform their role is not well understood.   The
              objectives of this work are to identify the specific interactions that
              determine the spatial and temporal coordination of neurotransmission in a
              defined system.  We will develop a synthetic fusion system to model
              neurosecretion using only the minimal components, specifically pure
              phospholipids and fusion proteins from the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster. 
              Neuronal fusion proteins, called SNAREs, will be produced in bacteria and
              incorporated into synthetic phospholipid vesicles.  A detailed molecular
              analysis of the protein-protein interaction affect SNARE function will be
              studied.  In addition, the role of regulatory factors will be analyzed.  This
              assay will provide a unique window into the way in which cells fuse biological
              membranes.  The ability to study these proteins in their native context of a
              phospholipid bilayer will be a major step toward a better understanding of
              their critical physiological role. 



