Title       : Genetic and Molecular Characterization of Dual HLH Domain Proteins in C. elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0212336

Award Number: 0212336
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $434203             (Estimated)
Investigator: Casonya R. Johnson cjohnso9@morgan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Morgan State University
	      1700 East Cold Spring Lane
	      Baltimore, MD  21251    443/885-3200

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1154,1228,1515,1594,9179,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Eukaryotic development depends on three carefully orchestrated processes:
              differentiation, morphogenesis, and growth.  The coordination of these
              processes is most clearly demonstrated during embryological development of
              newly fertilized eggs, when a single cell gives rise to thousands of
              differentiated and morphologically distinct cell types.  During this process,
              and throughout its life cycle, the developing organism is responsible for
              regulating the spatial and temporal expression of genes.  The helix-loop-helix
              (HLH) family of transcriptional regulators regulate a wide array of
              developmental processes.  Members of this transcription factor family have been
              identified in most eukaryotic systems and are required for a variety of
              critical developmental processes, including normal pancreatic functioning,
              brain and eye morphogenesis, macrophage differentiation, and skeletal muscle
              development.  Because HLH proteins are involved in so many diverse processes,
              they have been the focus of intense study by molecular geneticists and
              biochemists.  General rules for DNA binding and protein dimerization activities
              by HLH proteins have been determined, and the HLH proteins are classified
              according to these properties.  During a previously funded pilot study, a new
              class of HLH proteins was identified in the soil nematode, Caenorhabditis
              elegans.  The five proteins identified each contained two intact HLH domains. 
              Because HLH proteins have been extensively characterized, finding two domains
              was surprising.  The identification of HLH proteins containing more than one
              HLH domain implies that these proteins may regulate transcription in more ways
              than previously described.  The long-term goal of this project is to perform an
              in vivo and in vitro characterization of HLH regulators containing multiple HLH
              domains.  To meet this goal, the following specific aims have been formulated:
              (1) determine expression patterns of five C. elegans proteins, each containing
              two HLH domains; (2) characterize phenotypes associated with aberrant
              expression of dual HLH domain proteins; and (3) determine the DNA binding
              properties of two dual HLH domain proteins.
The intellectual merit of the work
              described here is the beginning of a long-term project that focuses on the
              transcriptional regulation of eukaryotic development by HLH proteins.  Once
              completed, this project will help determine if proteins containing more than
              one HLH domain are widely expressed in C. elegans, and if these proteins
              exhibit the same DNA binding properties as those with single HLH domains. 
              Future experiments can then focus on in vitro studies of transcriptional
              regulation by these proteins.  On the broader scale, the work described here
              will be performed at Morgan State University, an HBCU that is also an urban,
              predominantly undergraduate university.  With the goal of exposing more
              students to research careers, undergraduate students are involved in all
              aspects of the research described.  These students will present their research
              activities at local undergraduate and at National Research Symposia.  As
              designed, this project will also allow the Department of Biology to integrate
              an active research project into a required upper-level undergraduate course.
              The integration of the research into this course will ensure that every Biology
              Major at Morgan State University will have at least one semester of exposure to
              basic research in molecular genetics.
This project is supported by the
              Biochemistry of Gene Expression Program in the Division of Molecular and
              Cellular Biosciences and the Multi-User Equipment Program in the Division of
              Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate for Biological Sciences, and by
              the Historically Black College and University Undergraduate Initiative Program
              in the Division of Human Resource Development in the Education and Human
              Resources Directorate.
