Title       : In Vivo Pathways of Molecular Evolution: Acquisition of Thermostability by
               Mesophilic Adenylate Kinase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0212417

Award Number: 0212417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yousif Shamoo shamoo@bioc.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Using in vivo molecular evolution the P.I. is studying how an organism mutates
              an essential gene as a response to changes in its environment. The model
              organism is a genetically modified strain of B. stearothermophilus (a
              thermophile) that has had the wild type copy of the essential adenylate kinase
              gene (adk) replaced by the mesophilic B. subtilis gene. The grant focuses on
              two key attributes of molecular evolution; firstly, what are the
              characteristics of bacterial populations as they adapt to environmental
              extremes, and secondly, what are the physicochemical properties of the proteins
              generated from these selections. The experiments follow populations of mutant
              bacteria as they compete for survival and will use x-ray crystallography to
              examine the stereochemical basis for increases in thermostability.

Sequence
              and structure based comparisons of mesophilic and thermophilic homologs have
              suggested that numerous changes in amino acid sequence can increase
              thermostability, whereas in vitro directed evolution has shown that a smaller
              number of changes can frequently bring about the required changes in
              activity/thermostability. One conclusion frequently drawn from these
              observations is that many of the differences seen in sequence are the result of
              evolutionary drift, rather than evolutionary necessity. To determine the
              principles that guide evolution of a protein, the mutational path(s) taken by a
              population of bacteria as they evolve an essential protein to higher
              thermostability is being determined. Together with atomic analysis of the
              protein intermediates along this path, the complex sequence surface that
              constitutes the mutational path to thermostability for the model protein will
              be explored. Altering conditions of the evolution experiment can also change
              the "mutational path" used by the bacterial populations and allow further
              insights into evolution. Thus the primary goal of the work is to elucidate the
              pathway(s) used in vivo and to apply biophysical methods to understand the
              physical basis for the elaborated mutational pathway(s).  

