Title       : Molecular Analysis of XMAP215 Structure and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0212000

Award Number: 0212000
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Gard gard@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1132,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Microtubules (MTs) are dynamic intracellular structural polymers that play
              critical roles in many cellular functions, including intracellular transport,
              the specification and establishment of cellular and developmental polarity, and
              cell division. Microtubule dynamics are modulated by a diverse group of
              proteins collectively referred to as microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs). 
              XMAP215, a MAP first identified by Dr. Gard and isolated from eggs of the
              African frog Xenopus laevis, promotes the assembly of long, dynamic MTs by
              increasing the rates of both MT elongation and shortening in an end-specific
              manner. Recently, related proteins have been identified in taxonomically
              diverse organisms, including plants (Arabidopsis), yeast (S. cerevisiae and S.
              pombe), invertebrates (Drosophila and C. elegans), and humans, indicating that
              XMAP215 is a member of an ancient family of MAPs. The research to be performed
              under this award focuses on the relationship between XMAP215 structure and
              function. Specific questions to be addressed include: 

What is the
              relationship between XMAP215 structure and function? A. Do the domains
              identified by sequence alignment correspond to MT binding domains? B. Are HEAT
              repeats critical for XMAP215 function?  Sequence analysis suggests that XMAP215
              (and homologues in other organisms) contain four domains, each composed of
              multiple HEAT repeats, a protein motif thought to form a flexible scaffold for
              protein-protein interactions. A combination of in vitro and in vivo assays will
              be used to examine the relationship between XMAP215 structure and function,
              addressing the roles of XMAP215 domains and HEAT repeats in XMAP215 function. 
              

How does phosphorylation by the cell cycle kinase CDK1 and MARK kinase
              regulate XMAP215 function? Phosphorylation of XMAP215 by CDK1 in vitro reduces
              assembly promotion without reducing MT binding, suggesting that multiple
              binding sites for tubulin might be independently regulated by phosphorylation.
              To address the mechanism by which  CDK1-dependent phosphorylation regulates
              XMAP215 function, site-directed mutagenesis will be used to replace threonine
              residues in the two predicted CDK1 target sequences in XMAP215 with aspartate
              (mimicking phosphorylation) or alanine (a non-phosphorylatable amino acid). 
              The effects of these substitutions on XMAP215 function will be assayed in vitro
              and in vivo by expressing constructs bearing the mutations in transfected
              cells. Similar studies will target the three predicted target sequences for
              MARK, a MT-associated kinase known to regulate MAP-MT interactions in other
              cells.  

Are multiple homologs/isoforms of XMAP215 expressed during
              mammalian (mouse) development? Transcripts encoding two isoforms of XMAP215 are
              differentially expressed during Xenopus development, and evidence for multiple
              transcripts in humans exists in the form of two cDNAs related to XMAP215
              (KIAA0097 and ch-TOG). However, little is known of the spatial and temporal
              patterns of expression or role(s) of  XMAP215 homologues during mammalian
              development.  XMAP215 homologs (MAP215) expressed during mouse development will
              be characterized at both RNA and protein levels using a variety of techniques,
              including Northern blots and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
              (RT-PCR) to identify and characterize mRNA transcripts, in situ hybridization
              to localize mRNA expression, and immunoblots to characterize protein
              expression.  Finally, cloning and characterization of the gene encoding MAP215
              in mice will lay the groundwork for future genetic studies of the role of
              MAP215 in mouse development.  

Results from this project will provide new
              insight into the structure and function of XMAP215 and its regulation by
              phosphorylation, which may also shed light on the function and regulation of
              other members of this ancient family of microtubule-associated proteins.  The
              project will also support the training of undergraduate, graduate and
              post-doctoral students. 

