Title       : Signal Transduction Through the EnvZ/OmpR Two-Component Regulatory System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0212925

Award Number: 0212925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Goulian goulian@physics.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1136,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                         A grant has been awarded to explore the transmission of information
              through the EnvZ/OmpR two-component regulatory system in Escherichia coli. The
              osmo-regulation of porin expression by the sensor kinase EnvZ and response
              regulator OmpR is one of the simplest and best characterized two-component
              systems and is thus ideal for studying quantitative and mechanistic aspects of
              intracellular signaling. The goals of this project are oriented towards
              addressing the following questions: 1) Can models of EnvZ/OmpR signaling
              describe qualitative and quantitative aspects of porin osmoregulation in vivo? 
              2) What is the signal that stimulates the sensor kinase EnvZ? A quantitative
              model of the EnvZ/OmpR circuit has been formulated which predicts that the
              cycle of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation renders the system insensitive
              (robust) with respect to variations in a number of parameters. Fluorescent
              reporter strains have also been developed that permit rapid and sensitive
              quantitative measurements of transcriptional activity. These reporters will be
              used to test the predictions regarding robustness, quantify the variability in
              signaling behavior among single cells, characterize the kinetics of EnvZ/OmpR
              signal transduction, and determine whether EnvZ responds to mechanical stress.
              Quantitative models will be further developed and analyzed in order to explore
              the organization and structure of the EnvZ/OmpR circuit and to explore the
              extent to which variants of the models can be applied to other systems.

This
              project combines quantitative measurements and mathematical modeling in order
              to understand a relatively simple example of a biological circuit.  Progress in
              this area will provide important steps towards developing an integrative view
              of the complex networks of interacting biomolecules within cells. This will
              ultimately make it possible to reengineer many of the adaptive signaling
              systems in bacteria, plants and fungi and will impact a wide range of fields
              such as biotechnology, drug development, and cell signaling.

