Title       : Climatic Variability and Ecosystem Response: Precipitation Patterns, Soil
               Moisture Dynamics, and Productivity in Tallgrass Prairie
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0212409

Award Number: 0212409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nancy C. Tuchman                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $447214             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip A. Fay   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Climatic variability is a key driver of ecosystem structure and function in
              grasslands, and climate models suggest that variability in rainfall,
              temperature, and other climatic parameters will increase because of global
              climate change. However, there is uncertainty about future rainfall patterns,
              with some models predicting increased, others decreased growing season rainfall
              and soil moisture. Any shifts in rainfall quantity or frequency will change
              rainfall variability, and several lines of evidence suggest that variability
              may as important as the total quantity of rainfall in regulating tallgrass
              prairie net primary productivity. Indeed, increases in rainfall variability,
              even with no change in rainfall quantity, have the capacity to reduce plant
              performance and productivity and may cause shifts in tallgrass prairie
              community composition, because of unavoidable physiological and morphological
              limitations on plant abilities to track and adjust to varying resources. The
              objective of the research described in this proposal is to experimentally
              determine the impact of variability in rainfall patterns on above- and
              belowground grassland productivity, using tallgrass prairie as a model system.
              We will impose decreases and increases in variability in rainfall inputs on
              microcosms containing common tallgrass prairie grasses and forbs, by
              experimental watering at sixteen different quantity and frequency combinations.
              Measurements will focus on soil moisture dynamics, photosynthetic performance,
              canopy development, root growth dynamics, plant reproduction, and above and
              belowground net primary productivity. The overarching hypothesis tested by this
              experiment is that variability is a key driver of tallgrass prairie
              productivity, and the experiment will examine several specific hypotheses about
              the relationships between rainfall quantity and frequency and productivity in
              grasses and forbs. This knowledge will broaden our understanding of the
              regulation of grassland productivity, and will have implications for research
              on productivity/diversity relationships, fire/grazer interactions, terrestrial
              carbon dynamics, atmosphere/vegetation feedbacks, and interactions among
              climatic elements in global change scenarios (rainfall, temperature, and
              elevated CO2). An accurate understanding of these issues is crucial to
              predicting climate change impacts on grasslands and developing proactive
              conservation and management plans for these endangered systems.
