Title       : Studies of Brightness, Brightness Contrast and Lightness: Methods and Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0212789

Award Number: 0212789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150501             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Blakeslee barbara.blakeslee@ndsu.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1185,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Brightness is a fundamental quality of vision. A central problem in brightness
              perception is understanding how and when the visual system is able to separate
              the physically invariant reflectances of surfaces from their potentially
              changing illumination. The luminance distribution falling on the photoreceptor
              array, and the neural activity this engenders, is the algebraic product of the
              reflectance of objects in the environment and their illuminance. The recovery
              of surface reflectance and illuminance information from the raw luminance
              signal is thus an ill-posed problem, in that there are myriad combinations of
              illumination and reflectance that can potentially give rise to a given
              intensity distribution, and in the absence of additional information there is
              no algorithmic solution. We know from everyday experience, however, that the
              visual system solves the inverse problem in a satisfactory manner much of the
              time. The heuristic used by the visual system must, therefore, involve the use
              of additional sources of information and/or assumptions. Indeed, much of the
              current debate among researchers in brightness and lightness perception, and
              the focus of this research project, centers on discovering the mechanisms the
              visual system uses to solve this problem.  
A careful examination of the work
              of Arend and Spehar [(1993) Perception & Psychophysics, 54, 446-468] makes it
              clear that lightness defined only as perceived reflectance is under-specified,
              since it refers to three very different types of achromatic judgments that are
              not comparable. This is a direct result of the fact that, in its heuristic
              solution to the inverse problem, the visual system uses different strategies to
              estimate surface reflectance in different situations. The fact that lightness
              judgments are based on different information under different conditions, and
              that the various definitions of the term lightness refer to either all or only
              a subset of these different types of lightness judgments, has created confusion
              in the literature. Thus, "lightness" data generated in one study may or may not
              be comparable or relevant to what other investigators study using the same
              name.  
The proposed experiments are designed to resolve large discrepancies
              in the literature over the effects of perceived illumination and the effects of
              perceived depth on lightness perception. It is hypothesized that these
              discrepancies are the result of different studies tapping different types of
              lightness judgments. To definitively resolve this issue we will obtain
              brightness, brightness contrast and lightness judgments for a set of critical
              stimuli. A clear distinction between inferred-lightness judgments (cognitive
              judgments of target lightness) and lightness judgments based on brightness or
              brightness contrast (sensory-level judgments of surface color or contrast) is
              an essential step in critically evaluating models of brightness and lightness
              perception. These data will be compared to predictions of both a multiscale
              filtering model of brightness perception [Blakeslee & McCourt (1999) Vision
              Research, 39, 4361-4377] as well as to an anchoring model of lightness
              perception [Gilchrist et al. (1999) Psychological Review, 106, 795-834].
The
              project will integrate research and education by involving undergraduate
              students as much as possible in every phase of the research process. Effort
              will be made to involve students from underrepresented groups, such as females
              and Native Americans. In addition to the benefits conferred on society by
              expanding knowledge of basic sensory processing, the present research will be
              of broad applicability to any area impacted by the interface between sighted
              humans and machines of all descriptions.


