Title       : A Systematic Investigation of Golden Algae - Ochromonadales (Chrysophyceae).
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0212138

Award Number: 0212138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Andersen randersen@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	A grant has been awarded to Dr. Robert Andersen at Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean
              Sciences to investigate the systematic biology of golden algae.  The
              Chrysophyceae (golden algae) contain many common freshwater and marine algal
              species.  Most species are microscopic and were described about 100 years ago
              using only a light microscope.  Recent studies revealed that older studies were
              too simplistic and inaccurate.  This study will examine the largest taxonomic
              order of the Chrysophyceae, the order Ochromonadales, with emphasis on the
              largest genus, Ochromonas.  These are biflagellate microorganisms that are able
              to conduct photosynthesis.  Preliminary results showed that the small subunit
              ribosomal RNA and the ribulose bis-phosphate carboxylase/oxygenase genes are
              appropriate for the DNA portion of the study.  Additionally, the electron
              microscope will be used to study flagella and special vesicles of keystone
              species, i.e., those especially important for understanding evolution of these
              algae. We anticipate the discovery and description of several new species, as
              well as new genera, that have heretofore been unknown to science.  The
              completed project will provide a modern taxonomic revision for this large and
              important group of algae.  

	Chrysophyte algae help form the base of the
              food chain in aquatic ecosystems, and freshwater and marine animals depend
              directly, or indirectly, on these algae.  Those in drinking water treatment
              plants or environmental science companies, who work in aquatic ecosystems,
              depend upon systematic biologists, like myself, for accurate and thorough
              descriptions of species.  Also, biochemists, molecular biologists, and
              biotechnologists depend upon systematic biologists for accurate identifications
              of cultures and precise descriptions for species.  Our previous research
              discovered a new group of algae that produce large amounts of polyunsaturated
              fatty acids (PUFAs), especially EPA, which is very beneficial for human health
              (reduces heart disease).  These new PUFA algae are related to the
              Chrysophyceae, and perhaps additional organisms, which are beneficial to human
              health, will be discovered and described in this study.

