Title       : Ecology and Evolution of Nodule Symbiosis for Invasive Legumes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0212369

Award Number: 0212369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan J. Tessier                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew A. Parker mparker@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wanda Malek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ingrid M. Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:  Ecology and evolution of nodule symbiosis for invasive legumes
              

	As a result of both deliberate and accidental transport across regions,
              many species of legumes have become invasive weeds that have greatly altered
              the ecology of plant communities throughout the world.  The disproportionate
              ecological impact of legumes is strongly related to their symbiosis with root
              nodule bacteria (rhizobia).  This symbiosis provides legumes with an abundant
              supply of usable nitrogen, an essential nutrient that is often a primary
              limiting factor for plant growth.  
However, the influence of this symbiosis
              on invasion by legumes is poorly understood.  Legumes must acquire rhizobia
              from their immediate environment following seed germination, because bacteria
              are not carried internally within seeds.  As a result, introduced legumes will
              often arrive at new habitats where well-adapted mutualist partners from their
              ancestral range are nonexistent.  Even if legume colonists have sufficiently
              unspecialized nodulation behavior to allow them to use bacterial strains
              obtained from other legume taxa indigenous to a site, there is no reason to
              expect that such strains will be optimally adapted to the novel host.  Invasion
              success may thus depend on whether colonist plants can select for more
              beneficial symbiotic partners over time.  To date, there has been no research
              to test whether evolutionary changes in symbiotic compatibility are an
              important factor in legume range expansion.
	This project will use the highly
              invasive legume Scotch broom (Cytisus scoparius) as a model system to answer
              several fundamental questions about demographic and evolutionary processes
              affecting biological invasion by legumes.  Scotch broom is native to Europe,
              but is an aggressive invader on four other continents.  The specific objectives
              of the project are: 1)  to use DNA sequencing of ribosomal genes to identify
              the geographic origin of rhizobial symbionts for invasive Scotch broom plants
              in two separate regions of the U.S.  These bacteria will be compared to samples
              from a broad range of other legumes species native to both Europe and North
              America. 2) to test whether adaptation of nodule bacteria to invading legumes
              has involved horizontal transfer of bacterial genes encoding symbiotic traits. 
              DNA sequencing will also be performed on two bacterial genes essential to the
              nitrogen-fixation symbiosis, to test whether the genealogical relationships of
              different DNA regions have been altered by transfer of genetic material between
              bacterial strains; 3) to use field inoculation experiments to determine whether
              the demographic performance of legume colonists is limited by a scarcity of
              compatible rhizobia.  The growth of plants in natural environments with and
              without exposure to supplemental root-nodule bacteria will be compared; and 4)
              to evaluate whether the rhizobia available to legume invaders are of inferior
              quality, by comparing how plants grow when inoculated with bacteria from the
              plant's ancestral range (Europe) vs. bacteria from newly colonized North
              American sites.

	One of the most serious types of human environmental impact
              on natural ecosystems involves activities that have caused species to invade
              new geographic regions.  By providing insights about the role of microbial
              symbionts in legume range expansion, this project will contribute to a better
              understanding of biological invasions, and will also generate concepts and
              methods relevant to specific programs for managing a variety of invasive legume
              weeds.

