Title       : RUI: Versal Deformations, Deformation Quantization, Moduli Spaces and Graph
               Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0200669

Award Number: 0200669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47452              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Penkava penkavmr@uwec.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Eau Claire
	      Park & Garfield
	      Eau Claire, WI  54701    715/836-2637

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project has three parts:  (1) To study the versal deformations of  A_\infty
              , L_\infty  algebras, which are generalizations of Lie and associative
              algebras; (2) To study the problem of deformation quantization of polynomial
              Poisson algebras; (3) To address some problems in the study of the moduli space
              of Riemann surfaces with marked points that arise from the combinatorial
              equivalence of this space and the orbifold of metric Ribbon graphs.  The first
              part continues a program being carried out jointly with Alice Fialowski.  The
              second part is about generalizing a purely cohomological construction of the PI
              and Pol Vanhaecke of the unique generic deformation quantizationof order three
              which extends to a fourth order deformation.  The third part, which is joint
              work with Motohico Mulase, is more open-ended.  Reasonable goals might be: to
              establish a canonical orbifold diffeomorphism between the moduli space of
              Riemann surfaces and the Ribbon graph complex; to give concrete
              characterizations of the Strebel differential in some interesting cases; to
              study solutions to the KP system determined by the correspondence between
              ribbon graphs and Riemann surfaces over the algebraic closure of the rationals;
              to describe in detail the correspondence between the homology of the Ribbon
              graph comples, and the moduli space of Riemann surfaces with marked
              points.

This project consists of three problems in mathematics related to or
              motivated by physics.  The first problem is to study what happens when a very
              general kind of algebraic structure, one that arises in both mathematics and
              physics, is "deformed," for example by incorporating some special little
              twisting process into the usual algebraic operation of multiplication.  This
              investigation continues collaborative work with a colleague in Hungary.  The
              second problem involves a different kind of deformation process applied to a
              certain class of polynomial algebras.  The third, and most open-ended problem,
              is about investigating a remarkable and unexpected correspondence between an
              algebraically defined geometric space and a differentially (as in calculus)
              defined geometric object.  This third part also provides numerous opportunities
              for undergraduate involvement in research.
