Title       : Computational Techniques for Learning and Reusing Design Procedures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2002     
File        : a0200262

Award Number: 0200262
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299974             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Stahovich stahov@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research project is to create techniques for capturing and
              reusing design procedures for parametric design.  The proposed techniques will
              be implemented as a transparent software layer that will be placed over
              existing design tools, transforming them into trainable design automation
              tools.  The designer will train these tools by solving a few sample design
              problems.  Once trained, the tools will be capable of solving similar problems
              with a minimum of human intervention.  The proposed approach will use decision
              tree learning algorithms to learn which attributes of the design best indicate
              which parameter the designer will change at any given point in the design
              procedure.   Background knowledge will be used to improve the learning accuracy
              and to generalize the learned procedures.   Neural networks will be used to
              learn representations for the implicit design constraints.

If successful,
              this work will help to preserve design knowledge in a reusable form.  A
              tremendous amount of useful information is generated during the process of
              designing, but often only the final result is recorded, in the form of detailed
              drawings.  When design information is lost, future efforts to maintain the
              design may result in unexpected failures.  Similarly, future designers may have
              to reinvent what was once known, or they may repeat past mistakes.  The
              proposed work directly addresses these issues by creating techniques for
              capturing the procedures by which design problems are solved.  Solution
              procedures are the distillation of the designer's understanding of a problem,
              thus preserving them provides a valuable resource for others who must solve
              similar problems.
