Title       : Representation Theoretical Methods in the Theory of Special Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0200364

Award Number: 0200364
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140108             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adriano M. Garsia garsia@schur.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is on the Theory of Symmetric Functions and its 
applications to
              Representation Theory and Combinatorics.  The 
connection between
              Representation Theory and the Theory of 
Symmetric Functions is provided by
              the Frobenius map which 
relates group characters to symmetric functions.
              Combinatorics  
plays a role in that multiplicities of irreducibles are  often
              
obtained by counting tableaux, paths, trees and a growing variety 
of newly
              emerging  discrete structures. In the more than ten years 
since its
              discovery, the Macdonald basis has progressively emerged 
as a central element
              in these connections.  For more than a decade 
of research in the Theory of
              Macdonald Polynomials, the 
investigator and M. Haiman  have been led to a
              variety of 
conjectures in Representation Theory, Algebraic Geometry,
              
Combinatorics and  Symmetric Function Theory. Efforts in proving 
these
              conjectures have yielded fundamental facts and methods  in 
each of these
              areas.  More recently the investigator discovered a 
variety of summation
              formulas (PNAS V. 98 (April 2001) 4313-4316) 
which permitted the proof of the
              first significant positivity 
result in the Theory of Macdonald Polynomials.
              In joint work with 
J. Haglund the investigator proved a beautiful
              combinatorial 
formula (conjectured by J. Haglund) for a rational function
              which 
had come to be known as the $q,t$-Catalan. The investigator in
              
collaboration with students and associates plans to use his 
recently
              discovered symmetric function identities for a direct 
attack of some of the
              conjectures that are still unresolved.

The Theory of Symmetric Functions is
              a powerful symbolic 
manipulation tool. The reason for this is that non linear
              problems 
may often be linearized by the introduction of an infinite number 
              
of variables. Now it develops that the change of bases matrices  
of
              Symmetric Function Theory  may be used to "mimic" the presence 
of infinities
              within a finite device, thereby permitting the 
linearization and solution of
              many a computational problem. 
Discoveries in the theory and applications of
              symmetric functions, 
should also turn out to be of significant impact in the
              various 
areas of mathematics in which symmetric function methods  have been
              
shown to be effective.  This given, we can see how important it is 
to
              pursue investigations in the  Theory of Symmetric functions 
that extend and
              deepen the computational power of the theory.  
This is the foremost goal of
              the present project. 
