Title       : Strategic Reverse Production System Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0200162

Award Number: 0200162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane C. Ammons jane.ammons@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew J. Realff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding to develop methodology and tools for the design
              and extension of reverse production systems.  The methodological basis is
              mathematical programming, specifically mixed-integer linear programming.  The
              model uses a robust objective function that minimizes the maximum deviation of
              the robust solution from the best solutions for a set of scenarios.  The
              approach builds on previous research in reverse production systems in four
              ways.  First, it extends the scope of the system to overlay decisions in the
              forward production system.  Second, it considers multiple commodities. Third,
              it develops richer representations of uncertainties that have a major impact on
              the decision-making.  Fourth, it addresses reverse production systems with
              several independent players that may have conflicting goals.  The strong links
              between the principal investigators and organizations involved in recycling for
              carpet and electronics will allow these tools to be tested and refined in a
              variety of contexts.
     Production systems that support the recovery,
              processing and resale of materials and sub-components at the end of their
              useful life are an important part of the U.S. and world economy.  There are
              estimated to be 73,000 firms employing 350,000 people, generating revenues of
              US$53 billion/year in remanufacturing alone.  Working with companies,
              non-profits, and government agencies, successful results from the research
              enable better decision making for strategic reverse production system design,
              with practical application to recycling and reuse in the carpet and electronics
              industry.  They will contribute to the knowledge base for complex supply chain
              decision-making, both by making the problem representation richer, and by
              developing new approaches for solving large-scale mathematical programming
              problems in the context of supply chain design.  The students and our
              industrial partners will gain exposure to a rich class of problems of
              significant importance to modern industrialized societies and a set of
              techniques that can be brought to bear on a wide range of decision-making
              problems.
