Title       : Global Methods in the Analysis on Singular Spaces and Partial Differential
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0200808

Award Number: 0200808
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor Nistor nistor@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Nistor

This project is devoted to the analysis and spectral theory
              of differential operators on non-compact manifolds. The investigator is
              especially interested in generalizing the classical results of elliptic theory
              for compact manifolds, including index theory. Little can be said about all
              non-compact manifolds in general, but results of Bismut, Beunning, Cordes,
              Mazzeo, Melrose, Meuller, Shubin, and others have singled
out a class of
              manifolds that is more amenable to study: the class of manifolds with a uniform
              structure at infinity. The local theory (regularity, local existence) for these
              manifolds is the same as for compact manifolds, so our methods will necessarily
              be global. Thus, in addition to the methods of Partial differential equations
              and Differential geometry used by the above mentioned authors, methods from
              Operator algebras have come to play an increasingly important role in the study
              of non-compact manifolds with
a uniform structure at infinity, as is seen from
              the work of Connes, V.F.R. Jones, Lauter, Monthubert, Skandalis, Taylor, and
              the investigator.

Manifolds with a uniform structure at infinity appear
              naturally in Scattering theory, Differential geometry, Representation theory,
              Mathematical physics, and certain problems of Applied mathematics. The results
              of the proposed research will have, in the long run, applications to all these
              domains. The main methods that are proposed belong to Analysis, especially
              Partial differential equations, Operator algebras, Spectral theory, and
              K-theory. A main technical tool will be provided by algebras generated by
              differential
operators on non-compact manifolds with a uniform structure at
              infinity. By using Sobolev spaces, one can reduce many of our basic questions
              to questions about algebras of bounded operators. A novel feature of this
              proposal is the study of boundary value problems for manifolds with a uniform
              structure at infinity that have Lipschitz boundaries, as in the work of Mitrea
              and Taylor on such compact domains.

