Title       : Harmonic Analysis and Nonlinear Hamiltonian Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0200880

Award Number: 0200880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67521              (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren R. Wogen wrw@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Comech  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project suggests investigations in the area of Harmonic 
Analysis and
              Nonlinear Hamiltonian Equations.  One direction 
of the research in the
              analysis of singular integral operators.
Current interests include Lebesgue
              space estimates on Fourier 
integral operators associated to singular and
              nonsingular 
canonical relations. Such estimates provide important tools 
for
              the analysis of properties of solutions to nonlinear 
Hamiltonian systems:
              global existence, smoothness, and stability. 
The other direction of the
              research concerns specific properties 
of solitary wave solutions to nonlinear
              Hamiltonian systems.
Such soliton-like solutions were proved to exist in
              many
different contexts. If the equation is invariant under the
action of
              some Lie group, then the solitary waves may possess
stability properties. The
              program of research focuses on the
stability of solitary waves with minimal
              energy, which are
expected to be of particular importance for
              applications.

When the amplitude of the waves increases, their interaction
              with 
the medium becomes important. This interaction may seriously
change the
              behavior of the waves and lead to the appearance of
nonlinear solitary waves,
              or solitons. Such nonlinear waves
describe central phenomena in fiber optics,
              plasma physics,
theory of superconductivity, theory of elementary
              particles,
meteorology, and oceanology. Detailed knowledge of properties
of
              such waves, and in particular their stability or instability,
will allow to
              predict the chances of sudden weather changes,
develop optical waveguides, and
              describe quantum effects on
the scales being inexorably approached by today's
              electronics
and chip manufacturers, let alone the Experimental
              Physics.
Natural phenomena pose new challenges to the intricately related
              
fields, Harmonic Analysis and the Theory of Nonlinear Equations, 
and
              stimulate further refinement of the tools of modern
Mathematics.
