Title       : Hamiltonian and Celestial Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0200992

Award Number: 0200992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Moeckel rick@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Richard Moeckel, University of Minnesota - Twin
              Cities
DMS-0200992


Project Abstract:
Hamiltonian and Celestial
              Mechanics


This project is devoted to research in the general area of
              dynamical 
systems theory with emphasis on Hamiltonian and celestial
              mechanics.   Several very 
different aspects of the subject will be studied. 
              Part of the project deals with the special 
periodic solutions of the n-body
              problem arising from central configurations.  It is a 
long-standing open
              problem to determine how many central configurations are possible, or 
even if
              the number is finite.  Techniques from algebraic geometry and computational
              algebra 
will be used to attack this question.  A second part of the project
              involves the 
construction of isolating blocks in the phase space of the
              three-body problem.  It is known that 
it is possible to find simple, explicit
              isolating blocks at the collinear Lagrange points 
of the restricted
              three-body problem.  These blocks can be used to study the complicated
              
invariant set nearby.  The project is to carry out such a construction near
              the 
collinear central configuration of the unrestricted three-body problem. 
              Here the 
dimension of the phase space is higher and the geometry is much more
              complicated.  A final part 
of the project is concerned with understanding the
              mechanism of Arnold diffusion for 
Hamiltonian systems. The approach taken
              here is based on the construction of an invariant 
Cantor set of annuli and
              subsequent analysis of the resulting dynamics.

The gravitational n-body
              problem remains an active topic for mathematics 
research three centuries
              after Newton proposed it.  Over the years it has been a 
stimulus for the
              development of new mathematics of wide applicability.  It is the classic
              
example of a nonlinear mechanical system and its solutions include orderly
              cyclical 
motions, multi-body collisions, and irregular, chaotic behavior. 
              The simplest 
solutions are the rigidly rotating orbits arising from the
              central configurations.  
Central configurations are special arrangements of
              the masses such that the gravitational 
forces can be exactly balanced by
              centrifugal forces when the configuration rotates.  Although 
these solutions
              are dynamically very simple, the problem of finding or even counting the
              
central configurations turns out to be very difficult when there are four or
              more masses 
involved.  Part of this project is about how to deal with very
              complicated algebraic problems 
such as this, perhaps using the help of
              computers.  The central configurations are 
important landmarks which provide
              a starting point for further analysis.  It turns out that 
there are many
              other interesting solutions near the simple, rigidly rotating ones.  One 
way
              to trap and study these nearby orbits involves the construction of so-called
              
isolating blocks. The geometry of these blocks provides qualitative
              information about the 
solutions inside and can also form the basis of
              numerical methods for approximating these 
solutions. Finally, there is the
              problem of understanding chaotic dynamics in 
mechanical systems and how such
              behavior can lead to large-scale instability.  Instability in 
celestial
              mechanics can give rise to such phenomena as the slow drifting of the orbital
              
parameters of planets or asteroids.  It also occurs in a variety of other
              mechanical systems.  
This phenomenon of Arnold diffusion is only partially
              understood at present.  The new 
approach which will be pursued here seems
              promising but much work remains to be done before 
it can be applied to
              complex systems like the n-body problem.


