Title       : Statistical Adjustment for Short-Run Manufacturing: Parametric Optimization,
               Robustness Analysis, and Ensemble Control Using Gibbs Sampling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0200056

Award Number: 0200056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193455             (Estimated)
Investigator: Enrique Del Castillo exd13@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              A problem located at the foundations of the Statistical Process Control (SPC)
              field is how to adjust a manufacturing process that is suspected to be
              operating in a malfunctioning mode. Rapidly adjusting a manufacturing process
              when the setup operation is defective is particularly important. The object of
              this research is to develop optimal sequential adjustment methods for the setup
              and within-run control problems. The setup adjustment problem was first
              analyzed by F. Grubbs who derived a simple sequential scheme. A Bayesian
              formulation for process adjustment will be developed based on Kalman filters.
              The formulation unifies several adjustment rules including Grubbs' scheme,
              Stochastic Approximation, and classical control methods such as Linear
              Quadratic Gaussian (LQG) control. The proposed work will follow two main
              research thrusts: a) parametric optimization and robustness assessment of
              existing  adjustment rules; b) development of a new ensemble-optimal adjustment
              rule. It is proposed to utilize Markov Chain Monte Carlo techniques, and in
              particular, Gibbs Sampling, applied to the problem of estimating the mean of a
              sequentially-adjusted process that experiences errors in the setups according
              to some stable distribution. 

The main outcome of this research will be a
              new set of process adjustment tools that will provide efficient setup and
              within-run control in short-run manufacturing processes. This formulation has
              the major advantage that after a few runs or lots are produced, it allows to
              start adjusting a new lot prior to obtaining the first measurement in the lot.
              This is clearly an advantage for the type of flexible, short-run manufacturing
              systems this research is expected to benefit. Use of Penn State's FAME
              manufacturing laboratory will provide a realistic testbed for the techniques
              developed in this project. Collaboration with industrial researchers (Eli Lilly
              and SAS Institute Inc.) will provide expertise in the real-life application of
              the techniques developed in this research and guidance about software
              implementation. To allow technology transfer, software tools will be written
              and will be freely distributed at Penn State's Applied Statistics laboratory
              web site.
