Title       : Calculus of Variations in L-infinity and Related Nonlinear Partial Differential
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0200169

Award Number: 0200169
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148569             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Jensen rrj@math.luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Emmanuel N. Barron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

DMS-0200169: Calculus of Variations in L-infinity and Nonlinear PDE's
PI:
              Robert R. Jensen, Co-PI: Emmanuel N. Barron

Abstract: 

The study of
              nonlinear essential supremum functionals is the focus
of this project. In
              variational problems with such functionals the
natural questions of interest
              are existence of an absolute (or
local) minimizer, i.e., a function which
              minimizes the functional
on every subdomain, necessary conditions for the
              minimizer leading
to very nonlinear differential equations, and regularity of
              the
minimizer. In contrast to the classical calculus of variations,
even
              under very strong assumptions, regularity beyond continuous
differentiability
              is not expected, but even this much smoothness
is unknown. Virtually every
              question posed in classical
variational analysis can be posed for supremum
              functionals--
constraints, relaxation, homogenization, duality--and this can
              be
done for both scalar and vector valued problems where the results
are more
              difficult. This subject has placed a new focus on
viscosity solutions for
              fully nonlinear equations, and a new
emphasis on an old area of convex
              analysis, quasiconvexity. The
motivation for the study of such problems comes
              from consideration
of physical problems in which the use of the typical energy
              norm
is not adequate, that is, one must design for the worst case.
Supremum
              norm functionals lack strong differentiability and the
subsequent difficulties
              associated with this lack must be dealt
with using all forms of nonlinear
              analysis.

The use of variational analysis in engineering, physics,
              medicine,
economics, and other fields is well established. Extreme
              value
engineering is an area in which one seeks to consider the worst
case in
              order to properly design or build some mechanism. In this
project these two
              disciplines are merged to apply variational
analysis in order to accomodate a
              worst case analysis. In certain
areas, such as medicine, or structural
              engineering, it is clear
that the worst case analysis is the only realistic
              design. For
example, an oncological treatment cannot seek to minimize
              the
average tumor load, but must minimize the maximum tumor load. A
bridge
              should not be designed to minimize average stresses but
maximum pointwise
              stresses. Many control mechanisms implemented
only when a maximum indicator is
              triggered. These are all problems
which are applications of the project
              considered and in which many
new techniques must be developed. The basic and
              fundamental
results of this area of variational analysis, including
              existence
and the determination of criteria sufficient to determine
              the
optimal function, will be studied. The analysis leads to the study
of
              nonlinear partial differential equations and systems of such
equations.

