Title       : Representation Theory and Quantum Field Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0200834

Award Number: 0200834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Feodor Malikov fmalikov@math.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is centered around several examples of sheaves of vertex algebras
              that Malikov, Schechtman, Vaintrob, and Gorbounov discovered and investigated
              in the previous work.  More specifically, the first part of the proposal has to
              do with computation of the algebras of global sections of these sheaves on
              Calabi-Yau manifolds. The known examples arising in the case of tori and
              projective spaces are promising.  The second part is built on the recent
              discovery that a family of such vertex algebras arising in the case of the
              projective line is closely related to the super-algebra  Lie sl(2|1) and  to 
              sl(2|1) - Toda field theory.  The third is an attempt to generalize the
              relation of such sheaves to  ellptic genera, quantum cohomology, and modular
              forms discovered in a joint work with Schechtman. This relation is visible
              through the fact that the character of the space of global sections of one such
              sheaf, a chiral de Rham complex, over over an even-dimensional projective space
              equals the equivariant signature of the corresponding loop space.  The fourth
              is a project aiming at an explanation of a certain remarkable duality arising
              in the case of a simple Lie group, in physics terms if possible. That the whole
              proposal may be related to string theory is revealed, for example, in the fact
              that the above-mentioned chiral de Rham complex allows to reproduce the quantum
              cohomology of smooth projective toric varieties.  The fifth is a separate
              project based on the previous work of I.Frenkel and Malikov; it has to do with
              a possible application of affine translation functors to BGG-type resolutions
              of admissible representations.

This is a project simultaneously in the area
              of mathematics known as "Representation Theory," and in the area of
              mathematical physics called "Quantum Field Theory."  Representation theory is
              generally considered to be the most useful area of mathematics for describing
              symmetries of all kinds, especially those that arise in nature.  Quantum field
              theory may be thought of as the logical foundation for the quantum mechanics
              that govern the behavior of subatomic particles.  An important source of
              inspiration for this project is string theory, which is widely accepted as the
              only candidate for a unified physical theory explaining all fundamental laws of
              Nature.  The striking idea of string theory is that an elementary particle in
              physics can be described mathematically as a loop.  The implications of this
              idea have made entire areas of mathematics previously thought of as totally
              abstract into everyday tools of research in theoretical physics.  The specific
              goal of this project is to obtain a better understanding of the so-called "loop
              spaces" that arise in this point of view.  Mathematical ideas from string
              theory have already found important applications in tomography, and surely
              there are more applications waiting to be found.

