Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0200145

Award Number: 0200145
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chad W. Saltikov saltikov@gps.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : C, Saltikov
	      California Inst. of Technology
	      Pasadena, CA  911254000    626/395-8748

NSF Program : 1603      Postdoc Rsch Fllwshp Micro Bio
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
              FY2002.  The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
              protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
              not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
              opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
              microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
              established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
              research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
              fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
              research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
              of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
              locations. 

The research and training plan is entitled "Molecular
              characterization of microbial respiratory arsenate reduction: diversity and
              environmental expression of metalloid reductase genes." Microbial respiratory
              arsenate reduction can significantly alter the mobility and toxicity of arsenic
              in the environment.  Little is known about the molecular mechanisms for arsenic
              respiration.  The research goals of this research are to identify genes
              involved in arsenate respiration in a variety of species, including
              Sulfurospirillum and Shewanella strains, and measure arsenate respiratory
              activity in contaminated sites.

