Title       : GOALI: Optimum Design of Extrusion Dies using the Estimated Elongational
               Viscosity of Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0200091

Award Number: 0200091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218738             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mahesh Gupta mahesh@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Dooley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1467,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project deals
              with two important issues in polymer processing. Research will be focused on
              enhancing the control of the processing through the development a new methods
              for indirect measurement of the elongational viscosity of the polymeric
              material. In addition, efforts to optimize die channel geometry for polymer
              extrusion will be investigated in terms of the effects of elongational
              viscosity on the polymer flow in the die.  In this project, strain-rate
              dependence of elongational viscosity will be determined by finding the optimal
              values of the four parameters in the Sarkar-Gupta elongational viscosity model
              such that the difference between the pressure loss predicted by a finite
              element simulation and the corresponding experimental data from a capillary or
              slit rheometer is minimized.

The optimization model, which will be developed
              in this project, is expected to provide much better die design than the design
              obtained by using currently available software packages, which do not account
              for the elongational viscosity of a polymer. Even though this proposal involves
              optimization of extrusion dies, a successful completion of the proposed
              research will open the avenues for including the effect of elongational
              viscosity on design of the equipment for other polymer processing techniques
              involving elongation-dominated flows such as blow molding and fiber spinning. 
              The software developed in this project will be used in a senior-level course to
              educate the students on importance of elongational viscosity in polymer
              processing.  For the next three years, a graduate student will spend one month
              per year at The Dow Chemical Co. to conduct various experiments resulting in
              additional educational benefit from the project.
