Title       : Selmer Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a0200785

Award Number: 0200785
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $418814             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph Greenberg greenber@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator intends to pursue a diverse set of projects related to
Selmer
              groups, elliptic curves, modular forms, p-adic L-functions and
Iwasawa theory.
              Selmer groups have traditionally been an important tool
for studying the
              Mordell-Weil group of an elliptic curve over a number
field. They have also
              played an important role in proving special cases
of the Birch and
              Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture which provides a relationship
between arithmetic
              properties of an elliptic curve E and the behavior of
the Hasse-Weil
              L-function for E.  In recent years it has become clear that
certain natural
              generalizations of the Selmer group should provide similar
conjectural
              relationships to the behavior of much more general kinds of
L-functions.
              Iwasawa theory provides a framework for studying these
conjectures by allowing
              the L-functions to vary in families defined by
congruences modulo powers of a
              prime p. This leads to the notion of a
p-adic L-function and to the
              formulation of analogous conjectural
relationships relating the behavior of
              such p-adic L-functions to the
corresponding Selmer groups. The investigator,
              together with several
collaborators, intends to study this kind of conjectural
              relationship in
some new settings: (1) p-adic analogues of classical Artin
              L-functions,
(2) families of L-functions associated to certain families of
              Galois
representations of varying dimension. In addition, the
              investigator
intends to study relationships between Selmer groups associated
              to modular
forms and ideal class groups of certain number fields and to study
              some
unresolved questions about the derivatives of p-adic L-functions.

One
              of the fundamental questions in the theory of numbers is the study
of
              solutions of an algebraic equation. The difficulty of this question
depends on
              the degree of the equation and the number of variables. It
has been understood
              since antiquity how to study this question when the
degree is one or two and
              the number of variables is also one or two.
However, the question becomes much
              more subtle when one considers
equations of degree three, even if the number
              of variables is just two.
A fundamental conjecture concerning this kind of
              equation was formulated
in the 1960s by Birch and Swinnerton-Dyer. Although
              considerable progress
has been made since then, the conjecture remains
              unresolved. Such equations
define a class of curves known as "elliptic
              curves." The study of their
properties has proved to be of importance in
              crytography - designing codes
for the secure transmission of information.
              Professor Greenberg intends to
continue his study of "Selmer groups" which
              have been a traditional tool in
understanding the arithmetic properties of
              elliptic curves and in studying
the conjecture of Birch and Swinnnerton-Dyer.
              The ultimate goal is to
achieve a deeper understanding of the solutions to the
              algebraic equations
that define an elliptic curve, and to develop a more
              general point of view
concerning conjectures analogous to the Birch and
              Swinnerton-Dyer conjecture.



