Title       : Tomography and Integral Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0200788

Award Number: 0200788
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Todd Quinto equinto@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

PROJECT:  Tomography and Integral Geometry 
PI:       Eric Todd Quinto,
              Tufts University
DMS-0200788




ABSTRACT: 

Professor Quinto will
              pursue problems in tomography and the mathematical analysis of
              Radon
transforms.  He will develop and refine singularity detection algorithms
              (including limited data Lambda CT and wavelet methods) and apply them to
              electron microscopy and limited data industrial and medical X-ray tomography,
              with the goal of testing the algorithms on
real data and using them in
              scanners.  Professor Quinto will continue to develop a boundary detection
              method that is applicable to Sonar in shallow water, and he will begin to
              develop these methods for synthetic aperture Radar.  The theoretical
              underpinnings will be based on Professor Quinto's pure mathematical research. 
              Radon transforms have an intimate relation to harmonic analysis, partial
              differential equations, and complex analysis, and he will use integral geometry
              to prove theorems in these fields.  The principal investigator will prove
              uniqueness and support theorems for Radon transforms defined by spreads of
              polynomials, including spherical
transforms in Euclidean space and other
              settings.  He and Professor Agranovsky will use these results to characterize
              zero sets of solutions of the wave equation on crystallographic domains and
              other sets.  Zero sets, where the solution is zero for all time, are important
              and difficult to characterize.  He will prove uniqueness theorems for Radon
              transforms on spheres and other surfaces and use these to solve Morera and mean
              value problems on manifolds.  He will
prove support theorems for X-ray
              transforms.

This research encompasses both applied and pure mathematics:
              tomography and integral geometry.  The pure research will be used to develop,
              understand, and justify the applied
algorithms, and the applied problems will
              motivate much of the pure research.  Computed tomography (CT) algorithms will
              be developed for the nondestructive evaluation of rockets and other objects. 
              The algorithms will allow scientists to detect cracks in rocket bodies, air
              pockets in rocket fuel, and delaminations in rocket exit cones. Limited data
              algorithms will be developed for electron microscopy as a part of a joint
              industrial project.  The goal is to produce an algorithm that reliably produces
              accurate pictures for a SIDEC electron microscope.  He will develop pure
              mathematics that will show how well the algorithms work and where their
              limitations might show
up.  These pure mathematical underpinnings are required
              to ensure that his (or any other) reconstructions are correct and are not lucky
              guesses.  SONAR data can be modeled as averages over spheres (the spherical
              wave fronts of the sound) and Professor Quinto will prove
theorems about these
              averages.  He will use these theorems to develop simple algorithms to map the
              ocean floor and to find boundaries of objects in the ocean and to apply to
              Radar.  This pure mathematics is intriguing in its own right.  Professor Quinto
              will prove theorems about spherical averages which will be used to understand
              the wave equation (the equation that describes how sound and light behave). The
              wave equation describes the motion of a drum head, and he will
specify which
              points on the drum do not move at all.  Finally, he will prove theorems he will
              apply to complex and harmonic analysis, fields in pure mathematics.


