Title       : Regular Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0200757

Award Number: 0200757
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98640              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michaela Vancliff vancliff@math.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the research of Michaela Vancliff to work
              in
non-commutative algebra, with special emphasis on problems arising 
from
              the theory of regular algebras and non-commutative algebraic 
geometry.
              Vancliff's main objective is to add to the body of knowledge
on regular
              algebras and to further the existing geometric techniques.
In particular, she
              is interested in the graded-module category of such
an algebra viewed as a
              geometric space, with certain graded modules 
playing the role of geometric
              objects. The linear geometric modules 
(point modules, line modules, etc) are
              parametrized by so-called 
linear schemes. Vancliff plans to study how the
              structure and role of
higher-dimensional linear schemes generalize the
              structure and role of
point schemes. She is also interested in connections
              between this type
of geometric analysis and that of various Poisson-geometric
              
structures. Some of these activities entail the development of 
fundamental
              computational algorithms, and their implementation using 
a computer-algebra
              package, in order to enable explicit computation of
linear schemes.

Systems
              of polynomial-style equations and their solutions play a 
critical role in
              almost every scientific field, such as statistical 
mechanics,
              elementary-particle physics, quantum mechanics, robotics, 
crystallography,
              networking, etc. The solutions are often results that
cannot be found by
              experimentation nor other methods, and often they 
are not numbers but are
              functions (e.g., differential operators or 
matrices), and so, in general,
              they do not commute. The business of 
seeking methods that find all solutions
              to any system of 
polynomial-style equations in non-commuting variables is
              called 
non-commutative algebra. The main idea to find the solutions is as
              
follows. One associates to such a system of equations an abstract 
object
              called an algebra, which encodes all the properties of the 
system. To the
              algebra is associated abstract objects called modules,
and these encode all
              the properties of the solutions. Hence, in order
to find all the solutions,
              one should find and understand all the 
modules for the associated algebra. 
              In many of the applications, the
algebras that arise in this way tend to share
              certain properties; they
are called regular algebras and are the main focus of
              Vancliff's
projects. One of the goals of non-commutative algebraic geometry,
              the
subfield in which Vancliff works, is to use geometric techniques to 
find
              some of the modules (point modules, line modules, etc) of the 
regular
              algebra, and then to use those modules to find the modules 
giving the
              solutions to the original system of equations. Vancliff's 
underlying goal is
              to improve on these geometric techniques and to 
understand better how they
              relate to the structure of the category of
modules.




