Title       : Semi-Classical Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0200732

Award Number: 0200732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $421407             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maciej R. Zworski zworski@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Maciej R. Zworski, UC-Berkeley. DMS-0200732

Abstract:

The main
              interest of the PI is the study of quantum mechanics from the
mathematical
              point of view, and of its many manifestations in the theory
of partial
              differential equations and geometry. Specific current interests are 
the
              classical/quantum correspondence, resonances, geometric scattering,
              and
non-hermitian quantum mechanics. More precisely, the PI is interested in
              resonances, 
which are mathematical objects modeling states which have certain
              frequencies of 
oscillations (or rest energies) and rates of decay, such as
              unstable molecules or 
classical system responding to resonant forcing terms.
              Despite a long tradition and a 
lot of recent progress our understanding is
              still very limited. Current experimental
and numerical advances provide new
              stimuli for our studies. Another interest of the PI is
non-hermitian quantum
              mechanics, which deals with systems in which energy is not conserved.
That is
              almost always present when we localize a part of a system and the global
              
conservation of energy disapears. In a subtle way resonances already fall
              into this 
category of phenomena. The mathematical problems present here are
              the stability of 
eigenvalues and measuring the size of the resolvent of
              non-self-adjoint operators. 
That leads to the study of ``pseudospectra''
              which is then related to 
many interesting phenomena in PDEs. Finally, the
              PI's interest involves mathematical 
scattering. It replaces spectral theory
              for problems on non-compact domains, and in physics 
almost all the data comes
              from scattering experiments. Many new things are constantly 
discovered now,
              ranging from scattering on locally symmetric spaces to problems
related to
              conformal field theory.

Many of the phenomena discussed in this proposal are
              in fact more general: for instance, 
electromagnetic scattering can be used to
              model quantum scattering, and its understanding
can benefit from the
              development of the classical/quantum correspondence.
The PI's work focuses on
              the search for general mathematical principles,
and the detailed study of
              specific examples is motivated by that. 





