Title       : Computational Study of Chemical Reactions and Material Modification during
               Polyatomic-Ion and Cluster-Surface Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0200838

Award Number: 0200838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan B. Sinnott sinnott@mse.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Susan Sinnott of the University of Florida is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to examine particle-surface interactions that
              can lead to chemical reactions and material modification using molecular
              dynamics (MD) simulations.  Three closely related problems will be studied. 
              First, the deposition of covalently bound polyatomic ions on polymeric
              substrates will be examined.  The unique capabilities of polyatomic ions for
              material modification and thin-film growth motivate this research, which aims
              to shed light on the analogous and more complex processes that take place in
              low-energy plasmas.  Second, the use of polyatomic and single-atom ions to
              chemically functionalize and modify carbon nanotubes and nanotube-polymer
              interfaces will be explored, motivated by the fact that carbon nanotubes are
              being considered for use as fibers in the next generation of composite
              materials.  Finally, the novel size-specific reactions that occur in gas
              solvent assisted chemistry when molecular clusters are deposited on solid
              surfaces will be studied, along with the growth of covalently balanced
              nanostructured thin films that can be generated experimentally through
              cluster-beam deposition.  This project requires expansion and refinement of
              existing MD programs to include kinetic Monte Carlo simulations of thermal
              surface diffusion and relaxation between MD simulations of each cluster
              deposition event.  Collaborative efforts are planned with experimentalists and
              theorists on all three projects. 

This computational project has the
              potential to provide new understanding that will be important for industrial
              materials processing.  For example, ion deposition can serve as a model for
              several aspects of thin-film growth through low energy plasmas, which is the
              leading industrial method for depositing polymer thin films under dry
              conditions.  Organic thin films are important for optoelectronic applications,
              coatings, electronic devices, and mechanical applications.  The present studies
              aim to model film deposition and surface modification issues relevant to
              ongoing experimental studies.
