Title       : Harmonic Analysis and PDE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a0200628

Award Number: 0200628
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102630             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sagun Chanillo chanillo@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Sagun Chanillo, Rutgers University
DMS-0200628

Abstract:

In this
              proposal several problems are proposed, all in the field of
PDE. Most of these
              problems are in the sub-field of non-linear
PDE, and some in linear PDE. The
              non-linear problems
arise naturally from Physics and
Geometry and the
              interaction of Physics and Geometry. 
The linear problems are also tied in
              with
Geometry and Physics. There
is a strong focus in this proposal on
              various qualitative
features of solutions to PDE, their level lines, nodal
              lines
of eigenfunctions, smoothness of solutions and so on. 
We have selected
              the problems in part because we view many of them as having very natural
              connections with classical Harmonic analysis, and in fact we have made some
              start on solving them using techniques from classical Harmonic analysis. This
              is described in the body of the proposal. Some of the problems that arise from
              Physics in our proposal are connected with the phenomena of
vortices. Here we
              continue work that was funded by previous grants.
The vortices we study are
              those that arise from fluid flow on
two-dimensional spheres and on the plane.
              Taking the continuum limit of the 
point vortex distribution leads us to a new
              technique for solving the prescribed 
Gauss curvature equation which also
              gives a tremendous insight into conformally invariant PDE's. Problems are also
              posed
that stem from the Schrodinger equation and Geometry and its
influence
              on the spectrum of elliptic operators.



We single out an important
              component of the proposed research
proposal. In todays environment it has
              become important to
study so-called smart materials, more principally
              composites.
Because of their lightness they are preferred materials
to use
              for their strength and lightness. In this proposal
we study as one problem the
              vibrational characteristics
of composites. In particular how should one build
              objects using
composite materials so as to minimize their basic vibrational
              characteristics.
Intuitively the larger the natural frequency with which
an
              object vibrates, the more it is susceptible to stress
and breakage. For
              example one question one can ask is, if we need to 
build a symmetric object
              like a washer does it
mean the composite has to be arranged symmetrically
              respecting
the symmetry of the washer? We find that in our research for
              example that
this necessarily does not minimize the stresses that can be
              caused by vibration
and we need to arrange the composite in a non-symmetric
              way
to construct the washer. This is not the only problem we study in
              our
proposal but also problems in Differential Geometry and Physics.


