Title       : Microwave and Radio Frequency Rapid Electromagnetic Induction Heating (EMIH) of
               Silicon Wafers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0200120

Award Number: 0200120
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Booske booske@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Reid F. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yogesh Gianchandani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The need to reduce the thermal budgets (time, temperature) of next generation
              semiconductor device processing has created a significant interest in
              short-term rapid thermal processing (RTP) of silicon. One of the most important
              applications for RTP is the formation of the source and drain regions of CMOS
              gate stacks. Another application is the bonding of wafers for fabrication of
              micromechanical and power microelectronic devices. This proposal requests
              support for basic research of microwave and radio frequency (RF) rapid
              electromagnetic induction heating (EMIH) of Si. EMIH would provide valuable and
              unique capabilities for wafer bonding. Moreover, EMIH may be the only viable
              method to anneal ultrashallow implanted impurity dopant regions to the
              specifications required to manufacture the next generation of high density VLSI
              integrated circuits (the so-called 100 nm technology node).

The research
              program involves investigations of rapid microwave and RF EMIH of Si wafers.
              For example, initial data indicate that EMIH spike-annealing of ultra-shallow
              boron-implanted wafers is superior to conventional lamp RTP. Experiments with
              ultra-shallow boron-implanted wafers are proposed to establish just how
              effective EMIH RTP can be, and to elucidate the unconventional mechanisms
              responsible for the observed superior performance. Similarly, initial results
              indicate that EMIH enables very rapid wafer bonding without the need for
              intermediate glue layers. The research will more thoroughly determine the
              quality of the bond, the minimum time and temperature required to obtain a good
              bond, the prospects for multi-level wafer stack bonding, and the mechanisms
              that explain how uniformly strong bonds are obtained during RF EMIH, even with
              significant radial temperature gradients.

Supporting collaborations with
              leading semiconductor fabrication industrial organizations will provide
              critical input to experimental design and results analysis, and valuable
              mentorship of students. These collaborations will also leverage grant resources
              by providing sources of ultrashallow implanted wafers and post-anneal
              characterization from institutions with unparalleled experience and expertise
              in this technology area.

