Title       : A Mobile Canopy Access Platform for Environmental and Physiological Research at
               Harvard Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0200868

Award Number: 0200868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55860              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Foster   (Principal Investigator current)
              Fakhri A. Bazzaz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Noel M. Holbrook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. David Foster at Harvard University to purchase a
              mobile canopy access platform to support research at the Harvard Forest. 
              Forest canopies are key sites for the exchange of mass, energy and momentum
              within forest ecosystems.  However, examination of the physiological and
              physical processes occurring within the canopy is hampered by logistic
              difficulties of conducting research that involves sophisticated equipment at
              heights far above the ground.  The funds provided in this grant will allow the
              purchase of a mobile canopy access platform of the type referred to as an
              articulated boom lift in the construction industry.  This "macromanipulator"
              will enhance ongoing projects of six investigators whose work at the Harvard
              Forest focuses on tree physiology, ecosystem processes, and
              atmosphere-biosphere exchange.  

Forests are inherently three-dimensional
              systems.  A mobile canopy access system will provide investigators with the
              ability to expand their research into new areas and new dimensions.  A mobile
              platform is well suited to research at the Harvard Forest due to the relatively
              low stature of the forest (~ 20 m) and the extensive network of fire roads.  At
              present, canopy access at the Harvard Forest is limited to a small number of
              fixed towers.  A mobile canopy system will allow us to extend our studies to a
              broader range of community types and to sample from a larger number of trees. 
              In addition, a mobile canopy access platform is compatible with physiological
              studies that frequently require the collection of destructive samples. 
              Specific projects that will benefit from the purchase of this instrument
              include: Dr. Foster's studies of the impact of the hemlock wooly adelgid, a
              recently introduced pest of hemlock trees, Dr. Bazzaz's research on
              photosynthesis-nitrogen dynamics in forest trees, Dr. Holbrook's studies of
              water transport in tall trees, Dr. Wofsy's studies of CO2 exchange between
              forest ecosystems and the atmosphere, Dr. Aber's studies of the effects of
              chronic nitrogen deposition on forest ecosystems, and Dr. Steudler's research
              on global warming and carbon storage in mid-latitude forest ecosystems.

The
              Harvard Forest is an important site for both research and teaching.  Much of
              the research at the Harvard Forest is directed at understanding the function
              and stability of forest ecosystems in relation to human disturbance and global
              climate change.  Thus, the acquisition of this instrument will contribute to
              our understanding of the health and resilience of this important ecosystem.

