Title       : RUI: Image Aquisition and Analysis Facility for Faculty-Student Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a0200148

Award Number: 0200148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102142             (Estimated)
Investigator: David O. Ribble dribble@trinity.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Brodl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nelson D. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brenda G. Rushing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence L. Espey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  78212    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

	A grant has been awarded to Dr. David Ribble of the Biology
              Department at Trinity University to fund state of the art image acquisition and
              analysis instrumentation and software. This equipment will be housed in the
              Center for Image Acquisition and Analysis, a multi-user research facility that
              will enhance the research capabilities of all faculty and undergraduate
              students in the Department of Biology at Trinity University.  Trinity
              University will remodel an existing laboratory to provide a site for this
              Center and will share in the cost of the equipment and software. To satisfy the
              needs of this diverse research community, the Center will contain equipment and
              software to acquire, store, and analyze images appropriate to research studies
              in molecular biology, cellular biology, physiology, ecology, and evolution. To
              meet these needs, the following items of equipment will be purchased:  a gel
              documentation system; a fluorescence microscope with deconvolution
              capabilities, digital cameras, computers, and support software.

	The Center
              for Image Acquisition and Analysis will significantly increase faculty and
              student research capabilities, enhancing the activities of the varied research
              groups within the Department of Biology. Each of these groups will make
              intensive use of this new facility. These ongoing research projects include the
              study of the following topics:
	The mechanisms for selective destabilization
              of secretory protein mRNAs at the ER 
	Changes in ovarian gene expression
              during ovulation 
	Regulation of photosystem production by a putative
              GTP-binding protein in Rhodospirillum                 centenum 
	Paracellular
              permeability of tight junctions in intestinal epithelial cells 
	Rat epidermal
              cell responses to radiofrequency radiation 
	Evolution of monogamy and
              conservation of mammals 
	Sociality and social parasitism in galling aphids
              

	Not only will this equipment support the ongoing research activities of
              faculty and students; the sensitivity, resolution, and analysis capabilities of
              the proposed equipment will provide opportunities for research initiatives and
              directions not currently possible at Trinity. Furthermore, use of this shared
              facility will help develop collaborative research projects between the diverse
              sub-disciplines within the Department of Biology.

