Title       : Spray Deposited High Damping Shape Memory Alloy Composite Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0200153

Award Number: 0200153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240013             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Argento   (Principal Investigator current)
              Pravansu S. Mohanty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The research objective of this grant is to develop a new class of high damping
              structures having a shape memory metal alloy composite casing over a carbon
              fiber reinforced polymeric (FRP) composite tube. It is expected that the
              traditional FRP core will provide the high stiffness while the damping capacity
              accomplished by the shape memory alloy casing. The research will be conducted
              in three key segments: (1) developing the fabrication technology (spray
              forming) for building shape memory alloy casings on the FRP cores, (2)
              characterizing the stiffness, strength and damping capabilities of the new
              structures, and (3) integrating the design, manufacture, and field testing of
              prototype automotive half -shafts. 

The fabrication technology to be
              developed as part of this project will introduce a new way of making
              multi-material, multi-functional structures that cannot be conveniently
              fabricated by other manufacturing methods.  These novel high damping structures
              would find use in challenging, vibration prone applications in the automotive,
              aerospace, and cutting tool industries.   The project includes collaboration
              among university researchers, REU students, and industrial engineers. The
              automotive and composite manufacturing industries have pledged support for the
              project and will be collaborative partners providing composite manufacturing
              and prototype field-testing. Learning modules will be developed from the
              research and included in the undergraduate and graduate curriculums. A goal is
              to stimulate undergraduate and graduate students to pursue advanced educational
              degrees. The integrated research and educational objectives will benefit the
              participating industries and will provide their engineers with unique training
              for further advancing the state-of-art.


