Title       : GOALI: Optimization-Based Human Motion Simulation Models for Computer-Aided
               Human-Centric Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0200143

Award Number: 0200143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192853             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xudong Zhang xudong@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ulrich Raschke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 1049,1504,5514,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) research
              project seeks to integrate the development of a series of optimization-based
              models for digital human motion simulation and the synthesis of movement
              performance descriptors such that the developed models are physically realistic
              and computationally efficient.  Three new models, formulated as optimization
              problems, will be developed: (1) an end-point trajectory model, (2) a
              parameterized differential inverse kinematics model, and (3) a parameterized
              forward dynamics model.  These models will have open structures to incorporate
              movement performance descriptors that can be formulated as objective functions,
              constraints, or parameters, and then be empirically synthesized, tested, and
              determined.  In return, the determined or evaluated descriptors will allow the
              models to render complex simulated motions via efficient computations.  The
              project will employ empirical databases of several types of complex human
              movements most relevant to computer-aided workplace or vehicle design and
              virtual prototyping.

Digital human motion simulation is an integral part of
              the enabling technology that will profoundly change the process of designing
              and prototyping a wide variety of products or systems that are used, operated,
              inhabited, or maintained by human beings.  Such changes, including tremendous
              cost reduction, efficiency improvement, and quality (usability, serviceability,
              and manufacturability) enhancement in product development, will be central to
              the vitality of the US economy and its global competitiveness.  The proposed
              research identifies and explores a unique and important area for novel,
              strategic application of various optimization techniques.  A successful
              completion will lead to a new generation of digital human motion simulation
              models for computer-aided human-centric design and human-machine systems
              engineering, and will yield results addressing some of the most fundamental
              questions about human movement control.  Educational outcomes from this project
              will include new course materials on advanced modeling tools for a graduate
              class, and a collection of examples of operations research problems in
              biomechanics and ergonomics.
