Title       : Magnetic Behavior in Nanoscale Magnetic Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0200257

Award Number: 0200257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357133             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy F. Willis RFW4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This condensed matter physics project focuses on the measurement and
              understanding of factors that determine the range of spin ordering in metallic
              magnets. The fundamental measure of spin ordering is the spin-spin correlation
              length, L.  For example, the critical temperature, Tc, for magnetic ordering
              depends on the strength, i. e. range, of the interactions between individual
              spins. This material parameter is often unknown, so that the critical
              temperatures at which magnets lose their strength cannot be predicted with
              certainty.  The parameter L also determines how Tc decreases as the dimensions
              of a magnet are reduced.  Tc goes precipitously to zero in the nanoscale regime
              when the dimensions of the magnet approach L.  Plotting and fitting
              experimental curves of Tc as a function of the thickness of nanoscale thin
              films provides a measure of the intrinsic spin-spin coupling length, L.  The
              experimental plots also reveal the onset of quantum 'finite-size' effects as
              the thickness approaches a few nanometers.  The correlation length L also
              determines the coupling between thin magnetic layers in magnetic
              heterostructures.  The coupling strength between spins can be 'tuned' to
              different values by carefully alloying different magnetic elements. The
              research program will investigate these effects in ultrathin layers and
              heterostructures of different coupled magnetic materials as a function of
              material composition. The results are of importance to the future development
              of magnetic recording and magnetic memory devices as the dimensions approach
              the nanoscale. The technology is 'cutting edge' so that the program will serve
              to train a new generation of scientists in this high technology field and
              prepare them for careers in academe, industry and government.

This research
              focuses on measuring and understanding those factors that determine the range
              of magnetic coupling between magnetic moments in magnets. This parameter, the
              spin-spin correlation length, is a fundamental quantity that determines how the
              magnetism decays to zero with increasing temperature. This parameter is unknown
              so that the critical temperatures at which magnets lose their strength cannot
              be predicted with certainty. This parameter also determines how the critical
              temperature decreases as the dimensions of a magnet is reduced, going
              precipitously to zero in the nanoscale regime when the dimensions approach that
              of this unknown length parameter. A new discovery reveals that by plotting and
              fitting experimental curves of this parameter as a function of the thickness of
              nanoscale thin films provides a measure of this parameter. The coupling between
              thin magnetic layers in magnetic heterostructures is also a consequence of this
              same parameter. This coupling strength can be 'tuned' to different values by
              carefully alloying different magnetic elements. The research program will
              investigate these effects in ultrathin layers and heterostructures of different
              coupled magnetic materials as a function of nanoscale thickness and material
              composition. The results are of importance to the future development of
              magnetic recording and magnetic memory devices as the dimensions approach the
              nanoscale. The technology is 'cutting edge' so that the program will serve to
              educate a new generation of scientists in a rapidly evolving, high technology
              field.


