Title       : A Methodology for the Design of Optimum Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0200058

Award Number: 0200058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392940             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Dewhurst dewhurst@egr.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David G. Taggart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brent E. Stucker  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research grant is to establish a computer design procedure
              for product structures that will provide the highest strength or highest
              stiffness for a given weight of material.  This will be accomplished by direct
              solution of the equations defining the optimum structural layout for desired
              loading and boundary conditions. The method of solution will involve the use of
              matrix operators, and one part of the work will be the extension of the set of
              matrix operators to handle a range of different boundary situations.  The
              procedure will be appropriately applied on personal computers so that it can be
              widely used in the engineering design community.  The research program will
              also involve the manufacture and testing of prototype structures to validate
              the design process at each stage of the research.  Case studies will be carried
              out to illustrate the range of weight reduction opportunities.  

If
              successful, the principal benefit of the study will be a new approach to weight
              reduction, spanning a wide range of applications from aerospace to
              mass-produced durable goods.  It is also anticipated that the fundamental and
              direct approach to structure design, developed in the research, will be
              appealing to engineering educators and will impact the teaching of structural
              engineering and engineering design.


