Title       : Collaborative Proposal: Ultrabroadband Supercontinuum Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0200223

Award Number: 0200223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rick P. Trebino   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Windeler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Almantas Galvanauskas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0200223
Trebino

Probably the most exciting event in optics in the past two
              years has been the development of microstructure optical fiber. The dispersion
              properties of this fiber can be tailored to a far greater extent than
              conventional optical fibers. As a result, it can be used to transform
              commercially available, low-energy ultrashort pulses into ultrabroadband
              continuum light with a bandwidth of >500 THz. This light has numerous
              far-reaching applications in telecommunications, solid-state spectroscopy,
              coherent control of chemical reactions, and ultrahigh-spatial-resolution
              optical coherence tomography. It has already completely revolutionized the
              field of optical metrology.

Unfortunately, techniques for working with
              ultrabroadband light remain in their infancy.  At this stage, it is not
              possible to measure its properties other than the power spectrum.  Pulse
              shaping and compression techniques, which are successful in narrowband
              applications, are not applicable to this type of ultrabroadband radiation. 
              Even simple tasks such as collimating and propagating ultrabroadband light are
              not yet possible.  For example, ultrabroadband lenses do not exist, and mirrors
              also fail because the diffraction angle of this light is over 60s. 
              Furthermore, the process by which this light is created is at best poorly
              understood.

As a result, we propose to 1) perform extensive modeling to
              understand the underlying mechanisms and the properties of the continuum light,
              2) develop experimental techniques for its characterization, and 3) devise new
              techniques for manipulating and compressing this light.
 
We will take two
              distinct approaches to ultrabroadband-light generation. One will utilize a
              standard fs Ti:Sapphire laser and microstructure optical fiber to produce
              continuum light with spectrum from 400 nm to 1.6 um. The second approach, which
              is equally promising-but as yet unexplored-will use amplified fiber lasers
              developed by IMRA America to generate ultra-broadband continuum in conventional
              telecommunications fiber in the IR: from 800 nm to 2.5 um.

This
              ultrabroadband light is extremely complex, having a time-bandwidth product
              (TBP) in excess of 1000, whereas the most complex ultrashort pulse that has
              been completely characterized had a TBP of ~10. This latter measurement used
              frequency-resolved optical gating (FROG), and it pushed the FROG technique to
              its limits. As a result, we propose to develop a much broader-band version of
              FROG for measuring ultrabroadband continuum with more than two orders of
              magnitude of additional complexity. It will necessarily involve several
              innovations, including, for example, angle-dithering the nonlinear crystal for
              much greater bandwidth.





