Title       : Direct Write of Novel Optical Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a0200283

Award Number: 0200283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Beaman jbeaman@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kristin L. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Bourell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew I. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard H. Crawford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1467,1468,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The recent increase in demand for information bandwidth has created the need for
              improving current technologies for data, voice and video transmission.  The
              telecommunications industry has increasingly emphasized the development of
              fiberoptic networks to meet this demand.  One key to creating this
              infrastructure is the production of economical fiberoptic components, such as
              wave guides and Bragg gratings.  Current manufacturing techniques for optical
              components and fiber preforms are limited to vapor deposition techniques and
              photolithographic processes. This research is to advance the field of optical
              component manufacturing through innovative direct-write processing. 

Our
              goal is to develop a novel manufacturing process based on laser sintering of
              materials produced from sol-gel processing techniques.  Research tasks include:
              (1) characterizating the chemistry and processing of sol-gels; (2) design,
              construction, and testing of a workstation for combined sol-gel preparation and
              laser densification of multi-layer optical components; (3) developing a real
              time controller for the workstation; and (4) fabricating three-dimensional
              optical components to demonstrate the process.  We expect fundamental
              science-based results in the areas of unique sol-gel materials and chemistry,
              repeatability of sol-gel processing, materials characterization, models for
              optical property control, machine design of sol-gel deposition and
              densification, and laser processing methods for micron and sub-micron
              materials.  We also expect overall deliverables of a repeatable direct-write
              process and example 3D optical components. Collaboration with an industrial
              partner, 3M Corporation, will provide fundamental understanding of the industry
              needs and capabilities, leading to a higher potential for future
              commercialization. These unique research experiences will provide direct
              educational benefits to both graduate and undergraduate students in systems
              design engineering and optical product realization.

We believe our approach
              will lead to innovative optical component designs, not producible by current
              vapor deposition techniques.  These components will provide higher performance
              and enable the telecommunications industry to better meet the needs of
              society.

