Title       : Stark-type Conjectures "over Z" and the Equivariant Tamagawa Number Conjecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0200543

Award Number: 0200543
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123129             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cristian D. Popescu cpopescu@math.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The theory of special values of L-functions is a major, active area of
research
              within the general fields of number theory and arithmetic
algebraic geometry. 
              Stark's Main Conjecture provides a link between
special values of Artin
              L-functions and the arithmetic of the associated
Galois extensions. In recent
              years, Rubin and Popescu have formulated
refined, integral versions of Stark's
              Main Conjecture in the case of
abelian L-functions of arbitrary order of
              vanishing at the origin. Also,
Burns and Flach, by reworking earlier
              conjectures of Bloch-Kato and
Fontaine-Perrin Riou, have formulated the
              Equivariant Tamagawa Number
Conjecture for certain classes of motivic
              L-functions. If restricted to
the case of Artin L-functions, the Burns-Flach
              conjecture can also be
viewed as a refined, integral version of Stark's Main
              Conjecture.   The
Principal Investigator focuses on providing evidence for,
              studying the
functorial behavior of, and finding links between the Conjectures
              of
Rubin, Popescu, and Burns-Flach. He also works on developing
Gross-type
              p-adic refinements of these statements, as well as building
bridges between
              these statements and the Theory of Euler Systems,
Equivariant Iwasawa Theory,
              and the Conjectures of Brumer, Leopoldt, and
Chinburg.


The L-functions
              are mathematical objects of analytic (continuous) nature,
encoding an enormous
              amount of extremely interesting and useful
information of arithmetic
              (discrete) nature.  The main goal of this
project is to continue a program
              initiated by Stark, Rubin, the principal
investigator, and Burns-Flach, and
              develop general recipes (conjectures)
aimed at retrieving the arithmetic data
              encoded in a special type of
L-functions (the Artin L-functions), and follow
              these recipes (in other
words prove these conjectures) in several important
              special cases. In
parallel, the Principal Investigator is developing links
              between these
conjectures and other, already developed theories, dealing with
              objects of
arithmetic (discrete) nature, such as the theory of Euler Systems
              and
Equivariant Iwasawa Theory. Aside from its importance for the
              central
areas of pure mathematics called number theory and arithmetic
              algebraic
geometry, this research could have far reaching practical
              applications to
the development of new data encryption algorithms.

