Title       : Research on the Anderson metal-insulator transport transition and otherphenomena
               in disordered systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0200710

Award Number: 0200710
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abel Klein aklein@math.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The subject of this research proposal is the Anderson metal-insulator transport
              
transition and other phenomena in disordered systems. A new approach to the
              Anderson 
metal-insulator transition based on transport instead of spectral
              properties will be 
investigated.  In addition, several related topics will be
              investigated. Constructive 
criteria for localization in random media will be
              developed; an application is planned 
for the Landau Hamiltonian with a random
              potential. Local Poisson statistics for the 
strong insulator spectrum of
              Anderson-type Hamiltonians in the continuum will be 
studied.  The spectrum of
              the Anderson model on the Bethe lattice will be studied. 
Localization at low
              disorder in one or two dimensions will be investigated.

Fortysome years have
              passed since P. Anderson's seminal article on localization of 
electrons in
              random media, but our mathematical understanding of the metal-insulator
              
transition is still very unsatisfactory.  In three or more dimensions a
              transition is 
believed to occur from an insulator regime, characterized by
              localized states, to a 
very different metallic regime characterized by
              extended states. The energy at which 
this metal insulator transition occurs
              is called the mobility edge. The standard 
mathematical interpretation of this
              picture is that there should be a transition in the 
spectrum of the random
              SchrAdinger from pure point spectrum (localized states) to 
absolutely
              continuous spectrum (extended states). But up to now there are no
              
mathematical results on the existence of continuous spectrum and a
              metal-insulator 
transition (except for the special case of the Anderson model
              on the Bethe lattice).  A 
new approach to the Anderson metal-insulator
              transition is proposed based on transport 
instead of spectral properties. It
              is motivated by the fact that the intuitive physical 
notion of localization
              has a dynamical interpretation: an initially localized wave 
packet should
              remain localized under time evolution, and delocalization may be 
interpreted
              as nontrivial transport.  The main goal of this proposal is to show the
              
existence of such a transport transition.  


