Title       : ABELIAN VARIETIES, MODULI OF VECTOR BUNDLES AND MODULI OF COURVES
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0200150

Award Number: 0200150
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110558             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mihnea Popa mpopa@math.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               In work with G. Pareschi, Popa has introduced a notion of Mukai regularity

              for coherent sheaves on abelian varieties, defined using the Fourier-Mukai

              transform, and developed its theory.  Popa and Pareschi are now interested
 in
              using the concept of Mukai regularity in the study of irregular
 varieties,
              especially to give effective results on adjoint linear series and

              pluiricanonical maps.  Also, Popa and Pareschi intend to use invariants

              arising naturally from this theory in order to differentiate between

              Jacobians and other abelian varieties, and thus approach the Schottky
 problem
              in a new way.  Using some of their results that carry through in the
 more
              general context of an arbitrary Fourier transform, Popa and Pareschi
 intend
              to obtain constraints on the existence of equivalences of derived
 categories,
              which is a main concern in this line of approach to mirror
 symmetry.  In
              other work, Popa has established effective results for linear
 series on
              moduli spaces of vector bundles on curves.  Popa is interested in
 approaching
              the Strange Duality by refining his methods based on the
 Fourier-Mukai
              transform of Verlinde bundles on Jacobians and combining it
 with
              representation theory techniques.  Popa also intends to approach some
 optimal
              conjectures on effective base point freeness on these moduli spaces
 for
              general curves, using degeneration to stable curves.  In work with G.
 Farkas,
              Popa has obtained Brill-Noether type non-existence results for rank
 2 vector
              bundles on general curves, via generalized limit linear series and
 stability
              of pairs on reducible curves.  Popa and Farkas intend to further
 refine these
              techniques in order to prove a conjecture of
 Bertram-Feinberger-Mukai on
              Brill-Noether theory for rank 2 vector bundles
 with canonical determinant,
              and to find non-existence results in higher
 ranks.  This will allow them to
              define new divisors in moduli spaces of
 stable curves for appropriate genera.
               The ultimate goal of this project is
 to compute the class of these divisors
              and determine whether they provide
 counterexamples to the Harris-Morrison
              Slope Conjecture as expected.

 Algebraic curves and abelian varieties are
              ubiquitous objects in
 mathematics. Apart from their realizations in algebraic
              geometry, they
 appear in complex analysis (as Riemann surfaces or complex
              tori) or algebra
 (as field extensions or group schemes), and play a
              fundamental role in
 recent progress in mathematical physics. One of the most
              important problems
 in algebraic geometry is to classify algebraic varieties.
              For
 one-dimensional varieties (that is, for algebraic curves) this problem
              is
 approached by understanding the geometry of a space M(g) parametrizing
              all
 curves of given genus. In the case of abelian varieties, one way to
              approach
 this is to understand the totality of a specific kind of algebraic
              objects
 (called coherent sheaves) which can be associated to them. The
              investigator
 is pursuing these directions in research related to this
              proposal.

