Title       : Geometry of Banach Spaces and Operator Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0200690

Award Number: 0200690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $427215             (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Johnson johnson@math.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gilles Pisier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

Abstract for DMS-0200690
William B. Johnson and Gilles Pisier, PIs

The
              principal investigators will investigate problems in the 
theories of Banach
              spaces and operator spaces. The problems 
to be considered fall into several
              subcategories; namely,
affine approximation of Lipschitz functions, non
              linear
infinite dimensional and finite dimensional geometry, finite
              
dimensional subspaces of Lebesgue spaces, measures on infinite 
dimensional
              spaces,  similarity theory, tensor products of 
operator spaces, bounded and
              completely bounded approximation 
properties, and amenability of spaces of
              operators. There will 
be coordination of the proposed project with the
              existing 
Workshop in Linear Analysis and Probability Theory at Texas A&M
              
University.  This Workshop encourages interactions among 
researchers and
              apprentices in different mathematical 
fields by bringing together graduate 
              students, young 
investigators, and junior and senior postdoctoral 
              participants 
in several areas of analysis.  

Banach space theory, the
              study of notions of "distance" which 
are not necessarily Euclidean on both
              finite and infinite 
dimensional vector spaces, forms the basis for both
              Euclidean 
and non-Euclidean geometry and the analytic geometry of infinite
              
dimensional function spaces, including the space of continuous 
numerical
              functions on an interval as well as more complicated 
classes of functions. 
              From the beginning, the ideas at the 
root of Quantum Mechanics have had a
              major impact on mathematics, 
stimulating the study of operators and their
              spectrum instead of 
numerical functions. These ideas have led recently to the
              new 
field of "Quantized Functional Analysis" or "Operator Space 
Theory" and
              this development has led to the solution of several 
major problems as well as
              opened new avenues of research. 
Analogously, the non linear geometry of
              Banach spaces 
also is a rather recent development which is beginning to have
              
considerable impact in geometrical analysis in both the finite 
and infinite
              dimensional settings. 


