Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0200203

Award Number: 0200203
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherry L. Dollhopf sdollhop@mailer.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : S, Dollhopf
	      3200 Wood Hill Drive
	      Tallahassee, FL  323032030    850/459-8295

NSF Program : 1603      Postdoc Rsch Fllwshp Micro Bio
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
              FY2002.  The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
              protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
              not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
              opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
              microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
              established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
              research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
              fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
              research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
              of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
              locations. 

The research and training plan is entitled "The microbiology of
              iron reduction in the salt marsh."  This research is investigating the
              importance of microorganisms that use iron to obtain energy for growth in the
              salt marsh ecosystem. Comprehensive geochemical and microbiological laboratory
              techniques are being used to quantify the contribution of microbial iron
              respiration to total organic matter decomposition in different salt marsh
              environments to estimate the importance of iron respiration to carbon cycling
              on a marsh-wide scale. The diversity and community structure of iron-reducing
              microorganisms is being investigated using serial dilution cultures, 16S rRNA
              based techniques, fluorescent in situ hybridization, and microscopy. This
              research could lead to the discovery of new iron-reducing organisms that are
              important in coastal marine environments.

