Title       : Existence of Solutions to Hyperbolic Differential Equations in Mathematical
               Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0200226

Award Number: 0200226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans Lindblad lindblad@math.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

PI: Hans Lindblad, Univ. of Cal. San
              Diego
DMS-0200226

Abstract:

Lindblad's  research concerns  basic
              mathematical questions for systems 
 of nonlinear hyperbolic equations in
              mathematical physics.  
 These include several important equations in
              classical field theory 
 and continuum mechanics as well as in classical
              physics, e.g.
 Einstein's equations in general relativity and the equation
              of
 fluids and elastic bodies. 
        These basic questions are:
 (i) Do
              we have local existence and uniqueness of solutions 
    in a certain class?
              
 (ii) Do we have blow-up of solutions?  (e.g. black holes in general

              relativity)
 (iii)  What is the long time behavior of solutions?
 More
              specifically, Lindblad is mainly working on two projects.
 One on proving the
              well-posedness 
 for a class of problems that occur in fluid dynamics and
              general
 relativity, in particular proving the well-posedness for the free 

              boundary problem of the motion of the surface of a fluid in vacuum.
 A long
              term goal is to study the long time behavior of astrophysical
 bodies such as
              gaseous stars as well as the surface of the ocean.
 Another project is to
              study global solutions of equations related to 
 Einstein's equations. A long
              term goal is to simplify and generalize 
 the global existence results for
              Einstein's equations. 

 These two problems are related to the question of
              whether 
 the fundamental equations in physics have global solutions. 

              Solution to these questions could have important consequences. For
 instance,
              it is conceivable that one could use the knowledge obtained from the

              solutions of Einstein's equations to permit the use of gravitational
 waves to
              observe the Universe. Understanding the properties of
 and controlling the
              interface between two fluids could have industrial applications.
 
 To solve
              these problems Lindblad and his collaborators are developing new techniques
              that could be useful for studying many other problems as well. In particular,
              they are using geometric methods to study hyperbolic 
 differential
              equations.



