Title       : X-ray Diffraction Laboratory Upgrade
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a0200293

Award Number: 0200293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297575             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet L. Smith smithj@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports improvements in the capability and reliability of the X-ray
              diffraction laboratory used for study of single crystals of biological
              macromolecules at Purdue University. The equipment to be obtained with this
              support will be used for in research aimed at determination of the
              three-dimensional crystal structures of proteins, RNA molecules, and of
              protein-nucleic acid complexes. Knowledge of such structures are essential to
              molecular level understanding of how biological macromolecules function in a
              variety of processes.  Three types of equipment will be obtained: a new
              diffraction instrument that will improve throughput and, by providing a more
              monochromatic and intense X-ray beam, that will facilitate the study of very
              large macromolecules. The new instrument will allow flash-frozen crystals to be
              saved in their frozen state for later diffraction experiments. A new optical
              system for an existing diffraction instrument will improve the intensity and
              quality of the X-ray beam, permitting more pricise measurements and use of
              smaller crystals than now possible. Finally a new microspectrophotometer will
              be obtained to monitor enzymatic reactions and measure ligand binding of
              crystalline macromolecules. The award provides improved infrastructure for one
              of the nation's leading academic laboratories in one of the most important
              areas of contemporary biology.
