Title       : Free Boundary Problems and Mass Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a0200644

Award Number: 0200644
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101801             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mikhail Feldman feldman@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
PI: Mikhail Feldman, University of
              Wisconsin
DMS-0200644

ABSTRACT
--------------------------------------------------
The project consists of two main topics: (1) Free boundary
problems for nonlinear elliptic equations. One of objectives
is to develop techniques for studying free boundary problems
arising in the models of compressible fluid dynamics, in
particular to study existence, uniqueness and stability of
multidimensional transonic shocks for Euler equations for
steady and self-similar potential flows. Euler equations can
be written as a single second order, nonlinear elliptic-hyperbolic
equation of mixed type for the velocity potential, if the flow
is steady or self-similar. Transonic shocks are discontinuities
in the gradient of the solution such that the type of equation
changes from hyperbolic to elliptic across the shock surface.
Transonic shocks arise in many situations of physical importance
(steady supersonic flows around an obstacle, shock reflection for
self-similar flows). (2) Monge-Kantorovich mass transfer problem.
The questions to study include geometric and measure-theoretic
properties of solutions, and applications to partial differential
equations.

Free boundary problems arise naturally in many models in physics,
fluid dynamics, economics. Free boundaries correspond to sharp
changes in the variables describing the problem. Significant
progress has been made during last several decades in the study
of free boundary problems. However in the case of nonlinear partial
differential equations many important questions are yet to be studied.
This is the first theme of the project. Better understanding of
properties of free boundaries, such as stability, makes possible to
understand complex phenomena in models and applications. We plan to
study transonic shocks in a flow of compressible fluid or gas.
Another area of the project is optimal transportation problem.
Recently many fundamental properties and important applications of
this problem within and beyond mathematics were discovered, in
particular its connections to nonlinear partial differential
equations, and applications in models for front formation in the
atmosphere, kinetic  theory, fluid flow, elastic crystals, granular
materials, and microeconomic decision problems. We plan to work
on theory and applications of optimal transportation problem.



