Title       : Spectrofluorometer with Stopped Flow Accessory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0200457

Award Number: 0200457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141649             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. von Hippel petevh@molbio.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Marcus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beatrice D. Darimont  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. James Remington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick W. Dahlquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for NSF Instrument Grant DBI-0200457

	A grant has been awarded to
              Dr. Peter H. von Hippel of the Institute of Molecular Biology at the University
              of Oregon, serving as Principal Investigator for a group seven co-PIs, whose
              research groups will all use the new equipment in their various research
              programs. The equipment to be purchased is a Spectrofluorometer, which will
              make possible new and incisive studies of protein-protein, protein-nucleic
              acid, and protein-ligand interactions involved in the functioning and
              regulation of a variety of "macromolecular machines" of physiological
              importance. 
A variety of sophisticated research problems will be pursued
              using this facility, which will permit fluorescent measurements at very low
              concentrations and within cells. The equipment will be coupled to a
              stopped-flow kinetic device to follow biological reactions in milliseconds, and
              can be used in either a steady-state or a time-resolved mode to measure
              fluorescence quenching and anisotropy.   Research problems to be studied
              include assembly and regulation of DNA replication and transcription complexes
              (P. von Hippel laboratory), energetics of signaling in bacterial chemotaxsis
              (Frederick Dahlquist laboratory), structure and functional regulation of
              nuclear receptors by hormones (Beatrice Darimont laboratory), development and
              characterization of green fluorescent protein-based biosensors (S. J. Remington
              laboratory), measurement of the mobility of mitochondria and other organelles
              in live cells and studies of protein and nucleic acid dynamics in vitro (Andrew
              Marcus laboratory), studies on the assembly of eukaryotic RNA polymerase II
              transcription complexes (Diane Hawley  laboratory), and analysis of protein
              folding and assembly reactions (Brian Matthews laboratory). These research
              projects, as well as those of other groups within the Institute of Molecular
              Biology, will take advantage of the full range of capabilities of the new
              fluorescence facility. 
All the research projects will focus on gaining
              increased molecular understanding of the functional and regulatory systems of
              cells and tissues, and the results will contribute both to our basic knowledge
              of biological regulatory systems.

