Title       : Dynamics of Nonlinear Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0200178

Award Number: 0200178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103503             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Mallet-Paret jmp@cfm.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: John Mallet-Paret, Brown University
DMS-0200178

Abstract:

We propose
              a fundamental study of qualitative properties of various classes
of nonlinear
              dynamical systems, in particular as they arise from differential
and
              difference equations.  Among the systems to be considered are those
              from
ordinary and partial differential equations, systems of lattice
              differential
equations (that is, spatially discrete systems), differential
              delay equations,
and nonlinear maps on cones.  Issues such as existence of
              equilibria and their
stability, spontaneous formation of spatial patterns and
              spatial chaos, and
existence and qualitative properties of traveling fronts,
              will be studied for
these equations.  In addition to established techniques
              (both theoretical
and numerical) from differential equations and dynamical
              systems, a significant
portion of the proposed research involves the
              development and implementation
of new tools and techniques with which to study
              these systems. Among the
techniques to be employed are those involving
              singular perturbations,
invariant manifolds, exponential dichotomies, and
              topological methods (Morse
decompositions, fixed point theorems, degree
              theory).

We are developing new mathematical techniques for analyzing and
              understanding
differential equations and difference equations which arise as
              models in
various areas of science.  Very broadly, these types of mathematical
              systems
model time-dependent or evolutionary behavior, as it occurs in a wide
              range
of scientific areas, including biology, chemistry, electrical circuit
              theory,
image processing, and material science. While this is a very broad
              scope of
inquiry, the specific problems to be studied exhibit features in
              common --
spontaneous formation of patterns, self-sustained oscillations,
              regulation by
internal feedback (often with time delays) -- which can be
              analyzed with some
of the basic tools of dynamical systems theory.  It is
              expected the resulting
mathematical advances arising from these studies will
              increase the knowledge
of and will provide insight into both the abstract
              theory of dynamical
systems and the scientific areas of inquiry.


