Title       : Integrality, Blowup Algebras and Multiplicities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0200858

Award Number: 0200858
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208506             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernd Ulrich ulrich@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5913,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Passing from an affine algebra or an ideal to the integral closure
is a
              fundamental operation. The investigator intends to examine
computational
              aspects of this process. While there exist algorithms
for computing the
              integral closure of an affine domain, little is
known about the complexity of
              such calculations. To address this
problem the investigator intends to find
              estimates for the number
of algebra generators of the integral closure and for
              the degrees
of these generators. In the case of ideals on the other hand,
              one
still has no efficient method for computing integral closures. In
view of
              this lack of an algorithm, the investigator intends to
express, or at least
              approximate, the integral closure of an ideal
by a sum of colon ideals that
              are more readily accessible. The core
of an ideal is a counterpart of the
              integral closure: it encodes
information about all possible reductions of a
              given ideal, i.e.,
all ideals over which the given ideal is integral. The
              investigator
intends to work on a conjectural formula that, if proved, would
              give
an explicit expression for the core of a large class of
              ideals.
Continuing the somewhat computational theme the investigator
              proposes
to establish bounds for the Castelnuovo-Mumford regularity
              of
embedded projective varieties in terms of their defining equations.
The
              known results require strong assumptions on the singularities of
the variety
              which the investigator hopes to weaken. In this vein he
intends to show that
              rational singularities persist under generic
linkage of ideals in the linkage
              class of a complete intersection.
In continuation of his earlier work on
              blowup algebras the
investigator plans to study the rings representing special
              fibers of
blowups. These `special fiber rings' describe, for instance,
              images
of rational maps, including secant varieties and Gauss images.
              The
investigator intends to study the Cohen-Macaulayness of special
              fiber
rings, estimate their depth and compute multiplicities. Suitable
depth
              estimates would have a bearing on a conjecture by Mazur that
originates in
              Wiles' work on deformations of Galois representations.
Formulas for the
              multiplicity on the other hand would lead to an
extension of the
              Teissier-Pluecker formula for the degrees of certain
dual varieties.


The
              investigator works in the area of Mathematics called "Commutative Algebra,"
              which deals with the qualitative study of systems of polynomial equations in
              several variables.  Such systems arise in numerous applications outside
              mathematics.  Over the past two decades commutative algebraists have become
              more concerned with computational aspects, thereby emphasizing connections to
              applied areas such as computer algebra, robotics, cryptography and coding
              theory.  This project addresses both theoretical and computational aspects of
              commutative algebra.

