Title       : Double Hecke Algebras and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a0200276

Award Number: 0200276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111483             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivan V. Cherednik chered@math.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to study double affine Hecke algebras (DAHA), as
              previously introduced by the principal investigator.  They have proved to be
              very useful in representation theory, the theory of special and spherical
              functions, conformal field theory, and combinatorics.  The main objectives
              include:  (1) A general classification of the semisimple, spherical, unitary,
              and Fourier-univariant representations of DAHA; (2) the classification of
              finite dimensional representations of DAHA for generic q, with applications to
              Macdonald's eta-type identities, Kac-Moody characters, and degenerate Bessel
              functions; (3) the theory of representations of DAHA at roots of unity,
              connections with the monodromy of the double affine KZ equations and elliptic
              braid groups; (4) classificaton of the Fourier-invariant uitary representations
              of DAHA with applications to Gauss-Selberg sums and Verlinde algebras; (5)
              harmonic analysis on semisimple representations of DAHA in the compact and
              noncompact cases, at roots of unity, and in the elliptic case.

This is a
              project in the area of mathematics known as Representation Theory.  The nature
              of representation theory, and what makes it so useful in so many areas of
              mathematics and science, is that it is a way of studying and encoding
              symmetries, whereever they may occur, in nature or abstractly.  The purpose of
              this project is to study and develop the properties of a new
              representation-theoretic tool, "double affine Hecke algebras," that can be used
              in the application of representation theory to physics (conformal field theory)
              and combinatorics.  Combinatorics is the science of counting the possible
              arrangements and ways of organizing collections of anything (e.g., atoms,
              pebbles, star clusters).
