Title       : Generalized Branch-and-Cut Method for Mixed Integer Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0200151

Award Number: 0200151
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287204             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjay Mehrotra mehrotra@iems.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Models involving general integer variables with nonlinear constraints are very
              hard to solve.  There has been some, but limited progress towards solving large
              scale models of this type.  Computational results on practical test problems
              suggest that the gap between the optimum objective value and a bound from the
              solution of the relaxed problem at the root node is significantly larger when
              compared with bounds obtained in the linear case, and the size of the
              enumeration tree explodes quickly.  To overcome the difficulties in solving
              large scale problems of this type, advances in several directions are needed. 
              Methods for generating good cutting planes need to be developed further, as
              well as more advanced heuristics for identifying a feasible solution quickly
              need to be developed.  However, we think that the most fundamental advance may
              come from the development of advanced branching schemes in a branch-and-cut
              method.  The standard branching schemes branch on a single variable disjunction
              at a time.  Lenstra showed that by branching on general hyperplanes we can
              solve a mixed integer linear programming problem in polynomial time.  Lenstra's
              algorithm has found limited practical value.  This is because the computational
              cost of finding the branching hyperplane in his algorithm is very high. 
              However, there is a possibility for finding branching planes that are ``good
              quality'' but computationally not as expensive.  This research will focus on
              this problem as well as related issues towards solving nonlinear mixed integer
              programs.

Several engineering and management problems lead to models that
              are nonlinear, possibly stochastic, integer programs.  These problem areas
              include inventory, production and chemical process planning, layout, location,
              logistics and financial optimization.  For example, nonlinearity arises
              naturally while modeling uncertainty using the second moment.  This proposal
              request funds to support our ongoing research for finding efficient techniques
              for solving such models.  The development of general purpose solution
              methodology for solving nonlinear integer programming problem will have a wide
              ranging impact, as it would facilitate solving such problems arising from many
              different areas.
