Title       : Greedy Approximation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0200187

Award Number: 0200187
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir N. Temlyakov   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Vladimir Temlyakov, University of South Carolina
DMS-0200187
             
                       
Abstract:

Nonlinear approximation seeks ways to approximate
              complicated functions by simple functions using methods that depend nonlinearly
              on the function being approximated. Recently, a particular kind of nonlinear
              approximation, namely, greedy approximation attracted a lot of attention in
              both theoretical and applied settings. Greedy type algorithms proved to be very
              useful in various applications such as image compression, signal processing,
              design of neural networks, and the numerical solution of nonlinear partial
              differential equations. The theory of greedy approximation is emerging now:
              some fundamental convergence results have already been established; many
              fundamental problems remain unsolved. The purpose of the proposed research is
              to continue investigations of greedy approximation. We propose to continue to
              study greedy approximation with regard to bases, where substantial progress has
              been achieved recently. We propose to place emphasis on studying the efficiency
              of greedy algorithms with regard to redundant systems (dictionaries). 
              Redundancy on the one hand offers much promise for greater efficiency in terms
              of approximation rate, but on the other hand gives rise to highly nontrivial
              theoretical and practical
problems. We note that there is a solid
              justification of importance of redundant systems in both theoretical questions
              and practical applications.

Approximation theory is a branch of Mathematics
              that studies methods of  replacing complicated objects by simpler objects. This
              idea has proved to be fruitful in many applications to the real world problems.
              Among these applications are signal processing, image compression,
              finance
problems, and many others.  As one of the model problems consider
              image compression.
Take for example an image (picture) on a TV screen. Why
              should we approximate it?  In many cases we cannot afford to transmit (or store
              in a computer memory) the whole information of an image, perhaps because of a
              high cost for transmission of a bit of information or
limited channel
              capacity. This is exactly the  point where an application of approximation
              theory can be fruitful. Clearly, when we replace an image by its approximant we
              lose the quality of picture: the more information we keep the better
              approximation to the original image we have. As a result we have an interplay
              between the reduction of information and the quality of approximation. In
              approximation theory we try to find the best (optimal) solution to this
              problem. The purpose of the proposed research is to continue the investigations
              of methods of approximation   which are motivated by these types of
              applications. We note that nonlinear 
approximation is at the current
              frontiers of approximation theory. Nonlinear approximation is the only hope at
              present for the increase in available approximation power still needed to
              handle problems of real practical interest.



