Title       : Operator Algebras and Symmetry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0200809

Award Number: 0200809
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274616             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adrian Ocneanu adrian@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

Abstract
Ocneanu

Since their introduction a century ago, subgroups of
              SU(2) and simple Lie groups have evolved almost separately. In operator
              algebras no geometrical structure of subfactors has been previously found.  The
              proponent has found the natural link between  subfactors, the subgroups of
              quantum SU(2) and the classical and quantum Lie groups, showing that the
              information for building a simple Lie group comes naturally from the fusion
              structure on representations of a quantum subgroup of SU(2). The bridge between
              these two areas of research is a new crystallographic property of homology
              theory, wherein for instance six term exact sequences correspond to regular
              hexagons.  These methods yield a natural elementary construction of a canonical
              basis of the quantum enveloping algebra of the  semisimple Lie groups.  The
              link  found between quantum subgroups and root lattices extends beyond SU(2)
              and the classical Lie groups. The proponent found new unimodular root systems 
              in weight lattices associated to general quantum subgroups, which are  not
              connected to any known structures. The proponent considers the development  of
              the higher analogs of simple Lie groups corresponding to the new root systems a
              priority.  These are likely to be essentially new mathematical objects with
              natural many-to-one laws, which have potential applications in  constructive
              QFT in a physical (3 or 4) number of dimensions, while the usual binary laws
              produce naturally 2-dimensional field theories.
The project is centered around
              the construction, classification and study of the properties and manifestations
              of the quantum subgroups of Lie groups. The quantum deformations of the
              semisimple Lie groups have, when the quantization parameter is a root of unity,
              subgroups which are the analogs of the finite subgroups of the classical Lie
              groups. The proponent has introduced this structure over the years, starting
              with the classification of the algebraic structure of small index subfactors in
              the noncommutative Galois theory for operator algebras. Other manifestations of
              these structures appear in topological quantum field theory, where they provide
              boundary extensions of numerical invariants for 3-manifolds , conformal field
              theory, and modular invariants. The quantum subgroups of SU(2), SU(3) and SU(4)
              are now classified by the proponent, and show that the quantum world is very
              different and apparently nearly unrelated to the classical world, with a
              markedly simpler situation for the exceptional quantum subgroups than for the
              corresponding classical subgroups. The project introduces geometrical
              structures associated to quantum subgroups, with the quantum subgroups of SU(2)
              producing the roots weights and canonical bases for the simple Lie groups,
              while the other quantum subgroups give raise to essentially new generalized
              root systems in weight lattices.  It is hoped that the new structures produced
              by the project could play a role in constructing models of quantum field theory
              in a physical number of dimensions.

