Title       : Polarization Effects in Long-Haul Terrestrial Optical Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0200198

Award Number: 0200198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Li Yan liyan@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Zweck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian S. Marks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary M. Carter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Curtis R. Menyuk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               

The rapid expansion of global communications has placed increased
              requirements on optical fiber infrastructure and has stimulated the demand for
              increased system capacity. As a result, high data rate, dense
              wavelength-division-multiplexed (WDM) systems are being widely deployed in
              long-haul terrestrial and trans-oceanic links.  In these systems, polarization
              effects can severely limit the performance of the system.  

System designers
              commonly allocate a prescribed power penalty margin to polarization effects 
              say 2 dB.  An outage is said to occur when this margin is exceeded.  A common
              constraint is to limit outage to a probability of 10-6.  Because outages are
              rare events, it is difficult to quantify their probability of occurrence either
              theoretically or experimentally.  In the past year, we have achieved a
              theoretical breakthrough by the use of importance sampling, which allows us to
              accurately quantify rare events.  We both extend this technique theoretically
              and apply it for the first time experimentally.  Our focus is on determining
              the causes of outage and, from that, effective mitigation techniques. 

The
              proposed research is based on a close experimental and theoretical cooperation
              to study the issue of channel outage due to polarization effects in long haul,
              high data-rate, terrestrial WDM transmission systems.  A series of experiments
              will be carried out and theoretically modeled to study the interactions of
              polarization effects with nonlinearity, chromatic dispersion, and amplified
              spontaneous emission noise, and to assess the impact these combined effects
              have on channel outage for both RZ and NRZ formatted data.  We will
              experimentally determine the region of validity of a reduced model that only
              follows the Stokes parameters in a WDM system, rather than the full time-domain
              behavior.  We have already validated this model in simulations.  Other modeling
              tools will be developed and validated as needed to accurately and efficiently
              calculate the channel outage probability due to polarization effects.  

