Title       : C*-Algebras, K-theory and Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0200601

Award Number: 0200601
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240803             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marius Dadarlat mdd@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Dadarlat

Research conducted in the last ten years has revealed
              unexpected rigidity properties of noncommutative C*-algebras.  Whereas the
              cohomological invariants of a space (commutative C*-algebra) will determine the
              space at most up to homotopy equivalence, in the class of nuclear simple
              C*-algebras, the objects are often determined up to isomorphism by their
              K-theoretical invariants.  Elliott's conjecture states that, far from being an
              accident, this is always the case for the entire class of separable nuclear
              simple C*-algebras. (Tracial invariants are needed if the real rank is
              nonzero.)  The proposed research aims to uncover and explain rigidity
              properties of nuclear  C*-algebras.  The basic idea beyond the classification
              program is that that the simplicity and the stable or real rank conditions for
              a nuclear C*-algebra translate to certain internal dynamical properties of the
              algebra which forces a behavior typical to that of a combinatorial object. The
              C*-algebra becomes a rigid object built around its K-theory skeleton.  The
              ramifications of the classification theory into the structure theory of
              C*-algebras will be explored with emphasis on dynamical systems and group
              C*-algebras.  The investigator will analyze the impact of the recent advances
              around the Baum-Connes conjecture on the classification theory with the long
              term goal of formulating and exploring a Baum-Connes type conjecture for
              general nuclear C*-algebras.  This is closely tied with the universal
              coefficient theorem problem in KK-theory and deformation theory of
              C*-algebras.
Geometry was developed in an attempt to describe the ambient
              physical space. Its history has seen a series of remarkable achievements from
              the Euclidian geometry to the non-Euclidian geometries which culminated with
              the Riemannian geometry  providing a successful model for large-scale spacetime
              in general relativity.  The noncommutative geometry of Alain Connes is a far
              reaching generalization of the Riemannian geometry, well adapted for the study
              of a variety of large and small scale structures. The theory can be viewed as a
              significant development in the quest of quantizing of mathematics following the
              successful quantization of physics.  As in quantum physics, the coordinates in
              this theory are no longer ordinary numbers but noncommuting operators acting on
              infinite dimensional Hilbert spaces.  The ordinary spaces are being replaced by
              algebras of operators. The proposed project aims to contribute to the extensive
              effort of a community of researchers to extend the mathematics of commutative
              spaces to operator algebras.


