Title       : 2002 Tetrapyrroles Gordon Conference; July 14 -19, 2002, Newport, Rhode Island
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0200930

Award Number: 0200930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gloria C. Ferreira   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carlyle B. Storm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This application requests support for the 19 th Gordon Research Conference on
              the
Chemistry and Biology of Tetrapyrroles, to be held at Salve Regina
              University,
Newport, RI, from July 14-19, 2002. The specific aims of this
              conference are the
following:
1) To provide a forum for discussion of recent
              unpublished data by scientists with
common interest in the study of the
              chemistry and biology of tetrapyrrole compounds.

2) To promote the exchange
              of ideas between established and new investigators from a
wide variety of
              scientific disciplines (e.g., chemists, biochemists, clinicians,
              plant
biologists, microbiologists, biotechnologists) by providing ample
              discussion time
following formal presentations, by holding poster sessions
              which serve as a focus for
the discussion of common interests.

This
              biennial interdisciplinary conference has stimulated collaborations between
              basic
biologists, chemists and clinicians interested in tetrapyrroles for more
              than three
decades. In association with proteins, tetrapyrroles serve diverse
              roles as biological
redox catalysts, in the harvesting of light energy, in the
              activation and delivery of
oxygen, and as signaling molecules. Free
              tetrapyrroles are also essential nutrients
(e.g., vitamin B12), serve as
              regulators of gene expression (e.g., hemes), and are being
utilized as
              therapeutic agents (e.g., photodynamic cancer therapy, target delivery
              of
radionuclides). Owing to their photodynamic activity, toxicity and
              lipophilicity, the
accumulation of tetrapyrroles (e.g., porphyrins, bilirubin)
              is associated with numerous
pathologies of the skin, liver and brain. For
              these reasons, this conference represents
an important venue for exchange
              between basic and applied researchers on
tetrapyrroles and for refinement of
              new tools and therapies for development by the
biomedical industry. Funds
              requested in this application are targeted to support 10
young investigators
              who have not previously had the opportunity to attend this
conference and for
              travel of two young ioprimarily undergraduate institutionle
researchers. The
              sessions, which highlight recent technological progress, will include
22
              invited speakers, a plenary lecturer and 14 discussion leaders. All of
              these
individuals have been selected for their scientific excellence, recent
              innovative work
and contribution to the breadth of the program. The remaining
              100 conferees will be
chosen to ensure a broad representation of women,
              ethnicity and young scientists from
various disciplines in academia, medical
              research institutions and industry. Strengths
of this ongoing Gordon
              conference are its high disciplinary diversity, integration of
research from
              basic chemistry through practical and clinical applications, focus on
new
              unpublished work, time for discussion, informal atmosphere, and ban
              on
dissemination of conference proceedings, (which it is essential to
              assure
confidentiality when discussing unpublished results).
