Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0200485

Award Number: 0200485
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer A. Rudgers jarudgers@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : J, Rudgers
	      Center for Population Biology
	      Davis, CA  956168500    530/752-8416

NSF Program : 1603      Postdoc Rsch Fllwshp Micro Bio
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
              FY2002.  The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
              protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
              not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
              opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
              microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
              established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
              research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
              fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
              research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
              of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
              locations. 

The research and training plan is entitled "Do fungal
              endosymbionts of grasses structure community diversity and modify food web
              dynamics?"  Endophytic fungi form symbioses with grasses and produce toxic
              alkaloids that reduce herbivory to their hosts.  This research evaluates how
              grass endophytes modify the diversity and dynamics of plant, pathogen, and
              arthropod assemblages and asks how fungal alkaloid chemistry influences these
              effects.  This investigation will expand our understanding of how plant-microbe
              mutualisms influence community dynamics and biodiversity.

