Title       : Probabilistic Considerations in the Analysis of Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0200945

Award Number: 0200945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287331             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Frieze af1p@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 2860,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will continue his work on the interplay between
probability
              and algorithms. He has identified two distinct but 
very important aspects of
              such study. In the first instance he will 
study randomized algorithms i.e.
              those algorithms that introduce randomness
as a means of speeding up
              computation. In the second instance, he will 
consider the average case
              performance of algorithms. Here, he wants to try
to explain the good
              performance of simple algorithms on 
"typical" problems as opposed to the
              worst-case performance 
exemplified by the pathological examples of complexity
              theory.

In the area of randomized algorithms, the investigator will
              consider
problems arising in the study of Monte Carlo Markov Chain
              algorithms.
In particular he will study their use in problems associated with
              
combinatorial counting problems and with problems in Statistical 
Physics.
              He will also continue his study of the Edge Disjoint Path 
problem and the
              construction of a generalisation of the well known
matrix Singular Value
              Decomposition to multi-dimensional matrices. 
In the area of average case
              analysis, he will continue his work on the
Traveling Salesman Problem and try
              to extend his ideas to the 
independent symmetric model. He will continue his
              work on analysing the 
efficacy of the Sequencing By Hybridization technique
              in Computational
Biology. Finally, he will continue to work on probabilistic
              models of the
World Wide Web in an attempt to find a useful model for 
the
              testing of algorithmic ideas.
