Title       : Statistical Tools for RNA Folding Prediction and Antisense and Ribozyme Design
               for High Throughput Functional Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0200970

Award Number: 0200970
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ye Ding yding@wadsworth.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Lawrence  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Erasmus Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen McDonough  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443455    518/431-1200

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0200970
Ding
	The long-term goal of this project is to develop statistical
              methods and software for improved prediction of RNA secondary structure, and
              for improved computational design of antisense oligonucleotides (oligos) and
              trans-cleaving ribozymes as the vehicles for high-throughput functional
              genomics and drug target validation in the post-genomic era. The objectives of
              the project include: 1) development of statistical algorithms and methodology
              for the rational design of antisense oligos and ribozymes; 2) experimental
              testing and improvement of antisense design method with experimental feedback
              data; 3) development of a statistical RNA folding software Sfold for RNA
              folding prediction and design of antisense oligos and ribozymes; and
              establishment and maintenance of a Sfold Web server for RNA folding and
              antisense oligo and ribozyme design. The Web server will be freely accessible
              by the scientific community for non-commercial applications. 			
	Of the
              estimated 30,000-40,000 genes in the human genome, definitive functions have
              been assigned to only a few percent. Through gene down-regulation, antisense
              oligos and ribozymes are important tools for the assignment of gene functions
              and for the validation of human therapeutic targets. There is compelling
              experimental evidence that the accessibility of the messenger or viral RNA by
              antisense oligos or ribozymes is most constrained by the secondary structure of
              the target. Recently, statistical approaches to the prediction of RNA secondary
              structure and antisense targets have shown promise and advantages over
              established methods. It is thus important to explore fully the advantages of
              statistical approaches to RNA folding prediction and antisense oligo and
              ribozyme design. It is expected that the methods and software developed from
              this project will be widely used for functional genomics applications. This
              grant is made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support Research Grants
              in the Area of Mathematical Biology. This is a joint competition sponsored by
              the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the National Science Foundation
              and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the National
              Institutes of Health.  

