Title       : SGER: In Vivo Measurements of Channeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0200490

Award Number: 0200490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98876              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel H. Kohl kohl@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The hypothesis that intermediates in many metabolic pathways are "channeled"
              from one
pathway enzyme to the next is widely, but not universally, accepted.
              The mechanism of
channeling is presumed to be the transient associations of
              pathway enzymes. It is postulated that
the proximity of sequential enzymes
              would cause the product of the first enzyme to have an
advantage in
              competition for the active site of the second enzyme when compared to
              molecules
of the same species within the bulk medium. An alternative
              formulation is that pathway
intermediates are not part of the same pool as are
              identical molecules within the cell.
Intermediates produced within the pathway
              are "channeled" to the next enzyme. Investigations of
this hypothesis often
              center on the presumed mechanism; i.e., the association of sequential
pathway
              enzymes. Methods employed include several chromatographic techniques,
              co-
precipitation and co-purification. While positive results are suggestive,
              they are not conclusive
since channeling need not occur even if the enzymes
              are associated. Other approaches, including
isotope dilution experiments, have
              often supported the existence of channeling, but in vitro
systems are a poor
              proxy for the crowded, structured environment of the living cell.
              Approaches
employed in in vivo experiments include genetic approaches, NMR and
              isotope dilution. While
some of the reports from these experiments strongly
              support the existence of channeling, use of
these techniques allow only a
              qualitative assessment of channeling. The work proposed here
should lead to a
              quantitative evaluation of channeling in an in vivo, functioning system.
For
              simplicity, consider a 2-enzyme pathway. Substrate A binds to Enzyme 1 to
              make
intermediate B. B is the substrate for Enzyme 2. The product is C. If the
              cells can be induced to
take up B* (the asterisk indicating B has a different
              stable isotope, say 13 C, than does B), and B*
serves as the substrate for
              Enzyme 2, then the product will be C*. If there is no channeling, then
B*/B =
              C*/C. If there is 100% channeling, then C* = 0. Given knowledge of the ratios
              B*/B &
C*/C, quantitative values for channeling can be calculated. No other
              method presently in use can
provide this information. 
The appropriate ratios
              will be measured using a mass spectrometer (MS) interfaced with an appropriate
              column. The metabolism of glucose-6-phosphate (G6P) is one of the foci of this
              proposal. Whether G6P produced by hexokinase is channeled to the next enzyme in
              the oxidative limb of the pentose phosphate pathway, G6P dehydrogenase will be
              investigated. The appropriate mutant of yeast will take up galactose (gal) in
              the presence of glucose (glc). In four steps, gal is converted to G6P, which is
              oxidized to 6-phosphoguconate (6PG) Yeast will be incubated in 13 C-glc and 12
              C-gal. The ratios 13 C-G6P / 12 C-G6P and 13 C-gal / 12 C-gal will be measured
              and the results interpreted  as described above. G6P and 6PG have isomers
              which, if entered into the MS at the same time as the compounds of interest,
              would give artifactual results. To avoid this, the isomers will be separated 
              on a Dionex column off-line. If necessary corrections for any isomeric impurity
              using MS/MS techniques will be made.
An analogous experiment will be done with
              a prokaryote, E. coli, to investigate channeling
between aldolase and
              glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase. With this method in place not only
              can the degree of channeling be quantified, but also changes in channeling in
              response to changing environmental conditions or nutritional states may be
              evaluated for its possible contribution to directing the flow of metabolites.

