Title       : Severe Ground Motions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0200436

Award Number: 0200436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254934             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Allin Cornell cornell@ce.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory C. Beroza  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,5921,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this project are to improve the accuracy and effectiveness of
              the way both engineers and scientists address the life-threatening, most severe
              ground motions; these are defined as those motions that can induce highly
              nonlinear dynamic response and hence damage even those building and structures
              that have undergone modern aseismic design.  Current means of structural safety
              determination are limited by an inability to anticipate what the ground shaking
              will look like when it reaches these damaging levels.  Based on an effective
              new (structure-dependent) scalar measure of ground motion severity, suites of
              real and samples of realistic synthetic accelerograms will be ranked and the
              most severe identified for study in depth to learn why and how these records
              differ from the more benign.  Directivity-induced pulses can be one such
              phenomenon for certain structures at sites close to large faults.

These
              results will lead to project development of joint engineering and earth science
              tools for the assessment of the hazard of severe motions.  These tools will
              include a new probabilistic seismic hazard analysis procedure that takes
              advantage of the modern practicing engineer's knowledge of certain linear and
              nonlinear dynamic properties of his specific structure to then produce a
              particular measure of the threat that far more accurately predicts the demands
              on the structure when it is assaulted by these rare, severe ground
              motions.

A major project product is a dynamic rupture modeling capability
              that allows simulations of ground motion in the very near field of large
              earthquakes.  From this, we gain a better understanding of the factors that
              control behavior of aspects of the earthquake source,  principally the rise
              time, that are important in controlling the level and character of severe
              ground motion.  Our models are tested relative to their ability to produce
              samples of records that accurately capture the properties found earlier to
              produce severe effects in structures.  Thus the project requires an unusual
              degree of interaction between engineering and earth scientists. 

