Title       : Regularity for Fully Nonlinear Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0200784

Award Number: 0200784
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83673              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yu Yuan yuan@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Yu Yuan, University of Washington
DMS-0200784

Abstract:

The theory of
              a priori estimates and solvability for fully nonlinear
equations with the
              convexity condition are well developed. While other
concrete equations like
              Isaacs equations from the stochastic optimal
control theory and special
              Lagrangian equations from calibration geometry
do not have the usual convexity
              condition. Only preliminary attempts were
made toward this direction in recent
              years. Though the complex
Monge-Ampere equations have the usual convexity
              condition, the
holomorphic invariance is too large. There is no theory of a
              priori
estimates for the complex Monge-Ampere equations with non-smooth
right
              hand side. This project concentrates on the following four parts. In
part one,
              the objective is to derive Holder a priori estimates for
finitely piecewise
              linear Isaacs equations by further employment of the
ideas in recent work. In
              part two, the attempt is to study the regularity
for general fully nonlinear
              elliptic equations in 3-d in the light of
recent work that any homogeneous
              order two solution to fully nonlinear
elliptic equation in 3-d must be linear.
              In part three, the purpose is to
answer whether any homogeneous order two
              solution to special Lagrangian
equation of dimension four or higher is
              trivial. In part four, the aim is
to study the Bernstein problem for complex
              Monge-Ampere equations.

Differential equations and differential geometry are
              further applications
of Newton's calculus to the investigation of laws and
              shapes of nature,
and even some phenomena of our real world. This project
              deals with some
particular equations, like Isaacs equations from optimal
              stochastic
control theory, special Lagrangian equations and complex
              Monge-Ampere
equations from differential geometry. Understanding those
              equations would
have impacts on not only the related mathematical fields, but
              also fields
outside mathematics like physics.



