Title       : An Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer System for Ecological Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0200461

Award Number: 0200461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195211             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joshua P. Schimel schimel@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry M. Page  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Melack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the acquisition of an isotope ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS)
              to be shared by a group of UC Santa Barbara investigators who have made
              extensive use of stable isotope analysis in their research programs. The new
              IRMS system will permit high-precision measurement of carbon, nitrogen, sulfur,
              oxygen, and hydrogen stable isotope ratios. The instrument would be configured
              to allow isotope measurements on solid samples of biological and geological
              origin, on both major and minor components of gas samples, and on purge-able
              gaseous, liquid, and ionic solutes in aqueous solutions.  The instrument will
              be used in research that addresses a wide range of important and timely topics,
              including: measurements of fundamental microbial processes in marine
              environments, atmospheric methane levels, nutrient dynamics in soils from a
              variety of ecosystems and environments; and nutrient and food web linkages
              within coastal ecosystems.  The instrument will be housed and maintained in a
              professionally managed, shared-use analytical and instrumentation facility at
              the University's Marine Science Institute. Besides providing a tool that is
              critical to the success of vital research programs, this equipment would also
              allow graduate student and postdoctoral users to become experts in this key
              technology for environmental science.
