Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0200718

Award Number: 0200718
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicole T. Liberati-Moore whereisnik@hotmail.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N,Liberati-Moore
	      Wellman 10
	      Boston, MA  021142600    617/726-5950

NSF Program : 1603      Postdoc Rsch Fllwshp Micro Bio
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
              FY2002.  The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
              protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
              not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
              opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
              microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
              established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
              research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
              fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
              research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
              of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
              locations. 

The research and training plan is entitled "Pseudomonas
              aeruginosa Multi-Host Virulence."  Using a novel system of invertebrate hosts
              to rapidly identify Pseudomonas aeruginosa genes that confer virulence,
              significant overlap in the genes required for pathogenesis in both invertebrate
              and mammalian hosts has been discovered, suggesting that the mechanisms that
              direct pathogenesis are common among the many hosts of P. aeruginosa.  To
              dissect the molecular events of pathogenesis the role of the fatty acid
              biosynthesis gene, fabF, a gene isolated by multi-host screening, is being
              examined.  Novel virulence factors are also being identified using a library of
              non-redundant mutants with a disruption in every non-essential open reading
              frame in the P. aeruginosa genome. The defined nature of this library allows
              exhaustive screening for all genes required for P. aeruginosa pathogenesis.
              Such analyses will provide a comprehensive view of the universal mechanisms
              employed by P. aeruginosa to infect its many hosts.
