Title       : Studies on Integrality of Ideals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a0200200

Award Number: 0200200
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96241              (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudia Polini cpolini@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project deals with questions in commutative algebra. While the
questions
              address a variety of topics, there is an underlying
common thread that unifies
              them all: the theory of integral closure.
The PI, together with her
              collaborators, first plans to develop
methods that produce the integral
              closure of an ideal. In joint work
with Bernd Ulrich the proposer has
              established that linkage is a
method for capturing integral elements over a
              complete intersection. Now
the investigator wants to extend this same
              procedure to Gorenstein
linkage and residual intersections. Second, the PI
              intends to clarify the
connection between the core of an ideal and the adjoint
              of Lipman (or the
multiplier ideal of Ein and Lazarsfeld), find an explicit
              formula for
the core, and compute the core of monomial ideals (a question
              posed
by Eisenbud and Sturmfels). The investigator intends to use
              linkage
theory, residual intersection theory and Groebner basis
              theory.
Third, the investigator would like to study the special fiber ring.
              This
object is very important from a geometric point of view because
              it
encodes algebraic information on the special fiber of the blowup. The
              
focus here is on finding conditions that force the fiber to be unmixed
              or
even Cohen-Macaulay. Last, the PI  plans to study the Hilbert function of
              
zero-dimensional normal ideals (an ideal is normal if all its powers are
              
integrally closed). One of the proposer's goals is to show that all the
              
Hilbert coefficients of such ideals are non-negative, while another goal 
is
              to characterize the vanishing of the Hilbert coefficients in terms of
the
              Cohen-Macaulayness of the associated graded ring of the ideal
itself or of one
              of its powers.

The proposed research is concerned with problems in
              commutative
algebra. On a basic level commutative algebra is about
              techniques
for solving systems of polynomial equations. Commutative
              algebra
had a revolutionary growth in the past fifty years as it provided
the
              tools for understanding many problems in pure and applied
mathematics. In many
              applied problems, polynomial equations and
hence commutative algebra play a
              crucial role. Applied areas where
commutative algebra results have been used
              in the past include
operations research, computer science, robotics, control
              theory, coding
theory and cryptography to mention a few.

