Title       : The Combinatorics of Affine Algebras and their Applications to Mathematical
               Physics and Representation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0200774

Award Number: 0200774
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Schilling anne@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI intends to undertake a combinatorial study of structures
arising from
              affine algebras with applications to mathematical
physics, representation
              theory and q-series.
The primary combinatorial objects are crystal graphs
              which are
colored directed graphs. They provide a combinatorial
description
              of the deep theory of crystal bases of modules over
quantized universal
              enveloping algebras developed by Kashiwara
and Lusztig: As the quantum
              parameter q tends to zero,
these bases are described precisely by the crystal
              graphs encoding
nearly all the essential algebraic data. Despite their
              importance,
little is known about the combinatorial structure of
              crystals
corresponding to finite-dimensional modules of affine algebras.
The
              PI proposes a method to undertake such a combinatorial study.
These studies
              will have applications to q-series, branching
functions and fusion
              coefficients in conformal field theory and
statistical mechanics, and the
              theory of symmetric functions.

This is a project in combinatorial
              representation theory with 
applications to mathematical (theoretical)
              physics.  Representation
Theory is the area of mathematics most intimately
              involved with
studying the nature of symmetries, of any sort, whereever they
              occur.
Combinatorial representation theory refers to a methodology that
uses
              explicitly computable formulas.  About a decade ago it was
realized that
              certain models in the area of physics known as
statistical mechanics have
              symmetries that are not yet completely
understood.  This project carries out
              a
combinatorial study of the structure of those classes of symmetries
that
              can be represented by "colored directed graphs."
Remarkably, the structures
              that occur have applications in
many diverse areas of mathematics and
              physics,
such as statistical mechanical models, representation theory,
the
              theory of symmetric functions and combinatorics. For example,
they lead to
              formulas which encode the
particle structure of the underlying physical model.
