Title       : The Monge-Kantorovich in Kinetic Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0200267

Award Number: 0200267
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilfrid Gangbo gangbo@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Wilfrid Gangbo, Georgia Institute of
              Technology
DMS-0200267

ABSTRACT

The proposal uses the Monge-Kantorovich
              theory to study problems that originate 
in the kinetic theory of gases, and
              meteorology. The mass transportation problem 
was first introduced by G. Monge
              in 1781 and consists into finding the optimal 
way for moving a pile of dirt
              with a prescribed distribution to holes with prescribed distributions.
              Optimality is measured against a prescribed cost function. The original Monge
              problem deals only with measures that are absolutely continuous with respect to
              Lebesgue measures, and so, it makes sense to talk about distribution functions.
              We show that one can interprete the 
kinetic Fokker-Planck equations (KFPE) as
              the gradient flux of the entropy with 
respect to manifolds that vary in time.
              These manifolds are sets of probability 
densities for which the first moments
              and the standart deviation are prescribed. 
That restriction on the
              probability densities are needed to ensure conservation 
of total energy for
              the solutions constructed. This conservation law is a big 
deal in kinetic
              theory for inhomogeneous equations. Our investigations, in a 
special case,
              the so-called Maxwellian model of (KFPE),  show that the 
Monge-Kantorovich
              distance is an appropriate tool for studing these problems. 
The cost function
              used here is the square of the euclidien distance. We intend 
to investigate
              the implication of our results in the study of hydrodynamic 
equations. To
              deal with measures such as combination of dirac masses, in 1945, 
Kantorovich
              generalized the Monge problem to measures that may have singular 
parts. This
              generalization by Kantorovich turned out to find applications in 
various
              fields, including  shape recognition, where one wants to compare how two
              
curves living in the space look alike. In that case, clearly, the curves can
              be 
represented by one-dimensional measures and so, have singular parts. Other
              
applications that are relevant to this proposal are the semigeostrophic
              systems, 
introduced by Hoskins in 1975. The semigeostrophic systems are
              approxamations of 
the celebrated Euler equations of incompressible fluids in
              a system, rotating 
around a fix axis. These system where introduced in
              meteorology as models which 
develop fronts. There is a complete lack of
              analytical results on these models, 
and so, there is a need to develop a
              theory that would confirm or infirm  
previsions made by meteorologists. We
              show that these systems are infinite 
dimensional hamiltonian systems with
              respect to the Monge-Kantorovich distance, 
whose cost function is the square
              of the euclidien distance. In this proposal, 
we intend to extend results
              obtained in previous works with collaborators or 
graduate students.  

The
              Monge-Kantorovich theory became central in many fields of mathematics
              
including meteorology, kinetic theory, and shape recognition. Over the past
              few 
years, it has been noticed that a class of problems in various fields,
              including 
the study of evolution of gases, can be realized by minimizing a
              free energy 
functional under the penalty that one should not pay to much to
              change the state 
of the system. Based on preliminary investigations, we
              believe that in this 
proposal, we can use the Monge-Kantorovich theory to
              solved problems that are 
considered important in the kinetic theory of gases.
              We start our study with the 
Fokker-Planck equations, a class of equations
              similar to the Boltzmann 
equations, that are fundamental in kinetic
              theory.





