Title       : Connecting Representations of Algebraic Groups, Finite Groups, Lie Algebras,
               Quantum Groups, and Related Quivers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0200673

Award Number: 0200673
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116032             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zongzhu Lin zlin@math.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator plans to investigate detailed connections
              among
representation theories of finite groups of Lie types, algebraic groups,
              Lie
algebras, and quivers.  The research will concentrate on relating
              the
cohomology theory of finite groups of Lie type and that of restricted
              Lie
algebras and infinitesimal group schemes. The goal is to describe, for
              a
given  rational module for an algebraic group, its support varieties
              over
finite groups of rational points over  finite fields in terms of its
              support
varieties  over the higher  Frobenius kernels.  The principal
              investigator
will also study the connections between representations of
              quivers and
representations  of Kac-Moody Lie algebras and quantum groups (and
              their
generalizations). This will involve the study of subalgebras of
              Hall
algebras using perverse sheaves, construct canonical basis of
              generic
subalgebras, realize affine Lie algebras in terms of representations
              of
quivers, and relate them to Fock spaces.  


The beauty of mathematical
              research lies in linking many different subject
areas together to apply
              available theory in many different fields.  This project is in the area of
              mathematics known as representation theory.  At its core, representation theory
              derives from the study of symmetries, i.e., the symmetries that natural
              objects, from subatomic particles to planetary orbits, have.  Nowadays there
              are many different kinds of representation theory, each having evolved as the
              best way to deal with different kinds of problems.  The purpose of this project
              is to find and explore some of the links between some of the different kinds of
              representation theory.  Such links will benefit not only the study of
              representation theory, but also physics and other sciences that use
              representation theory as a standard tool.



