Title       : Collaborative/FRG Research: Nano-structured Materials of Covalently Bonded
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a0200866

Award Number: 0200866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans-Joachim Kleebe hkleebe@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A large number of the technologically useful, unusual, and exciting superhard
              and superstrong materials such as diamond, carbon nanotubes, and SiC are
              derived from carbon by covalent bonding of C to itself, and with other elements
              such as N, B, and Si. There are an important class of amorphous, partially
              amorphous, and nano-crystalline materials such as diamond like carbon and
              highly tetrahedral amorphous carbon with unusual properties. It has been shown
              that the amorphous phase plays an important role in the nucleation and growth
              of diamond and cubic-BN upon non-equilibrium processing. The primary objectives
              of this focussed research group will be to: (1) synthesize unusual C-based
              covalently-bonded amorphous and nano-crystalline materials with controlled
              nano-structures and properties in the focussed region of the ternary (C-B-N)
              system, (2) develop/apply advanced techniques to characterize the
              nano-structures of these materials, and (3) relate the scale of the
              nano-structure and connectivity of the amorphous network to the selected
              properties. With this vision in mind, the premise of the proposed FRG is that
              the functionality/property of nano-structured materials in the form of thin
              films and coatings can be designed by employing a suitable nanoscale
              architecture and distribution of the basic structural building blocks to
              control the properties. In this FRG, Prof. Kleebe at the CO School of Mines
              will collaborate with researchers at the University of Cincinnati (Profs. Singh
              and Boolchand) in the designing of nano-structured thin films that goes beyond
              just refining the polycrystalline microstructural scale, to exploring the
              amorphous routes for synthesizing, characterizing, and controlling the
              nano-structure of new materials in order to achieve unusual mechanical,
              physical, thermal, and possibly other properties. Thus, materials will be first
              designed and synthesized/produced to have only short-range order and then
              nano-structured thin films will be created by clever modifications of the
              non-equilibrium processing methods, and kinetic/thermal manipulation of the
              networks/nanostructues to create nano-crystalline thin films. The eventual aim
              of these activities will be to develop predictive tools for designing and
              synthesizing materials with unusual properties so that a knowledge base for
              "creating materials by design" will be obtained. 

On a broader scale, a
              successful completion of this research will lead to a knowledge base for
              designing nano-structured materials in C-B-N ternary with unusual mechanical
              and physical properties for applications in machining, electronic devices,
              MEMS, and functional/protective coatings. In particular, the scientific
              understanding of the role of the nano-scale structure, microstructure, and
              interfacial materials in creating novel materials will be obtained. Graduate
              and undergraduate students and research associate/post doc will be trained
              through participation on this research project and their theses. A new course
              on Plasma Processing of Thin Films will be developed and taught to
              undergraduate and graduate students. In addition, minority/women high school
              students will be mentored and exposed to this research through NASA-SHARP
              program at University of Cincinnati. 

