Title       : Collaborative Research: GOALI: Laser Additive Manufacturing of Aerospace
               Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0200270

Award Number: 0200270
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170645             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack L. Beuth beuth@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank Arcella  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hamish L. Fraser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Alexander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1467,1468,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The objective of this project is to advance the fundamental understanding
              of the Laser Additive Manufacturing processes that is necessary for the
              industrial implementation of LAM in a wide range of aerospace applications. LAM
              combines characteristics of conventional laser welding with the ability to
              automatically produce complex geometries.  One goal of LAM is to reduce the
              cost of manufacturing new aerospace components with complex features.  In
              conventional manufacturing methods, complex features must be incorporated into
              a casting or forging process, at substantial cost.  Cost savings can be
              realized by using LAM to add complex features to easy-to-produce, generic
              manufactured components.  Other applications of LAM include the repair of worn
              or cracked components by selective material addition, which is substantially
              more economical than part replacement.  In this project, the relationship
              between deposition process variables and the three key deposit characteristics
              critical to aerospace applications: melt pool size, residual stress and
              microstructure will be developed. This understanding will be demonstrated
              through model results presented in the form of process maps, which "map out"
              the dependence of deposit characteristics on process variables such as laser
              power and laser velocity.  Process maps will be of direct use to industry
              researchers working to advance LAM processes.  
     This research establishes
              a strong collaborative team including academic researchers from three
              universities, government researchers from two national labs, and several
              industry partners.  The results of this work are expected to have a significant
              impact on the widespread industrial implementation of LAM processes.  This
              project will also expose graduate, undergraduate and high school students to
              research integrating aerospace applications and manufacturing constraints with
              the fundamentals of solid mechanics, heat transfer and materials science.  

