Title       : Topics in Harmonic Analysis for Reductive P-adic Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0200542

Award Number: 0200542
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103503             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. DeBacker debacker@math.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract
DeBacker

The investigator will work on a number of topics which
              arise in the study of harmonic analysis for reductive groups over
              nonarchimedian local fields.  The unifying theme for these topics is their
              relation to homogeneity statements.  At their most basic level, homogeneity
              questions ask: given two distributions, what is the largest set of functions on
              which the two distributions will agree?  The first topic concerns the
              homogeneity question for invariant distributions supported on the compact
              elements in the group.  This is the last unproven (in general) homogeneity
              statement, and it has implications for the "fundamental lemma" (which is a
              conjecture).  The second topic concerns questions of stability for
              distributions supported on the unipotent set.   The final topic concerns the
              meaning of the constants occurring in the Harish-Chandra-Howe local character
              expansion.
The topics discussed above fall under the rubric of harmonic
              analysis on Lie groups.  This area of mathematics, which is solidly rooted in
              physics, was pioneered by Harish-Chandra beginning some fifty years ago.  Since
              the 1970s, much of the work in this area has been directed toward questions
              which arise naturally in the Langlands program (which seeks to relate, in a
              strong sense, number theory, representation theory, and harmonic analysis).   
              For example, Harish-Chandra studied the distributions which arise when one
              integrates over a conjugacy class.  From the perspective of the Langlands
              program, it is also important to study the distributions which arise when one
              integrates over certain stable conjugacy classes, that is, classes which become
              conjugate over an algebraic closure of the ground field.  The investigator
              hopes his program of research will contribute to future progress in this
              area.


