Title       : New Methods for Asymmetric Synthesis of Valuable Chemicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0200786

Award Number: 0200786
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $635000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry E. Overman leoverma@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the development of asymmetric methods for
              activating carbon-carbon pi-bonds for attack by external nucleophiles and for
              the stereospecific cross-coupling reactions of stereogenic secondary carbon
              centers will be developed. In the former, Pd(II)-catalyzed processes will be
              used to develop both carbon-heteroatom and carbon-carbon bond-forming
              reactions.  In the latter, palladacyclic intermediates containing Pd
              sigma-bonded to a stereogenic secondary carbon will be used to develop the
              reaction chemistry for stereospecific catalytic cross-coupling of stereogenic
              secondary carbons.  

With this renewal award, the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program is supporting the research efforts of Dr. Larry E. Overman in
              the Department of Chemistry at the University of California, Irvine.  Professor
              Overman will focus his work on developing catalytic, asymmetric reactions for
              the formation of carbon-carbon and carbon-heteroatom bonds.  The research has
              broad implications for the environment by minimizing the production of chemical
              wastes and resulting methodology could be of great interest to the
              pharmaceutical and agricultural industries.  This area of research has proven
              to be a valuable setting for the training of undergraduate, graduate and
              post-doctoral students.

