Title       : 9.4T a Micro-Imaging Spectrometer for High Field Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0200575

Award Number: 0200575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean A. King jean.king@umassmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sergey N. Makarov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Med Sch Worceste
	      55 Lake Avenue North
	      Worcester, MA  016550002    508/856-2119

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support to a consortium of faculty from the University of
              Massachusetts Medical School (UMMS) and Worcester Polytechnic Institute (WPI)
              for purchase of an ultra-high field magnetic micro-imaging device to be used
              for biological research.  The instrument includes a 9.4T, 89 mm bore, actively
              shielded, superconducting magnet, console, dual fullband RF system, gradient
              amplifier, two gradient coils, and five RF probes for multi-nuclear
              spectroscopy from 20 MHz to 480 MHz. The instrument is made cost effective by
              the small bore, a constraint that contributes to enhanced gradient performance
              and field homogeneity. Ultra high-field, large bore systems used for medical
              research and diagnosis cost millions of dollars and push the limits and
              performance of gradient coils.  Ultra high-field microimagers give
              unprecedented anatomical and functional images, allow multiple and single voxel
              spectroscopy, and have the potential to determine up to eighteen neurochemical
              signals simultaneously in vivo.  The microimager is expected to provide
              research and training opportunities for students in 1) MR imaging, 2) data
              acquisition, management, image processing, and informatics, 3) development of
              radiofrequency electronics, and 4) neurophysiological and biological
              experimental design and implementation.  The planned biological applications
              include: imaging functional brain activity, quantitative developmental
              neuroanatomy, imaging brain metabolism, and imaging brain receptors with ligand
              specific contrast agents, all using small animals. The success of these studies
              will require new developments in electronics, computer science and chemistry.
              Hence there is a natural collaboration between engineers, computer and
              biological scientists at WPI and neuroscientists at UMMS. 

