Title       : Quality Control and Activity Monitoring in Telecommunication Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0200224

Award Number: 0200224
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211004             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwok-Leung Tsui ktsui@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wei Jiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Telecommunication industry is a highly competitive industry.  Since divestiture
              and government de-regulations, various telephone services, such as cellular,
              local and long distance, domestic and commercial, have been the battle fields
              for telecommunication  service providers.  To remain competitive, it is
              important for the companies to establish  business planning systems to support
              management for strategic planning and decision  making.  Statistical process
              control (SPC) techniques have been used routinely for on-line process control
              and monitoring and have resulted in cost-effective returns on investment in
              manufacturing industry.  Our research builds on the powerful SPC and modeling
              methods to develop efficient statistical techniques for data mining and
              activity monitoring in telecommunication industry.  We identify the limitations
              of the current  SPC methods in telecommunication applications.  We develop
              efficient methods for 
monitoring large volume of univariate and multivariate
              data and construct economic models to evaluate and compare various monitoring
              methods.  We also develop design of  experiments and churn modeling methods to
              identify important characteristics responsible for abnormal activities and to
              predict likelihood that the activities would  happen. 

The major impact of
              the proposed research is to improve the existing techniques and tools  in the
              business planning system for data mining and knowledge extraction in the
              telecommunication industry.  The enhanced system will allow marketing and sales
              managers to apply data mining methods routinely, efficiently, and effectively
              to solve their problems.  As a result, our research will help the company
              reduce cost through efficient fraud detection systems and improve revenue
              through customer churn prevention, customer retention programs, and new
              business opportunities based on extracted useful knowledge.

