Title       : Characterization and Recognition of Perfect Graphs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0200595

Award Number: 0200595
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $448007             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin Thomas thomas@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A graph is perfect if for every induced subgraph, the chromatic 
number is
              equal to the maximum size of a complete subgraph. The 
Strong Perfect Graph
              Conjecture (SPGC) of Berge from 1960 asserts 
that a graph is perfect if and
              only if it has no induced subgraph 
isomorphic to an odd cycle of length at
              least five, or the 
complement of such a cycle. A related open question is
              whether 
perfectness can be tested in polynomial time.  The PI and his
              
colleagues are pursuing a strategy for proving the SPGC. They 
have
              formulated several conjectures about graph decomposition
that together with
              earlier conjectures and results imply the SPGC, 
and are working toward
              establishing the validity of those 
conjectures.

This work falls within the
              area of graph theory, and is closely 
related to theoretical computer science
              and mathematical 
programming (operations research). A graph is an abstract
              
mathematical notion used to model networks, such as telephone 
networks,
              transportation networks or the Internet. Within graph 
theory the class of
              perfect graphs is important for several 
reasons. For instance, many problems
              of interest in practice that 
are intractable in general can be solved
              efficiently when 
restricted to the class of perfect graphs. Also, the
              question of 
when a certain class of linear programs always have an integer
              
solution can be answered in terms of the perfectness of an 
associated
              graph. Thus the Strong Perfect Graph Conjecture is 
believed to be an
              important open problem, and its resolution
is likely to have implications in
              the design of efficient 
algorithms of interest to theoretical computer
              scientists and 
operations researchers.

