Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Behavioral and Ecological Interactions of
               Lemurs and Raptors in Ranomafana National Park, Madagascar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0200747

Award Number: 0200747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Janson janson@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Lemurs have presented a puzzle to scientists trying to understand their social
              behavior, because they do not conform to the general social patterns found in
              most monkeys and apes.  One of the possible explanations for this difference
              assumes that Madagascar (the home of modern lemur species) has fewer and less
              dangerous predators than other areas where primates live. Anecdotal studies
              have questioned this assumption, but there are few systematic data concerning
              predation on lemurs. This study of the behavioral and ecological interactions
              of lemurs and raptors in Ranomafana National Park, Madagascar is designed to
              provide information on 1) the specific ecological interactions between lemurs
              and diurnal birds of prey, and 2) anti-predator behaviors of lemurs in response
              to distinct predator species. The first question will be addressed by measuring
              the actual rate of mortality on lemurs imposed by the four largest diurnal
              birds of prey in Madagascar (Buteo brachypterus, Accipiter henstii,
              Polyboroides radiatus, Eutriorchis astur).  Each of these raptors will be the
              focus of nest observations, prey remain collections, and radio-tracking studies
              designed to measure the number of lemurs killed by each raptor species, the
              area over which this mortality occurs, and the prey population size.  In
              addition, two experiments will address the behavioral responses of lemurs to
              the existing predator guild. The first experiment involves predator
              vocalization play backs to three species of lemurs with varying body sizes: the
              diademed sifaka (Propithecus diadema edwardsi), the rufous lemur (Eulemur
              fulvus rufus), and the gentle lemur (Hapalemur griseus).  The second experiment
              consists of exposing three independent groups of diademed sifakas to model
              avian and terrestrial predators. The analysis of both raptor and lemur data
              will provide a clear understanding of the ecological influence of raptor
              predation on lemurs as well as the behavioral responses of lemurs to predation
              risk.
