Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0200482

Award Number: 0200482
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine E. Gibson kgibson@cmgm.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : K, Gibson
	      371 Serra Mall
	      Stanford, CA  943055020    650/723-2122

NSF Program : 1603      Postdoc Rsch Fllwshp Micro Bio
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
              FY2002.  The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
              protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
              not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
              opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
              microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
              established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
              research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
              fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
              research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
              of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
              locations. 

The research and training plan is entitled "Symbiotic regulation
              and function of proteins in Sinorhizobium melilota Outer Membrane." 
              Sinorhizobium melilota, a gram negative bacterium, and the legume Medicago
              truncatula are partners in a symbiosis that requires coordinated
              differentiation for productive nodulation.  This research seeks to identify
              bacterial outer membrane proteins (OMPs) differentially expressed in
              plant-associated bacteroids compared to free-living bacteria, to be followed by
              a genetic and physiological analyses of the role these proteins play at the
              interface of the bacterium and plant.  This will ehnhance our understanding of
              the complex metabolic coupling between bacteria and plant required for nitrogen
              fixation.  

