Title       : Chow Groups of Projective Varieties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0200012

Award Number: 0200012
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chad Schoen schoen@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is concerned with the geometry of algebraic 
varieites. It builds
              on past experience which indicates that 
much can be learned about the
              geometry of a given algebraic 
variety by studying its Chow group. The Chow
              group is obtained 
from the free abelian group on all subvarieties of a given
              variety 
by modding out by the relation of rational equivalence. For
              
algebraic curves the Chow group is a close relative of the 
Jacobian. While
              the Chow group is known to have good functorial 
properties, it is often very
              difficult to compute. Thus it is 
difficult to gain access to the subtle and
              valuable information 
that it frequently contains. This investigation focuses
              on three 
different aspects of the problem of computing Chow groups. First
              
the torsion subgroup of the Chow group is being studied with an 
emphasis on
              the quotient by the subgroup generated by cycles 
algebraically equivalent to
              zero. Secondly, the relationship
between the Chow group and singular
              cohomology with rational 
coefficients is being investigated. The Hodge
              Conjecture is an 
important concern here. The theory of Abelian varieties and
              
techniques from classical algebraic geometry will be brought to 
bear on
              this problem.  The third line of investigation involves 
the relationship
              between the Chow group and singular cohomology 
with integrer coefficients. An
              ancient guidepost here was the so 
called Integral Hodge Conjecture. It has
              turned out that the 
Integral Hodge Conjecture is false in some instances. The
              extent 
of its failure is poorly understood, so the principal investigator
              
and a PhD student are working to clarify this.

To a significant extent,
              the value of basic research in algebraic 
geometry results from the tendency
              of mathematicians to reduce 
problems in various other fields of mathematics
              to problems in 
algebraic geometry. This tendency is due to the ultimate
              
simplicity of algebraic geometry, where remarkably effective 
approaches to
              certain geometric problems have been developed
with minimal reliance on
              infinite processes. While the initial 
translation of a problem from the
              physical world into mathematics 
frequently involves limits, derivatives,
              integrals, and further 
notions involving infinite processes which go well
              beyond ordinary 
calculus, mathematicians have learned to search for hidden
              aspects 
of these problems which are essentially of an algebraic or finite
              
nature.  Neither the task of translating real world phenomena into
              
mathematical problems, the task of discovering a hidden algebraic
core in a
              problem formulated using infinite processes, nor the 
task of solving this
              core problem using algebraic geometry is
often easy. Nonetheless, this lengthy
              process has led to profound 
insights.  For example, algebraic geometry and
              some of the 
algebraic varieties studied by the principal investigator are of
              
great interest to physicists in their current attempts to unify 
quantum
              mechanics with the theory of gravity.  
