Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0200720

Award Number: 0200720
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine V. Hawkes chawkes@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : C, Hawkes
	      1322 La Loma Ave.
	      Berkeley, CA  947082030    510/643-2402

NSF Program : 1603      Postdoc Rsch Fllwshp Micro Bio
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
              FY2002.  The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
              protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
              not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
              opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
              microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
              established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
              research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
              fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
              research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
              of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
              locations. 

The research and training plan is entitled "Effects of plant
              roots, mycorrhizal fungi, and rhizosphere bacteria on soil carbon cycling." 
              The aim of this research is to elucidate how interactions among plants,
              arbuscular mycorrhizae, and rhizosphere bacteria affect carbon cycling both
              locally and at the ecosystem level. This requires a combination of DNA-based
              microbial community characterization, engineered bacterial reporter gene
              systems to detect specific carbon compounds, traditional isotope techniques and
              13C PLFA for following the flow and fate of carbon, and an experimental design
              incorporating different rhizosphere communities from congeneric native and
              introduced plant species in CA and the UK. The results of this work will add to
              our understanding of microbial interactions in the rhizosphere and their
              consequences, improve our ability to predict system-level responses to global
              change, and add to our capacity to manage biological invasions.

