Title       : Current Mode Band-Limited Signaling for Deep Submicron Global Interconnects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0200063

Award Number: 0200063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wentai Liu wentai@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent trends in submicron CMOS scaling suggest that global interconnects will
              increasingly become a major performance limitation due to increased signal
              delay and cross-talk noise. The implementation of copper and low k wiring
              technology mitigates the effect of scaling on signal delay and cross-talk in
              local and intermediate interconnects. However, the benefits of new materials
              may not be sufficient for scaling long global interconnects due to the
              increasing RC delays. The near term solution adopted by the semiconductor
              industry to minimize the relative delay, according to the 1TRS roadmap, has
              been to increase the aspect ratio of interconnects. However, the increase in
              metal thickness, reduction in metal pitch and continuing voltage scaling with
              each technology generation will progressively exacerbate the noise problem due
              to interconnect capacitive and inductive coupling effects and will eventually
              become the dominant problem over local and global propagation delays.

The
              research described in this proposal will address the signal propagation delay
              and cross-talk noise limitations in deep submicron interconnects by introducing
              a fundamental change in the signaling approach: the use of current-mode
              band-limited signaling to reduce the signal delay and cross-talk noise
              bottlenecks in CMOS VLSI's. To reduce cross-talk noise due to capacitive and
              inductive effects, the proposed signaling scheme based on band-limited basis
              waveforms will partially replace the square pulses in critical communication
              links within the system. A preliminary remit from the proposed band-limited
              signaling scheme in 0.35-urn CMOS process shows capacitive cross-talk noise
              reduction beyond 30 percent for aluminum and copper interconnects. An
              attractive result from the proposed signaling approach is that given the signal
              bandwidth and noise margin requirements, longer interconnects lines or higher
              interconnect densities can be achieved.

To overcome the bandwidth
              limitations in the deep submicron regime, new approaches to high-speed
              signaling are required. In the proposed research, we intend to use current-mode
              circuit techniques to improve the bandwidth performance and reduce signal
              delay. Current-mode sensing has received limited attention for signaling in
              global interconnections partially due to the popularity of voltage-mode full
              swing repeater insertion methodologies. . It can be shown that as CMOS
              technology continues to scale, the number of repeaters required to achieve the
              projected performance criteria will increase dramatically and constitute a
              significant portion of the total system power dissipation. Therefore,
              current-mode sensing circuits will increasingly become popular in this deep
              submicron IC era.

Accurate estimation of propagation delay and cross-talk
              noise in long global interconnects plays an important role in the early design
              stages of high performance VLSI systems. Various techniques based on
              simulations and/or analytical closed-form formulations have been proposed to
              model delay and cross-talk in interconnects. The bulk of the work dedicated to
              this area targets capacitively terminated lines for voltage mode signaling.
              However, with the increasing speed requirements in VLSI circuits, current mode
              signal transporting techniques may provide an attractive solution to some of
              the challenges caused by aggressive interconnect scaling. To accommodate
              current-mode signaling techniques, we propose to derive efficient closed-form
              analytical models for a driven distributed RC line with arbitrary termination.
              The accuracy of this work is predicted to be the same as Elmore Delay
              formulation, extended to accommodate current-mode type circuits.

In this
              research, we intend to develop the theoretical basis for the proposed
              current-mode band-limited signaling scheme and analytically formulate its
              impact on cross-talk noise and signal delay reduction. We will target our study
              toward understanding its effects on interconnect coupling noise. Study of
              circuit design issues will be followed by prototype fabrication for conceptual
              and experimental verification. Finally, we intend to apply this knowledge to
              build a high performance wide bus system to prove the noise reduction
              advantages.

