Title       : Topics in Quantum Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0200591

Award Number: 0200591
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272612             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc A. Rieffel rieffel@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

Abstract
Rieffel

Over the past several years I developed a theory of
              quantum metric spaces, within the setting of algebras of operators on Hilbert
              space. My theory includes an analog of the classical Gromov-Hausdorff distance
              between metric spaces. I gave several applications of these ideas, notably to
              the convergence of matrix algebras to coadjoint orbits of compact Lie groups. I
              propose to continue to strengthen this theory, and to apply it in several
              directions suggested by the many situations in the physics and mathematics of
              quantization where one has a sequence of quantum spaces which appear to be
              converging to another space, either quantum or classical. As a major new
              direction I will try to develop an analogous theory for the quantum versions of
              the superstructure of vector bundles, connections, Yang-Mills actions, etc. I
              will also try to extend my theory beyond the quantum analog of locally compact
              spaces, so as to attempt to deal with the approximations of quantum
              field-theory models, especially those of integrable systems, say by quantum
              lattice models. 
Our nation's technological and economic success has at its
              foundation the mathematical models of the world around us which scientists
              develop in order to understand how to use the flood of data which flows from
              the laboratories of the experimental scientists. But human beings and computers
              can only deal with finite collections of numbers at a time.  Thus in applying
              these mathematical models it is almost always necessary to approximate the
              infinite variability of our world by finite collections of numbers. It is then
              crucial to understand how valid any given approximation is. With respect to
              individual calculations this matter has received extensive study. But less
              study has been made of how complex models as a whole can be approximated well
              by simpler models as a whole. Relatively little is known about such "global"
              approximations in the case of the models of quantum physics, which is the part
              of physics which governs chemical and biochemical reactions, the functioning of
              semi-conductors, and many other key technologies. In the classical realm there
              is an important form of global approximation called Gromov-Hausdorff distance.
              I have developed a quantum analog of it, and successfully applied it to a few
              examples. I propose to strengthen this theory, and to apply it to a broader
              class of examples, so as to better understand how to effectively approximate
              various models of quantum phenomena of current interest.

