Title       : Plasma-Assisted Net-Shape Deposition for Microfabrication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0200062

Award Number: 0200062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85113              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bakhtier Farouk bfarouk@coe.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Young H. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Exploratory studies will be conducted for the development of novel micro plasma
              reactors that are less than a millimeter in size, for the deposition of metals,
              dielectric materials, or polymers for microfabrication. An intense plasma ball
              of less than a few hundred microns diameter can be generated under atmospheric
              pressure between a microelectrode and a counter electrode under suitable
              conditions. Such a plasma ball is self-sustaining and is of 'cold' type similar
              to the high vacuum plasma sources used in microchip manufacturing.  Based on
              this micro plasma ball, a radically different method of microfabrication -
              plasma-assisted net-shape deposition (PAND) - is proposed.  With the PAND
              method, the deposition will be carried out under atmospheric pressure to
              eliminate the costly high vacuum equipment.  Also, the net shape of the desired
              feature is 'printed' at the substrate surface directly thereby eliminating the
              time-consuming and capital-intensive photolithography. 

The proposed
              one-year project also addresses the fundamental mechanisms affecting the design
              and operation of the PAND reactors.  Since the experimental characterization of
              the atmospheric pressure micro-plasma discharge is a challenging task,
              comprehensive process modeling is proposed to understand the inherent physics
              and chemistry of the system.  Innovative modeling strategies will be used to
              simulate the unique discharge ('cold' atmospheric pressure micro-plasma)
              addressed here.  A high-resolution discharge physics model will be developed
              for the reactor to examine the effects of various process parameters on the
              ionization and dissociation characteristics of the feed gases.  The results
              from numerical computations and laboratory measurements will help in
              characterizing the 'cold' atmospheric pressure micro-plasma.   

