Title       : A Broad Research Program in the Sciences of Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0200500

Award Number: 0200500
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Brown                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3176000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas B. Kepler kepler@santafe.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen H. Goldberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Fe Institute
	      1399 Hyde Park Road
	      Santa Fe, NM  875016188    505/984-8800

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7205,9150,9218,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Santa Fe Institute (SFI) will build significantly upon its successes to date
              in conducting transdisciplinary research toward understanding the complex
              behaviors arising in systems composed of relatively simple, highly interacting
              components.  Specifically, SFI will study the emergent behaviors of real
              complex systems whose components are themselves complex-genetic regulatory
              networks, financial markets and social institutions for example-through
              mathematical investigation and simulation in concert with empirical studies and
              data analysis.  Researchers involved in these activities will come from many
              disciplines, including biology, physics, mathematics, computation, and the
              social behavioral, and economic sciences.

Integration and synthesis underlie
              this research, which is thus complementary to the more well-established methods
              of reduction and analysis that characterize disciplinary science.  It is, of
              course, essential that complex systems such as the immune system or the global
              economy be decomposed into their constituent parts and that the behavior of
              these parts be elucidated as completely as possible for the subsequent
              understanding of the system as a whole.  But in addition to understanding these
              constituents, understanding of their collective organization is required.  It
              is necessary to refer separately to the parts and their organization to call
              attention to the fact that the properties of the parts alone do not uniquely
              determine their collective organization; there are many organizational
              structures possible with the same parts.  Furthermore, the observed
              organization, or the emergent collective entity, is itself perpetuated
              independently of its parts.  Thus, a market persists even as the individual
              traders turn over, an ecosystem persists even as the organisms die and are
              replaced, a cell persists, though its molecules degrade.  

SFI will further
              develop the fertile concept of emergence by strengthening the theoretical
              understanding of emergence through rigorous mathematical study direct and by
              intensive study of empirical data from specific real-world complex phenomena,
              including: Structure and Dynamics of Networks, Novelty in Evolution,
              Computation in Nature, Market Evolution, and Human Behavior and the Emergent
              Properties of Social Structures.


