Title       : Conference on Stark's Conjectures and Related Topics, August 4 - 9, 2002, The
               Johns Hopkins University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0200541

Award Number: 0200541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cristian D. Popescu cpopescu@math.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan W. Sands  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Originating in the mid-1970's, Stark's Conjecture remains one of the
              
deepest unsolved problems in number theory. Tate's 1984 book on the
              sub-
ject provided a generation of researchers with a solid exposition of the
              
state of the conjecture at that time, and a foundation for further
              in-
vestigation. Work related to the conjecture has recently grown to
              in-
volve more and more number theorists, but there has never been a major
              
conference on the subject. This NSF award will provide major funding 
for a
              conference dedicated to Stark's conjecture and its variations to
be held at
              John's Hopkins University in Baltimore August 4-9, 2002. 
Plans include
              plenary talks devoted to background and current research
in the mornings,
              followed by contributed talks in the afternoons.
The gathering of researchers
              from various strands of inquiry should
lead to insight into the links between
              various conjectures and provide 
an ideal platform for further research on all
              aspects of Stark's Conj-
ecture. In particular, one would expect that this
              conference would lead 
to a number of new and fruitful collaborations, and to
              the greater in-
volvement of graduate students in this research. Indeed,
              graduate stu-
dents, junior faculty members, women, and members of
              traditionally 
under-represented minorities are especially encouraged to
              attend and 
to apply for funding. 

     Stark's conjecture in number theory
              suggests that there is astonishing 
and useful structure waiting to be
              discovered behind the fundamental 
concepts of higher arithmetic. In higher
              arithmetic, one seeks to de-
scribe the solutions of polynomial equations and
              their properties. This 
is the algebraic side of number theory. The conjecture
              states that the 
solutions of certain polynomial equations can be obtained
              from the values   
of specific limits and infinite sums which naturally
              involve the methods 
of calculus. This is the analytic side of number theory.
              Thus Stark's 
conjecture makes a striking connection between two branches of
              mathematics:
algebra and analysis. Understanding this type of connection is
              just what
leads to major breakthroughs. Indeed, the conjecture has already led
              to 
new and more efficient methods of performing certain computations.     

              

