Title       : Mechanisms of Freezing Damage to Concrete
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0200440

Award Number: 0200440
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276123             (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Scherer scherer@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Freeze/thaw cycles can damage concrete by causing internal cracking or
              superficial scaling. The physical mechanisms responsible for these two types of
              damage are apparently different, but the details are controversial. The purpose
              of this project is to examine the fundamental mechanisms responsible for the
              damage, and to test novel methods for preventing it. Concrete is conventionally
              protected from frost damage by introducing surfactants that create air voids
              with diameters on the order of 50-100 um and spacing of about 200um The voids
              serve as sinks into which water can flow when ice forms in the pores of the
              cement paste; this prevents development of destructive hydraulic pressures
              created by the expansion as water transforms to ice. However, the voids do not
              protect the paste against crystallization pressure when ice forms in the
              surrounding mesopores. We intend to examine the relative importance of
              crystallization pressure and hydraulic pressure with respect to internal
              cracking. To control the occurrence of crystallization, we will introduce
              nucleating agents for ice into the air voids, so that ice forms preferentially
              in those open spaces, where it can grow without creating stress. If effective,
              such nucleating agents could be incorporated into concrete along with the
              surfactants that create the voids. To examine surface scaling of concrete, we
              will employ a novel experimental approach. A pool of liquid is established on
              the surface of a plate of cement paste, and the system is cooled until freezing
              occurs. As the ice forms, internal stresses develop that are revealed by
              warping of the plate; by measuring the deflection with an optical probe, we can
              study the kinetics of stress development. Preliminary experiments have revealed
              several stress-generating mechanisms: thermal contraction of the pore liquid
              relative to the solid paste, transfer of pore water toward the ice at the
              exterior surface of the body, and thermal expansion mismatch between the
              superficial ice and the paste. The relative importance of these mechanisms will
              be quantified, and we will explore the effectiveness of air voids, nucleation
              control, and other methods for minimizing the damage.
 This research will be
              the subject of a doctoral thesis, and will be integrated into the undergraduate
              curriculum by having parts of the study done as senior theses and independent
              research projects. Freeze/thaw testing will use special facilities and
              expertise in the labs of the W.R. Grace Corporation. We will also collaborate
              with Prof. Leo Pel (Eindhoven) to obtain magnetic resonance imaging of the
              freezing process within the concrete samples.



