Title       : Highly Nonlinear Approximation: Theory and Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0200665

Award Number: 0200665
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pencho Petrushev   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Pencho Petrushev, University of South Carolina
DMS-0200665

              

========


ABSTRACT   

The project will be focused on specific
              problems in nonlinear  n-term approximation from large redundant systems, which
              is commonly referred to as highly nonlinear approximation.   Redundant systems
              have already had a serious impact in signal and image processing and upon
              Approximation Theory in general. The research community is currently developing
              two forms of redundant systems. The first deals with libraries of bases such as
              the wavelet packets and cosine packets. The second major thrust has been to
              study dictionaries such as the Gabor functions and neural networks.  The focus
              of our investigations is toward dictionaries of a different nature, which fall
              in two categories:
(i)	Dictionaries consisting of shifts and dilates of
              infinitely smooth, rapidly decaying functions which include the Gaussian,
              radial partial fractions, or more general anisotropic systems consisting of
              certain transformations of such functions.
  (ii)         Collections of
              piecewise polynomials generated by multilevel dyadic partitions of the 
      
                      pace, multilevel nested triangulations, or simplex partitions.  
The
              primary goal of project is to understand nonlinear and highly nonlinear
              processes. In particular, we must develop an understanding of the nature of the
              smoothness conditions 
(specified by specific spaces) which govern the rate of
              approximation in a collection of important metrics. The second major effort of
              the project is to develop algorithms which are grounded in fundamental
              analysis, capable of achieving the rate of the best approximation (i.e.
              compression), and are practical to implement.

This project is actively
              coordinating its investigations with collaborators involved in the analysis and
              presentation of data for a wide range of application fields, including digital
              elevation maps and associated imagery arising from geographical information
              systems (GIS), signal and image analysis, computer aided geometric design
              (CAGD), graphical rendering and visualization of large scale numerical
              simulations. In each case, the objective is to analyze complicated data and
              signals in the context of prescribed dictionaries and to decompose them into
              basic elements which are natural for the physical system under investigation.
              The amplitudes associated with the base elements, whether they be wavelets, a
              multiresolution redundant system, or anisotropic systems, provide inherent
              information about the data and ideally lead to the maximal entropy encoding of
              classes of  signals (data). This encoded representation of data is important
              for the storage, transmission, fast query, visual display, correlation, or
              registration against data from other modalities. The primary motivation of this
              project is to make substantial contributions to the underlying theoretical
              foundation for these investigations.   

