Title       : A WAVE Nucleic Acid Fragment Analysis System for Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0200484

Award Number: 0200484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107296             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip B. Danielson pdaniels@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Dores  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Quinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Fogleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Egbert Schwartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Phillip Danielson at the University of Denver to
              fund the purchase of a Transgenomic   Nucleic Acid Fragment Analysis System.
              Based on established DNA size separation and mutation detection technology,
              this system will increase the quality and cost effectiveness of
              undergraduate/graduate research and
education in molecular biology. Specific
              research programs that will benefit immediately include National Science
              Foundation-funded studies to identify novel genes that encode: (1) endocrine
              hormones in the brain; (2) cytochrome P450 toxin-metabolizing enzymes - which
              are critical to the control of crop pests and disease-carrying organisms; 3)
              microbial proteins that can be used to clean up of toxic waste sites
              contaminated with heavy metals and 4) molecular markers that can be used to
              identify and track genetic diversity in endangered species - work is conducted
              in collaboration with the Denver Zoological Gardens and Denver Museum of
              Science and Nature. 

Until recently, the identification of mutations
              required the laborious screening of hundreds to thousands of genes for subtle
              variations in DNA sequence. Analysis of a single novel gene by the direct
              sequence approach currently used, can require a day or more to complete. The
              Transgenomic WAVE System funded by this grant will reduce the analysis time to
              2-4 minutes/sample. The discovery and analysis of genes that encode proteins
              involved in toxin breakdown, as well as neuropeptides linked to stress is the
              focus of several research programs. Since these genes often exist as duplicates
              with subtle but critical differences, it is essential that both copies be
              isolated. The WAVE  system will be used to reduce the potential number of
              competing non-target gene fragments by precise size fractionation of the
              initial pool of DNA used for gene amplification reactions. The instrument's
              mutation detection and fragment capture functions will be used to increase the
              efficiency with which these related genes are identified and recovered - even
              where two genes sequences differ by less than 0.5%. In research focused on
              conservation biology and microbial ecology, the WAVE  system will provide an
              extremely sensitive approach to the analysis of DNA sequence differences among
              and within species. Finally, the WAVE's high-speed genotyping capabilities will
              be used to gather gene frequency data from hundreds of samples for large-scale,
              multi-state conservation genetic projects. 

Beyond the benefit to the
              research activities at the University of Denver, a broad range of
laboratory
              and classroom-oriented educational goals will be advanced at both the
              undergraduate and graduate levels. Benefits will be particularly evident in the
              molecular-oriented laboratory courses that are at the heart of the Bachelor of
              Science and Bachelor of Arts degrees in Molecular Biology. On a broader level,
              department-sponsored biotechnology classes offered to high school students and
              teacher-training workshops that promote hands-on science education at the
              secondary school level will also be greatly enhanced by providing first-hand
              experience in one of the most modern methods of genetic analysis. The benefit
              to high school outreach efforts will immeasurable given that these programs
              target students in urban and low-income school districts who have traditionally
              been underrepresented in the natural sciences. In short, acquisition of
              the
WAVE Nucleic Acid Fragment Analysis System will provide significant and
              immediate
benefits to education at the high school, undergraduate and graduate
              levels.

