Title       : GOALI - Green CMP: Chemical Mechanical Planarization Process Modeling for
               Minimizing Environmental Impact
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0200204

Award Number: 0200204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Dornfeld dornfeld@me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mike Woolston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1468,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Chemical-mechanical planarization (CMP) is one of the most critical steps in the
              production of multilayer silicon microelectronic devices. The goal of the
              research project  is to develop a framework for environmental modeling which
              combines mechanical-chemical modeling of CMP tool components, environmental
              impact factors and cost of ownership (CoO) based upon competent variable
              sensitive process models of material removal in CMP. This work will extend
              earlier work to more detailed process capable models within an integrated
              process assessment framework. We focus here on the continued development of
              models for the mechanical interactions as well as models of the chemical
              effects and influence on the process. We expect to determine the dependency of
              material removal (both at a specific point and over the wafer surface) on
              process variables such as slurry, pattern density, wafer material, etc. The
              model will be able to offer information on designing new or novel pad
              geometries to facilitate "environmentally efficient CMP." 

The work at UC,
              San Diego, on chemical removal mechanisms, is added to prior work at Berkeley.
              The resulting software will link process models to higher-level tools for
              assessing the environmental impact of the process and the upstream and
              downstream energy, consumable and waste requirements. A result of this
              model-based "environmental analysis tool" will be quantitative suggestions to
              process engineers and product and tool designers to enable them to insure that
              energy, waste and consumable use is minimized while maintaining the capability
              of the process and high product standards - that is - Environmentally Benign
              Manufacturing.
