Title       : Fundamental Groups and Absolute Galois Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0200045

Award Number: 0200045
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251343             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Harbater harbater@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Principal Investigator studies fundamental groups and absolute
Galois
              groups of varieties, especially in finite characteristic.  In
particular, he
              investigates the fundamental groups of affine curves over
an algebraically
              closed field of finite characteristic; the absolute
Galois groups of function
              fields of curves over non-algebraically closed
fields of finite
              characteristic; and the fundamental groups and absolute
Galois groups of
              higher dimensional varieties over algebraically closed
fields of arbitrary
              characteristic.  This study is in large part guided
by possible
              generalizations of Abhyankar's Conjecture for curves, which
the Principal
              Investigator has proven.  A major goal is to determine the
properties of the
              fundamental groups and absolute Galois groups in
question, and to determine
              which finite groups are quotients of these
profinite groups, in order to
              obtain greater insight into the algebra
and geometry of these spaces.  Methods
              include formal patching,
embedding problems, cohomology, valuation theory, and
              group theory.

The area of this project relates aspects of algebra and
              geometry in a
way that makes it possible to solve problems that would be
              intractible
in either field alone.  The linkage between the algebra and
              geometry
arises from geometric spaces that are defined by algebraic equations.
              
These spaces can have complicated patterns of symmetry, which
              manifest
themselves both in the algebra and the geometry.  This project seeks
              to
understand what types of symmetries can occur in the context of
              these
spaces, and how spaces with one type of symmetry can relate to a
              given
space with another type of symmetry.  These spaces are in many
              cases
defined with respect to an algebraic system in which a particular
              prime
number plays a special role; and the properties of those spaces can
              be
interpreted as giving information about the solvability of
              equations
involving prime numbers.

