Title       : Computational Algebraic Methods for High-dimensional Statistical Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0200888

Award Number: 0200888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94046              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Dinwoodie ihd@math.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Mosteig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Proposal DMS-0200888
PI Ian Dinwoodie
Title "Computational
              algebraic methods for high-dimensional statistical applications"

This
              project has the goal of research in algebraic methods for high-dimensional
              parametric statistical problems where classical asymptotic methods are not
              useful. Connected with the research goal is work with existing and future
              graduate students. The research problems are:
high-dimensional
              Gibbs-distribution models for network reliability and traffic with incomplete
              data; optimization for parameter estimation in high-dimensional models with
              incomplete data and nonconvex log-likelihood functions; fast simulation methods
              including fiber walks with Markov chains for integer data tables; and
              multivariate exponential generating functions for computations on lattice
              points with the hypergeometric distribution. A range of algebraic tools will be
              used, including Groebner bases in commutative rings and D-modules, elimination
              theory, polynomial homotopy methods, and Markov Monte Carlo methods. 

This
              project will bring recent developments in computational algebra to new
              statistical applications where classical methods do not work.  Examples of such
              new and challenging applications are large-scale network traffic and
              reliability, and large databases of tabular data such as census information
              where security and analysis are difficult.
The algebraic tools can help to
              solve problems of model formulation and model fitting and statistical analysis.
              Many algebraic techniques have been recently developed to solve computational
              problems in robotics and differential equations, and these methods are very
              promising for statistics. The investigators will develop these algebraic
              methods to solve statistical applications.

