Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0200307

Award Number: 0200307
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul D. Straight paul_straight@hms.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : P, Straight
	      Microbiology- Armenise Rm 219
	      Boston, MA  021155701    617/432-2268

NSF Program : 1603      Postdoc Rsch Fllwshp Micro Bio
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
              FY2002.  The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
              protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
              not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
              opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
              microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
              established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
              research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
              fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
              research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
              of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
              locations. 

The research and training plan is entitled "Bacterial-fungal
              interactions: novel signals and response mechanisms that influence development
              of bacterial communities in the presence of fungi."  In the natural
              environment, many microorganisms construct complex communities known as
              biofilms.  This research focuses on signaling interactions between bacteria and
              fungi in the context of biofilms through characterization of multiple
              bacterial-fungal pairs.  Genetic techniques and microarray analyses are being
              used to identify genes involved in dual-species interactions, in order to
              define signaling mechanisms important to bacterial-fungal communities.


