Title       : Morphing Complete Vibrational Potentials for Hydrogen Bonded and Related
               Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0200972

Award Number: 0200972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $341100             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Bevan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Lucchese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Bevan and Lucchese will use high-resolution spectroscopic
              experimental techniques and theoretical methods to obtain accurate interaction
              potential energy functions for prototypical hydrogen-bonded systems and related
              interactions.  Gas-phase neutral reactive radical dimers and molecular
              complexes will be investigated using high-resolution microwave,
              millimeter-wave, submillimeter-wave, and infrared  spectroscopy.  Spectra will
              be measured for dimers of the type X-HY (where X and Y are typically halogen
              atoms) as well as for HX clusters and hydrogen-bonded systems of biological
              interest, such as formamide:water.  Potential energy surfaces will be computed
              using ab initio techniques and used to predict spectroscopic data.  The
              potential energy functions will then be morphed until the predicted and
              experimental data agree.  

This project aims at obtaining a broader
              knowledge about fundamental properties related to chemical bonding.  The
              accurately determined potentials for the prototypical systems being studied
              will provide benchmarks for modeling and predicting the behavior of larger and
              less tractable systems.  The results will aid in understanding the structure
              and internal dynamics of larger species, including proteins and other
              biological molecules, as well as in resolving problems associated with other
              diverse fields such as atmospheric pollution and materials engineering. 
              Students supported in this project will receive training in both
              state-of-the-art experimental and theoretical techniques and will be exposed to
              international collaborations that will enhance their preparation for careers in
              academia and industry.

