Title       : GOALI: Robust Product Design Selection under Uncertainty and for Competitive
               Advantage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0200029

Award Number: 0200029
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327059             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shapour Azarm azarm@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen Brelsford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Spencer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pallassana K. Kannan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1464,1504,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to (1) develop an integrated framework and
              methodology to aid robust selection of product designs, either a single product
              or a product line, taking into account the uncertainties 
in measuring
              customer preferences, uncertainties due to changing preferences over time,
              uncertainties in competitive reactions, and uncertainty in uncontrollable
              engineering design parameters, and based  on this framework (2) construct and
              validate a prototype decision  support system. In the proposed approach, the
              product/product-line  design selection is viewed as a selection with two main
              stages: design alternative generation and design alternative evaluation.   In
              the first stage (design module), commonality information,   along with
              uncertainty in the engineering design formulation,  is fed into a
              multi-objective robust optimization to  generate a Pareto robust optimal set of
              design alternatives. In the second stage (market module), demand and market
              share  estimates are generated for each alternative in the set by  accounting
              for customer preferences and choices. Based on the demand function and
              commonality, cost functions are calculated 
for each generated design
              alternative and are used to compute the net present value of profit for each
              alternative. A recursive process between the two modules will be undertaken to
              account for the uncertainty in uncontrollable parameters in both modules using 
              simulation methods and to obtain a robust set of recommendations. 
If
              successful, the outcome of this research will advance the state of the art
              across different domains in engineering design, marketing science and
              management. The results of this investigation will be broadly disseminated in
              the engineering design automation and marketing science communities, the
              knowledge   integrated into courses at the University of Maryland, and the 
              technology and techniques transferred to industry. The proposed research will
              also provide opportunities for students to learn business and engineering
              
practices involved in product design selection and ways to enhance the
              effectiveness of such practices through basic research.  
  

