Title       : Complex Hyperbolic Geometry, Arithmetic, and Commutative Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0200877

Award Number: 0200877
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Domingo Toledo toledo@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Carlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigators study the complex hyperbolic 
geometry of the
              moduli spaces of cubic surfaces and cubic 
threefolds.   For stable cubic
              surfaces over the complex numbers, 
previous work of D. Allcock and the
              investigators gives a period 
map from the moduli space to the quotient of the
              four-ball by a 
lattice defined over the Eisenstein integers, which is an
              
isomorphism between these two spaces and which takes the subspace 
of moduli
              of singular surfaces to a configuration of hyperplanes 
in the ball.  The
              investigators now study the arithmetic 
properties of cubic surfaces whose
              periods are Eisenstein rational 
points.   For stable cubic threefolds over
              the complex numbers, 
there is a period map from their moduli space to the
              quotient of 
the ten-ball by a lattice also defined over the Eisenstein
              
integers.  The investigators study detailed properties of this 
period map
              in order to prove that this map is an isomorphism 
between the two spaces
              (after some blowing up and down) which 
carries the subspace of moduli of
              singular threefolds to a 
hyperplane configuration in the ball.  The main
              technical point 
under study is the computation of the differential of the
              
restriction of the period map to each stratum that parametrizes
              
equisingular varieties.  The extension of the Griffiths residue 
calculus to
              this situation turns out to be quite involved and to 
require new techniques
              in commutative algebra.

The understanding of cubic equations has been a
              central theme in 
mathematics, whith deep implications for mathematics,
              science and 
engineering.  In the sixteenth century  cubic equations in one
              
variable were solved by finding a formula for its solutions 
analogous to
              the well-known formula for the solutions of quadratic 
equations.   This
              formula led to the introduction of complex 
numbers, which are now a standard
              tool in science and engineering.  
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
              it was realized that 
quadratic equations in any number of variables could be
              
understood, and that, for a fixed number of variables,  all 
quadratic
              equations are essentially equivalent by a change of 
variables.  It was also
              realized that cubic equations in two or 
more variables are not all equivalent
              by change of variables.   
The different equivalence classes are now called
              the moduli space.   
The moduli space of cubic equations in two variables is
              the 
hyperbolic plane of non-Euclidean geometry.  This connection has led to
              many
discoveries, from special functions used to solve problems in physics
              and
engineering, to advances in number theory and cryptography.  The aim of
              this
project is to study the special non-Euclidean geometry that has recently
              been
discovered on the moduli spaces of cubic equations in three and
              four
variables.   The reason for carrying this study is not only the solution
              of
the problems posed in the proposal, but also the expectation that this
              study
of cubics in more variables will continue to be a point of departure for
              new
ideas that will affect other areas of mathematics, science and
              engineering.  

