Title       : Number Theory and Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0200047

Award Number: 0200047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138906             (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Andrews andrews@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal focuses on problems in q-series and partitions.  
There are five
              separate parts of this work.  The first part 
considers research tied to
              applications of the construction 
of representations of Lie algebras.  Next
              the investigator 
looks at new q-series methods related to special problems in
              
number theory.  The third part discusses applications of the 
Omega software
              package (http://www.uni-linz.ac.at/research/
combinat/risc/software/Omega/)
              which is being developed by 
the investigator in collaboration with colleagues
              at Linz. 
The focus in this latter section is on mutli-dimensional
              
partitions.  The fourth section is devoted to the study of 
Bailey chains
              and a consideration ofhow recent discoveries of 
the investigator may lead to
              new applications of this concept. 
The proposal concludes with consideration
              of three major unsolved
problems in the theory of partitions: (1) the
              Friedman-Joichi-
Stanton conjecture, (2) the Borwein conjecture and (3) the
              
Okada conjecture.  Each of these three conjectures has been 
around for some
              time.

The theme of this proposal put succinctly might be: Building 
bridges
              from partitions and q-series (two intrinsically deep and 
charming but
              sometimes rather introverted topics) to several 
branches of mathematics and
              science. The first two sections are 
devoted to relating this work to
              representation theory and number 
theory, two branches of mathematics; in each
              instance, it is clear 
that this interaction will not only enrich the object
              fields, but 
also will provide new insights for partitions and q-series.  The
              
work on the Omega package has great potential.  Here the 
investigator and
              his collaborators have found numerous instances 
where research discoveries
              have gone from being unthinkable to 
easily reached.  The possible
              applications to multi-dimensional 
partitions should lead to insights in
              combinatorics and, 
hopefully, the combinatorial aspects of physics. The work
              on 
Bailey chains in the past has had profound impact on statistical
              
mechanics in physics.  The more this method is advanced, the more 
we may
              expect these mutually beneficial applications to continue.  
The final section
              on three unsolved problems appears, at first, 
to be a purely internal study. 
              However, as has often happend 
in the past, whenever new methods are
              discovered to solve really 
hard problems, there is almost always a spillover
              into vital 
applications. 

