Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Tandem Traineeships for Cross-Disciplinary Statisticians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1993     
File        : a9256781

Award Number: 9256781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $666000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley Efron brad@stat.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   The principal objective of the National Science Foundation                
              Graduate Research Traineeship Program is to increase the numbers of            
              talented U.S. undergraduates enrolling in doctoral programs in                 
              critical and emerging areas of science and engineering.  Proposals             
              were solicited from institutions whose existing facilities and                 
              staff could accommodate additional graduate students in Ph.D.                  
              programs of high quality.  The program is also intended to                     
              contribute to strengthening the Nation's human resource base across            
              all geographic sectors and among all under-represented groups.                 
              Graduate Research Traineeship awards are packages of student                   
              support.  The colleges and universities that receive the awards are            
              responsible for the selection of trainees, retention of trainees,              
              and administration of traineeships.                                            
                   Stanford University plans to increase the number of U.S. Ph.D.            
              statisticians through a "Tandem Traineeship" program.  The                     
              objective of the program will be to produce students with the                  
              skills and desire to (a) conduct cross-disciplinary research in                
              science and engineering and (b) foster undergraduate education in              
              the mathematical sciences, particularly probability and statistics,            
              from a broad, interdisciplinary perspective.  In order to create a             
              structure in which the cross-disciplinary idea is nurtured,                    
              students will be encouraged to follow their interests and those of             
              their chosen faculty members in at least two departments.  In order            
              to attract a broad base of qualified U.S. applicants, particularly             
              women, minorities and students with disabilities, current mentoring            
              and recruitment efforts will be expanded.
