Title       : Graduate Traineeship in Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9256659

Award Number: 9256659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $555000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashok Saxena   (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. S. Ueng  (Principal Investigator former)
              Ramesh Talreja  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan S. Colton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Agaram S. Abhiraman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This Graduate Research Traineeship award will support five                     
              new trainees at the Georgia Institute of Technology for                        
              graduate study leading to a Ph.D. degree with a                                
              specialization in composites.  The students will be enrolled                   
              in one of the six participating Schools.  The traineeship                      
              program being administered through the Composites Education                    
              and Research Center(CERC), a campus-wide facility.  Georgia                    
              Tech has considerable depth of expertise in all technical                      
              areas related to composites technology, with very active                       
              research programs involving 25 faculty members who are                         
              collectively supervising 62 Ph.D. and 51 M.S. students                         
              (about one-half are engaged in composites research) in the                     
              various participating units and have considerable financial                    
              support from industry and government.  There are also a                        
              large number of composites courses available to students                       
              pursuing a Ph.D. degree in composites. Several of these                        
              courses are cross-listed and are team-taught by faculty from                   
              different schools.  Seven of these courses will form a set                     
              of required core courses to be taken by all trainees from                      
              all disciplines.                                                               
              %%%                                                                            
              Composite materials have extensive potential for use in                        
              aerospace, automotive, recreation, civil structure (highway                    
              and bridges), and telecommunications industries and have                       
              been identified in several recent federal reports as one of                    
              the key technologies for the future economic well being of                     
              the United States.  A multidisciplinary approach involving                     
              expertise in materials science and engineering mechanics,                      
              manufacturing and design is needed for the full commercial                     
              exploitation of these materials.  Trainees will be                             
              undertaking research and graduate studies in advanced                          
              composite materials.
