Title       : Chemical Aspects of Molecule-based Electronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1993     
File        : a9256486

Award Number: 9256486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $666000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Ratner ratner@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chad A. Mirkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph T. Hupp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tobin J. Marks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Van Duyne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1990      CHEMISTRY EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,9179,
Abstract    :
              Professor Mark A. Ratner is supported by a grant from the                      
              Chemistry Division and the Graduate Education and Research                     
              Division at NSF for a Graduate Traineeship Program emphasizing                 
              the chemical aspects of molecule-based electronics.  A team of                 
              six Northwestern University chemistry faculty members with                     
              teaching and research expertise in this and related areas will                 
              be assembled to provide graduate training and mentoring as well                
              as research program direction in this area.  To ensure the                     
              program leads to a net expansion of training within the                        
              chemistry department, an aggressive recruitment plan                           
              emphasizing minority and female students will be devised.  Once                
              recruited, the trainees will take part in a rigorous program                   
              designed to provide: 1) courses pertinent to the central themes                
              of molecule-based electronics; 2) exposure to and interaction                  
              with leading academic and industrial researchers from outside                  
              Northwestern University; 3) research training within the                       
              laboratories of Northwestern University faculty; and 4)                        
              experience in team-oriented, interdisciplinary problem solving                 
              via collaborative research interactions.                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              Molecule-based electronics is the use of molecular materials                   
              for electronic or photonic applications.  The scope of this                    
              field ranges from well-defined and well-understood phenomena                   
              such as nonlinear optical response of a single crystal of an                   
              organic chromophore to the more tantalizing and conceptually                   
              more difficult areas involving optical computing and optical                   
              memory storage systems at the molecular level. This                            
              interdisciplinary field encompasses not only chemistry, but                    
              also physics, engineering and materials science.  With the                     
              emergence of the first commercial molecular electronic                         
              technologies, the need for U.S. trained Ph.D. level scientists                 
              has become self-evident.  Funding provided through this                        
              Graduate Research Traineeship award will help to provide                       
              scientists in this area of national need.
