Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Applied Mathematics Graduate ResearchTraineeship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1993     
File        : a9256302

Award Number: 9256302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $666000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce R. McLaughlin mclauj@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   The principal objective of the National Science Foundation                
              Graduate Research Traineeship Program is to increase the numbers of            
              talented U.S. undergraduates enrolling in doctoral programs in                 
              critical and emerging areas of science and engineering.  Proposals             
              were solicited from institutions whose existing facilities and                 
              staff could accommodate additional graduate students in Ph.D.                  
              programs of high quality.  The program is also intended to                     
              contribute to strengthening the Nation's human resource base across            
              all geographic sectors and among all under-represented groups.                 
              Graduate Research Traineeship awards are packages of student                   
              support.  The colleges and universities that receive the awards are            
              responsible for the selection of trainees, retention of trainees,              
              and administration of traineeships.                                            
                   Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute will support Ph.D. students              
              in applied mathematics; the program addresses the following                    
              concerns:  (a) the academic need for applied mathematicians to                 
              provide academic training of students, (b) the industrial need for             
              applied mathematicians to maintain U.S. industrial competitiveness,            
              and (c) the need to increase the number of women and minority Ph.D.            
              applied mathematicians.  Students in the program will learn                    
              mathematical modeling, numerical computing, an outside (other than             
              mathematical) area, as well as a substantial background in the more            
              traditional areas of mathematics.  The program includes student                
              participation in workshops and panels on mathematical problems in              
              industry where students can work with student-faculty teams to                 
              solve industrial problems.  Current areas of departmental research             
              include physical mathematics and modeling, nonlinear analysis,                 
              scientific computation, mathematical programming and operations                
              research, and applied geometry.
