Title       : Graduate Training in Inorganic Materials Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1993     
File        : a9256824

Award Number: 9256824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $555000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis J. DiSalvo disalvo@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hector D. Abruna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Burlitch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roald Hoffmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter T. Wolczanski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Materials Chemistry is one focus of the national initiatives in                
              Science and Computer Science proposed by the National Science                  
              Advisor.  In order to meet the national objectives for more                    
              research and development in this burgeoning interdisciplinary                  
              field, more PH.D.'s trained in various aspects of Materials                    
              Chemistry are required.  This Graduate Research Traineeship award              
              will enable Cornell to increase the size of our materials                      
              chemistry program to train additional chemists over the next five              
              years; women and minorities will be especially targeted.  Six                  
              faculty members, all highly accomplished in research and                       
              teaching, will prepare these students for research in chemical                 
              aspects of materials.  Expertise in materials synthesis,                       
              characterization and theory is represented by this distinguished               
              group.                                                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              This program features an interdisciplinary set of courses and                  
              research collaborations, and institutes a plan targeting minority              
              institutions for recruitment.  Visitations by Cornell faculty and              
              students are a key component; another concerns Cornell summer                  
              research opportunities for students and faculty from minority                  
              institutions.  The Cornell Chemistry Department will match the                 
              $3500 per student enhancement in order to finance the recruiting               
              and summer research efforts, including teacher training.
