Title       : A Training Program in Adaptive Optics at the University of Chicago (Graduate
               Research Traineeship)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1999 
File        : a9256606

Award Number: 9256606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. W. Van Citters                       
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $601500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Kibblewhite edk@oddjob.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Rosner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1218      ADVANCED TECHNOLOGIES & INSTRM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              A Training Program in Adaptive Optics (AO) at the University                   
              of Chicago                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Adaptive optics compensates for the effect of turbulence in                    
              the earth's atmosphere and enables large ground-based                          
              telescopes to observe the universe with much of the clarity                    
              of space-based observatories.  The program at the University                   
              of Chicago provides training for both Ph.D level scientists                    
              expert in this new technology as well as for training Ph.D level               
              optical astronomers in the application of adaptive optics                      
              technology and techniques.                                                     
                                                                                             
              The program consists of three parts:                                           
                                                                                             
                   1) Course work in astronomy, high resolution imaging                      
                      and mathematical techniques in image processing                        
                      and data analysis.                                                     
                   2) A laboratory program which develops new technology.                    
                      This includes building deformable mirrors, ultra low                   
                      noise detectors, and using high speed digital computers as             
                      well as developing new algorithms to process the                       
                      data.  A 2 watt dye laser will be built and used for laser             
                      beacon tests in Arizona and New Mexico. A much more                    
                      powerful new solid state laser will also be used to                    
                      generate artificial beacons in the upper atmosphere.                   
                   3) A research program which builds adaptive optics                        
                      systems and uses them on large astronomical                            
                      telescopes.                                                            
                                                                                             
              A SD10 69 actuator adaptive optics system will be moved to                     
              Yerkes Observatory in Wisconsin where it will be used as the                   
              first AO system to feed a very high resolution spectrograph                    
              to be used for research on stellar seismology and a search                     
              for planets around stars. Two other systems are being built by                 
              students for use at the 3.5 meter telescope at Apache Point                    
              Observatory in New Mexico.  These will be the first laser beacon               
              adaptive optics systems available for astronomy. Students are                  
              encouraged to work with faculty to pursue new lines of astronomical            
              investigations opened up by use of data from the facility and to               
              improve the means of enhancing and interpreting the data.
