Title       : Graduate Research Traineeship Program in Environmental Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1993      
File        : a9256871

Award Number: 9256871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $444000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel P. Kounaves skounave@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1990      CHEMISTRY EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9156,9179,
Abstract    :
              Professor Samuel P. Kounaves is supported by a grant from the                  
              Chemistry Division and the Graduatae Education and Research                    
              Division of NSF for a Graduate Research Traineeship Program                    
              which will involve four graduate students who will receive                     
              training in environmental chemistry.  This traineeship program                 
              includes participation by ten chemistry faculty at Tufts                       
              University who have brought together their expertise from                      
              traditional sub-disciplines of analytical, inorganic, physical                 
              and organic chemistry to produce a focussed research and                       
              teaching effort in environmental chemistry.  A special emphasis                
              will be placed on identifying, recruiting and encouraging women                
              and minority students to apply, and to actively support and                    
              encourage them throughout their graduate training.                             
              %%%                                                                            
              Our country's ability to produce trained scientists in the                     
              critical areas encompassed by environmental chemistry is not                   
              only vital to the health of our environment, but also to our                   
              scientific and economic leadership.  In order to effectively                   
              manage the environment we need trained chemists who can apply                  
              their expertise in solving environmental problems in such                      
              diverse areas as: control of manufacturing processes; advanced                 
              environmental sensor and monitoring technologies; waste                        
              management; biodegradation; atmospheric and water modeling of                  
              chemical reactions; and better energy production and storage.                  
              The aim of this Graduate Research Traineeship Program is to                    
              provide a group of Ph.D. chemists who are trained to address                   
              these challenging problems.
