Title       : STRATMAN: Automatic Design and Assembly of Fixtures Using Modular Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1995       
File        : a9215362

Award Number: 9215362
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $607012             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aristides A. G. Requicha requicha@lipari.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George A. Bekey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Y. Goldberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,9279,
Abstract    :
                   Setup and fixturing are amongst the least automated of all the            
              production activities for mechanical components and assemblies, and            
              yet they contribute significantly to overall factors such as cost              
              and lead time.  This project seeks to automate the entire fixturing            
              process, from the design of fixtures to their physical realization             
              as assemblies of modular components.  Theory and technology from               
              the fields of kinematics and dynamics, geometric modeling,                     
              robotics, and artificial intelligence will be deployed through a               
              joint effort involving four principal investigators and their                  
              students in two institutions, plus an industrial collaborator.                 
              Multiple tasks will be considered-for example, NC (numerically                 
              controlled) machining, metal-deposition processes, assembly, and               
              inspection.  Task descriptions, plus solid models of parts,                    
              assemblies and modular fixturing components will be used to compute            
              fixture configurations appropriate for the tasks, and to generate              
              plans for assembling the fixtures automatically.  In addition,                 
              issues of design for fixturability will be addressed, and feedback             
              will be provided to designers about the fixturing consequences of              
              their decisions.                                                               
                   The main objectives of the project are to advance the current             
              understanding of representations and algorithms for automating the             
              various steps of the overall fixturing process (e.g., the synthesis            
              of fixture configurations), and to integrate subproblem solutions              
              into a prototype, experimental system that demonstrates the                    
              feasibility of the approach.  An industrial collaborator will                  
              provide a test bed for experimental investigations, information on             
              current industrial practices, and realistic tasks and products.
