Title       : Japan Long-Term Research Visit: Integrated Image Analysis and Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9215265

Award Number: 9215265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice Cassidy                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90865              (Estimated)
Investigator: Narendra Ahuja ahuja@vision.ai.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0522300   Man-Machine Communication               
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 6840,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a nine month long-term visit by Professor              
              Narendra Ahuja, Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of                  
              Illinois at Urbana, to Japan for a cooperative research project                
              with Dr. Fumio Kishino, Communications Systems Research                        
              Laboratories, Advanced Telecommunication Research Institute                    
              International (ATR) in Osaka.  They will be undertaking research               
              in the area of integrated image analysis and visualization.                    
              Professor Ahuja's current research includes  1) integration of                 
              the information present in diverse image cues for deriving a                   
              three-dimensional (3D) interpretation and  2) visually realistic               
              and compact depiction of scenes.  The success of a depiction is                
              measured by the extent to which a human observer realistically                 
              perceives the desired scene characteristics from the depiction.                
              Dr. Kishino's research is also concerned with both image                       
              interpretation and image synthesis, but for images that contain                
              humans.  They use a range of image cues related to human body                  
              motion in performing the interpretation.  They also emphasize                  
              greatly the hardware implementation and prototype development                  
              issues.  The researchers will closely study and compare the two                
              lines of research, and attempt to determine ways in which each                 
              PI's research could be enhanced in effectiveness by incorporating              
              the pertinent strengths of the other's activity.                               
                                                                                             
              Results of the research could provide great military and                       
              commercial potential.  Improved simulator technology could also                
              be used as a scientific research tool in robotics, eliminating                 
              the need for real mobile robots to be built at every robotics                  
              laboratory.  These robots are expensive to purchase and even more              
              expensive to maintain and program.  Both Professor Ahuja and Dr.               
              Kishino are noted for very productive, high quality research.                  
              Likewise, both the University of Illinois and ATR are respected                
              in the community for their significant research in the area of                 
              computer vision and visualization.  It is expected that this                   
              collaborative effort will continue after the formal agreement has              
              terminated, and it is further anticipated that useful                          
              publications will result from this bilateral effort.
