Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems for Two Classes of Evolutionary Partial
               Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1993   
File        : a9215111

Award Number: 9215111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32458              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans P. Engler engler@georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project seeks to derive properties of solutions of two               
              classes of partial differential equations that arise in models                 
              for the time-dependent behavior of viscoelastic model materials.               
              The first part deals with linear integrodifferential equations                 
              that describe materials with long-term memory and their                        
              solutions.  A goal is to give a detailed description of the                    
              smoothness of solutions depending on the data.  The methods to be              
              employed involve various transformation and transfer techniques                
              that allow use of known properties of simpler, related problems.               
              As a result, a better understanding of theoretical models and                  
              improved insight into the behavior of computational methods will               
              is expected.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                   Work will also be done investigating a class of nonlinear                 
              partial differential equations describing model materials with                 
              internal friction.  The goal is to construct generalized                       
              solutions that obey the basic physical principle that matter                   
              cannot penetrate itself and to analyze their structure.                        
              Techniques that have been successful for other classes of                      
              nonlinear partial differential equations, such as a priori                     
              estimates, are to be employed.  As a result, improved                          
              understanding of certain classes of models in continuum mechanics              
              and more generally of solutions of partial differential equations              
              that are to describe one-to-one mappings should result.
