Title       : U.S.-Australia Workshop on Plant Gene Technology: Plants forthe Future; Cairns,
               Australia; September 1993.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1993       
File        : a9215678

Award Number: 9215678
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheila M. McCormick sheilamc@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5912,9109,
Abstract    :
              This award will partially support the participation of twelve                  
              U.S. scientists to participate in a seminar/workshop on plant                  
              biotechnology and the engineering of plants for the future to be               
              held at Cairns, Australia in September 1993.  The American                     
              coordinators are Dr. Sheila McCormick from the University of                   
              California Plant Gene Expression Center at Berkeley and Dr. Niels              
              Nielson from the Department of Agronomy at Purdue University.                  
              The Australian coordinators are Dr. T. J. Higgins and Dr.                      
              Elizabeth Dennis from the Institute for Plant Production and                   
              Processing of the CSIRO Division of Plant Industry in Canberra,                
              and Dr. Adrienne Clarke from the School of Botany at the                       
              University of Melbourne.  This project is being conducted under                
              the U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science Program and support in                  
              Australia is provided through the Department of Industry,                      
              Technology and Commerce (DITAC).                                               
                                                                                             
              Emphasis in the program will be given to four areas that are                   
              considered likely to generate significant advances in plant work.              
              These areas include new strategies for pest and disease                        
              resistance, manipulation of reproductive biology, novel genes for              
              agriculture and plant genome structure.  The seminar will provide              
              a forum in which the strong and weak points of the current                     
              research can be examined and new research directions and                       
              approaches will be considered.  By bringing together leaders in                
              each of the four areas mentioned, it is anticipated that there                 
              will be an exchange of ideas and techniques that can be used in                
              engineering plants for the future.  This program should also                   
              facilitate the establishment of new cooperative research efforts               
              among the participants.
