Title       : Mathematical Sciences: NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences
               - Classification of Amenable Subfactors and Related Topics; August 24-28, 1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1993   
File        : a9215406

Award Number: 9215406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean Thiebaux                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24942              (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Christopher Phillips ncp@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The term "factors" denotes simple von Neumann algebras.  In               
              1982, Vaughan Jones started the study of subfactors when he gave               
              a natural definition of the index of a subfactor of a particular               
              kind of factor.  He discovered some remarkable restrictions on                 
              the possible values of this index and some totally unexpected                  
              connections with knot theory.  Since then many examples have been              
              discovered.  A tractable large class of subfactors, the so-called              
              amenable ones, has been completely classified.  The range of                   
              related areas has continued to grow, with the latest addition                  
              being the theory of superselection sectors.   Professor Sorin                  
              Popa has been involved in this subject almost from the beginning               
              and is the world's leading expert on "type II factors".                        
                   This project will support an NSF-CBMS Regional Research                   
              Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on Classification of                   
              Amenable Subfactors and Related Topics to be held August 24 - 28,              
              1993, at the University of California, Santa Cruz.  Professor                  
              Sorin Popa will be the principal lecturer.  The conference is                  
              expected to draw participants from the west coast of the U.S. and              
              Canada, including UC Berkeley, UCLA, U Nevada at Reno, and the                 
              Universities of Victoria and Vancouver.                                        
                   To stimulate interest and activity in mathematical research,              
              the National Science Foundation each year supports a number of                 
              NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conferences in the Mathematical                     
              Sciences.  Each five-day conference features a distinguished                   
              lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic on important                     
              current research in one sharply focused area of the mathematical               
              sciences.  The lecturer subsequently prepares an expository                    
              monograph based upon these lectures, which is normally published               
              by the American Mathematical Society or the Society for                        
              Industrial and Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the American                 
              Statistical Association and the Institute of Mathematical                      
              Statistics.  Certain features differentiate these conferences                  
              from typical research conferences.  These are:  (1) Focus on a                 
              single important and timely area of research by a leading                      
              practitioner,  (2) Continued effect and local stimulation through              
              regional emphasis,  (3) Panel review for quality, breadth, and                 
              timeliness, and  (4) Published monographs for a wider audience.
