Title       : Time Series Sediment Trapping in the Sargasso Sea and A Search for an Efficient
               Assessment of the Biological Pump
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1993  
File        : a9215350

Award Number: 9215350
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger W. Baier                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $414885             (Estimated)
Investigator: Werner G. Deuser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This project represents the balance of support required for studies            
              related to time-series sediment trapping in the Sargasso Sea and               
              for assuring continuation of the work beyond the present P.I.'s                
              full-time involvement.  The proposed work has two primary                      
              objectives: (1) A major portion of the effort will be spent on                 
              identifying relationships between surface-ocean variables and deep-            
              ocean carbon flux.  The marine biota is thought by many                        
              investigators to play an important part in the removal of carbon               
              from the atmosphere and upper ocean to the deep ocean through the              
              production of organic and carbonate particles which sink out of the            
              mixed layer.  There is, however, a considerable range in estimates             
              of the effectiveness of this mechanism, the "biological pump",                 
              relative to the amounts of carbon dioxide injected into the                    
              atmosphere by human activities.  An assessment of the magnitude,               
              variability and secular trend of the pump is thus desirable.                   
              Direct measurement of deep-ocean carbon flux is far too expensive              
              and labor-intensive to be done on a large scale over extended                  
              periods.  However, there is a distinct possibility that much more              
              easily monitored surface-ocean properties may serve as proxies for             
              deep carbon flux.  To test this hypothesis, this study will                    
              investigate whether or not carbon flux varies in a consistent                  
              relationship to variations in one or a combination of several of               
              those surface properties.  Identification of suitable proxies may              
              permit long-term monitoring of the deep carbon flux on large                   
              scales.  Comparative studies of existing time series of remote-                
              sensing, meteorologic, and hydrographic data on one hand and of                
              deep carbon-flux data on the other are a promising approach.  The              
              emphasis in such studies will be on other-than-annual periods                  
              because the annual cycle, common to all likely proxy candidates, is            
              of little value in revealing causative connections.  Comparisons               
              will be made between continuous deep carbon-flux measurements in               
              the Sargasso Sea and a superior variety of hydrographic and                    
              meteorologic data sets, as well as satellite data, for the area.               
              While the Sargasso Sea is representative of only one of several                
              major oceanographic domains which are likely to have different                 
              characteristic proxies and proxy-carbon flux relationships, the                
              ability to assess carbon flux by means of proxies even in part of              
              the ocean can free resources for more intensive in-situ studies in             
              other areas.  (2) Present modeling efforts at determining means and            
              time variances of the source areas and paths of particles collected            
              by sediment traps at different depths, i.e. using real and model               
              current vectors in the sampling area to delineate the shapes of the            
              statistical funnels connecting the traps to the sea surface, will              
              be completed.
