Title       : Analog CMOS Neural Circuits for Speech Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1995  
File        : a9215536

Award Number: 9215536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249946             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Tanner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tanner Research Inc
	      180 N Vinedo Avenue
	      Pasadena, CA  91107    818/792-3000

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1494,9256,
Abstract    :
              Real-time recognition of speaker-independent                                   
              connected speech has proven to be a difficult                                  
              problem for electronic systems.  Low-precision                                 
              highly parallel analog neural networks have                                    
              been shown to recognize speaker-dependent                                      
              small-vocabulary connected speech using                                        
              standard components.  This project will                                        
              research and develop massively parallel custom                                 
              integrated circuits that will perform this task,                               
              using integrated delay lines and analog                                        
              computing networks.  Phase I has included the                                  
              design and fabrication of test chips to prove                                  
              the feasibility of our development; the Phase                                  
              II effort will continue this development                                       
              through design, fabrication and testing of full-                               
              scale prototype systems.                                                       
              The approach utilizes standard readily                                         
              available CMOS Bulk integrated circuit                                         
              technology so products arising from this                                       
              research can be fabricated reliably and                                        
              economically by a number of vendors.   Phase                                   
              I culminated in the fabrication and testing of                                 
              an expandable, programmable single-chip                                        
              speech classifier.  This chip operates at over                                 
              100 MIPS and enjoys a 50x improvement in                                       
              performance over DSP chips (normalized to                                      
              the same silicon area usage). The P.I. has also                                
              shown the feasibility of using floating-nodes to                               
              provide nonvolatile storage of analog voltages.                                
              These voltages can be used to control the                                      
              operation of the chip thus implementing the                                    
              capability to learn or be trained in the field.                                
              During Phase II, the P.I. will investigate the                                 
              mapping of learning algorithms to efficient                                    
              silicon circuits.                                                              
              This proposed research applies the P.I.'s                                      
              experience to the challenging and important                                    
              problem of real-time speech recognition and                                    
              may lead directly to inexpensive products with                                 
              wide commercial applicability.
