Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Role of Structural Proteins in Cell Wall
               Organization and of Covalent Interactions Between Cell Wall Polymers in Legumes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1993     
File        : a9215375

Award Number: 9215375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: W. Y. B. Chang                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald D. Hatfield   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dept Agr-Northn Reg Res C
	      
	      Peoria, IL  61600    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5912,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides funds to support the visit                                 
              by Dr. Ronald D. Hatfield of the U.S.D.A. Dairy                                
              Forage Research Center at the University of                                    
              Wisconsin to La Trobe University                                               
              in Victoria, Australia, where he will conduct                                  
              cooperative research with Professor Bruce A.                                   
              Stone, Chair of the Department of Biochemistry.                                
              The research will focus on the chemical                                        
              composition of plant cell walls at various                                     
              stages of development.                                                         
                                                                                             
              Lignin-carbohydrate complexes from alfalfa                                     
              stems will be isolated and their fine                                          
              structure, in terms of cross-linking                                           
              mechanisms, identified. In addition, proteins                                  
              from the walls of young seedlings and cell                                     
              cultures of alfalfa will be isolated and                                       
              characterized in order to identify classes of                                  
              various structural proteins. Mature stems and                                  
              lignin-carbohydrate complexes will be assayed                                  
              for the presence of these classes of structural                                
              proteins. This information is critical to                                      
              elucidating cell wall organization necessary in                                
              determining digestibility by rumen                                             
              microbes in forage crops such as alfalfa. This                                 
              research is of economic importance to the                                      
              dairy, beef cattle, and sheep industries.
