Title       : Optimal Design for Castings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1995   
File        : a9215599

Award Number: 9215599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270864             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan A. Dantzig dantzig@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel A. Tortorelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   Given a set of design and process parameters, today's design              
              engineer is currently able to assess the quality and cost of the               
              final product through numerical simulation.  The parameters are                
              used to create a finite element model of the manufacturing process             
              and the ensuing analysis is performed to evaluate the process                  
              response.  The engineer then studies the response to predict the               
              ultimate quality of the product.  Through some other means, the                
              engineer also estimates the relative cost of the design versus                 
              other designs.  At this point, the engineer entertains the                     
              following questions:  (1) If the current design is not suitable,               
              how do I  improve it? (2) If the current design is suitable, how               
              might I improve it, or reduce its cost?  Presently, these questions            
              are resolved by the engineer's experience and/or trial and error.              
              Although a satisfactory design will ultimately be determined,                  
              there is no guarantee the chosen design is the most cost efficient,            
              i.e. optimal.  This research is to develop a systematic means to               
              obtain optimally designed manufactured products, concentrating on              
              the process of metal casting.  The approach combines the finite                
              element method, numerical optimization, and recent advances in                 
              explicit  sensitivity analysis to investigate various means of                 
              quantifying the effects of varying casting parameters to obtain on             
              optimal casting.                                                               
                   Such a rational design method should allow the more efficient             
              and accurate design of molds for casting, resulting in lower                   
              casting cost and higher quality.
