Title       : Process Optimization for Circuit Card Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  1994    
File        : a9215467

Award Number: 9215467
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane C. Ammons jane.ammons@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig A. Tovey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leon F. McGinnis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The goal of this research is to develop an approach and the               
              necessary methodologies and tools to allow circuit card assembly               
              manufacturers to determine the optimal strategy for circuit card               
              assembly, and to rapidly generate optimal or near-optimal plans.               
              The objective is to maximize total production rate over a desired              
              product mix.  The constraints are the equipment capabilities,                  
              including material handling, the products' bills of materials,                 
              component, technologies, and the production plan (quantities and               
              lot sizes required) for some planning horizon.  The research                   
              challenge is to find enough that is generic about each problem so              
              that a useful generic solution method can be derived.                          
                   Two types of results are anticipated from the research.                   
              First, models and algorithms will be developed for the process                 
              optimization for a range of assembly equipment types.  These                   
              algorithms will be demonstrated using case study data from actual              
              circuit card assembly operations.  Ultimately, these algorithms                
              should provide the basis for automated or semi-automated process               
              planning tools.  Such tools would enable process planners to create            
              higher quality process plans, with much shorter lead times than is             
              currently possible.  The potential benefit to manufacturing is                 
              faster response to changing requirements and continuous improvement            
              of the assembly process.  Second, given a particular setup                     
              management strategy, models and algorithms will be developed for               
              optimizing the assignment of components among assembly equipment               
              and the grouping and sequencing of card types within the assembly              
              system material flow.  In addition, the research will explore                  
              methods for comparing alternative setup management strategies and              
              for selecting the best strategy for a given situation.
