Title       : Drosophila Compound Eye: Molecular and Genetic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1992       
File        : a9215238

Award Number: 9215238
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87486              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tadmiri R. Venkatesh venky@sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The nervous system of multicellular organisms is a complex network             
              of diverse cell types with unique positions and patterns of                    
              connectivity.  Understanding how these cellular phenotypes develop             
              from these intricate patterns is a central problem in cell and                 
              developmental biology.  The Drosophila compound eye is well suited             
              for studying these processes.  The research is aimed at                        
              understanding the cellular interactions involved in pattern                    
              formation in the developing eye, specifically the role of                      
              photoreceptor cell R8 which is thought to play a central role in               
              these events.  The investigators have recently identified a new                
              genetic locus rap (retina aberrant in pattern) whose functions are             
              critical for pattern formation in eye.  Studies with a temperature             
              sensitive mutant have shown that rap function is essential during              
              pattern formation and preliminary immunocytological studies                    
              indicate that rap gene function is involved in early events during             
              pattern formation.  In addition, genetic mosaic studies show that              
              rap gene function is required only in the photoreceptor cell R8 for            
              normal eye pattern formation.  The research is aimed at a genetic              
              and molecular analysis of the rap gene with a view to understanding            
              the molecular nature of the rap gene product and its expression                
              patterns.  Furthermore, the genetic interactions that are important            
              for rap function will be identified.  These studies will facilitate            
              an understanding of the nature of cellular interactions underlying             
              neural pattern formation.
