Title       : Mechanisms of Fullerene Synthesis in Flames
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1994    
File        : a9215795

Award Number: 9215795
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George P. Peterson                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209893             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. T. McKinnon jmckinno@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,9187,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              The primary focus of this research program is the quantitative                 
              investigation of the detailed mechanisms responsible for                       
              conversion of fuel carbon into highly symmetrical, low entropy                 
              fullerene compounds in flames.  The project includes three                     
              main components: combustion experiments, molecular orbital                     
              modeling, and kinetic modeling.  In the combustion                             
              experiments, laboratory data on rates of production and                        
              consumption of fullerenes, fullerene precursors, and other                     
              species and flame parameters will be collected.  The flame                     
              properties to be measured include profiles of concentrations                   
              of stable species, fullerenes, fullerene intermediates, and                    
              polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) along with OH radicals                  
              and temperature through a low-pressure premixed flat flame;                    
              these measurements will be made at various operating                           
              pressures, cold-gas velocities, and feed compositions.  Some                   
              key intermediates involved in fullerene production will not be                 
              experimentally observable due to their transient nature, so                    
              their thermodynamic properties will be estimated using                         
              molecular orbital modeling methods.  This information will                     
              then be used in the last component of the program,  mechanism                  
              development and kinetic modeling, along with the measured                      
              profiles, for development of a coherent, quantitative                          
              explanation of the steps involved in fullerene production,                     
              leading to definition of strategies for optimization of                        
              fullerene production via combustion synthesis.                                 
                                                                                             
              Considerable interest in fullerenes (also referred to                          
              sometimes as the third form of carbon, alongside graphite and                  
              diamond), has developed over the past few years.  Potential                    
              uses for these compounds are just beginning to be defined;                     
              such definition and subsequent actual utilization are limited                  
              by a lack of material with which to work and its                               
              extraordinarily high price.  Combustion synthesis of                           
              fullerenes offers a potentially attractive route (alternative                  
              to the currently more widely used electric arc method of                       
              fullerene production) for cost and scale-up reasons.  Thus,                    
              development of an understanding of how fullerenes are formed                   
              in flames, leading to optimization (in terms of operating                      
              parameters and apparatus configuration) of combustion                          
              synthesis of these materials, is of major interest.
