Title       : Structure and Momentum Fluxes of Warm Pool Oceanic MesoscaleConvective Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1996     
File        : a9215508

Award Number: 9215508
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar-Rao Mopidevi                     
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212529             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. Barnes garyb@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1324,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This research focuses on the analysis and interpretation of               
              airborne Doppler radar and in-situ (i.e., flight level) data from              
              warm pool mesoscale convective systems (MCS) and on the                        
              documentation of the three-dimensional airflow within these                    
              systems.  Past observational field programs (e.g. GATE, PRE-STORM)             
              have clearly shown that MCSs are a fundamental phenomenon in the               
              atmosphere.  Particular emphasis will be given to the diagnosis of             
              vertical motions:  convective-scale in the active cumulus regions              
              of the MCS and mesoscale in the stratiform rain regions.  The                  
              accurate quantification of vertical motions is important for the               
              computation of fluxes of momentum and vertical profiles of heating.            
                                                                                             
                   The results from analysis of both Dopple and in-situ data will            
              be tested, supplemented and extended by using a series of numerical            
              simulations from several numerical models including both the Clark             
              and the Klemp-Wilhelmson.  Initialization for these models will be             
              provided by a combination of data from aircraft and sounding                   
              observations.  This approach, combining data analysis and numerical            
              modeling, should lead to a better understanding of MCS structure,              
              airflow, fluxes, and life-cycle and of the interactions between the            
              MCS and the environment.                                                       
                                                                                             
                   This proposal is also concerned with proper planning and                  
              execution of the aircraft flights, as well as data validation and              
              data management activities following the completion of the field               
              phase of TOGA/COARE.  Experience in other field projects (e.g.,                
              PRE-STORM hurricanes, TAMEX, and EMEX) has shown the value of real-            
              time decision making in the selection of proper flight tracks to               
              fully utilize the capabilites of the airborne Doppler radar.                   
              Therefore, the scientists performing this research will also                   
              participate in the field program as airborne Chief Scientists and              
              Doppler radar operators.  All aircraft scientists are working                  
              together to meet their individual research objectives through a                
              coordinated research flight plan.                                              
                                                                                             
                   This research is important because it serves as one of the                
              principal TOGA/COARE studies of the processes responsible for                  
              convection in the western Pacific warm pool and its interaction on             
              larger scales is an especially climate sensitive region of the                 
              world, the western Pacific Ocean, the field site of TOGA/COARE.
