Title       : Dissertation Research: The Northeast Mesoamerican Frontier
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1992      
File        : a9215476

Award Number: 9215476
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth O. Mozzillo  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Dan Healan, MS Elizabeth Mozzillo will              
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze a                 
              range of archaeological materials which she has collected from the             
              prehistoric site of Cerro de las Ventantas (CV) which is located in            
              northern Mexico. The entire mesa top of CV is covered by what                  
              probably were civic-ceremonial buildings including impressive                  
              platform constructions, a number of plazas, two small pyramids and             
              a circular structure. The sole prehistoric access trail to the                 
              mesatop is lined with the remains of a stone stairway which passes             
              near a rockshelter filled with the cliff dwellings from which the              
              promontory and archaeological zone take their names. To date MS                
              Mozzillo and her colleagues have surveyed and mapped the region.               
              They have collected surface materials and conducted controlled                 
              stratigraphic excavations. The goal of the current project is to               
              analyze the materials collected. Together with assistants MS                   
              Mozzillo will construct a ceramic tyopology which will allow sites             
              to be placed relative to each other in time. Radiocarbon                       
              determinations will be used to anchor the sequence with absolute               
              dates. Other classes of materials recovered - these include lithic             
              faunal and human skeletal remains - will also be examined.                     
                                                                                             
              While this region of northern Mexico contains many archaeological              
              sites, it has received little archaeological scrutiny. The reason              
              for this is its intermediate position between the "great" sites and            
              cultures of the Valley of Mexico to the South and the impressive               
              remains located in the U.S. Southwest to the North. The region                 
              appears to have served as a "frontier zone." Archaeologists have               
              speculated for many years about the rise of complex prehistoric                
              societies in the U.S. Southwest. Some believe that this process                
              took place essentially independently of developments in central                
              Mexico while others see strong linkages. To solve this question it             
              is necessary to study sites which lie between these two areas and              
              MS. Mozzillo's work will contribute to this goal.                              
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our                  
              understanding of U.S. prehistory and shed light on the rise of                 
              complex societies. It will also assist in the training of an                   
              extremely promising scientist.
