Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Neural Connectivity and Processing in the
               Crustacean Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1992  
File        : a9215638

Award Number: 9215638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23620              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara S. Beltz bbeltz@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510401   Nerve Growth                            
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5912,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This grant provides eight months of support for the U.S. PI to                 
              visit her Australian colleague, Dr. David Sandeman of the Zoology              
              Department at the University of New South Wales.  The                          
              investigators will concentrate on problems of connectivity and                 
              physiology in organized synaptic regions in the crustacean brain,              
              known as the accessory lobes.  The functional role of the                      
              accessory lobes, among the largest synaptic regions in many                    
              decapod brains, currently is not well understood.  No sensory                  
              neurons project to these regions, and no motor neurons have                    
              synaptic fields in the accessory lobes.  This situation has led                
              to much speculation as to the function of the accessory lobes and              
              to the suggestions that these are "associative" regions.  It is                
              interesting to note that accessory lobes are a unique feature of               
              those decapods that have adopted a benthic life style.                         
                                                                                             
              Electro-physiological and dye injection methods will be used to                
              examine the imput-output relationships of the accessory lobe in                
              the Australian fresh-water crayfish Cherax destructor.  The                    
              investigators expect that these studies will lead to a clearer                 
              understanding of the functional role of this area of the                       
              crustacean brain, which may serve as a model for understanding                 
              vertebrate brains.                                                             
                                                                                             
              Both investigators have been well funded for their work:                       
              Sandeman by the Australian Research Council and Beltz mostly by                
              NIH.  Dr. Beltz has a Presidential Young Investigator award from               
              NSF's Neuroscience Program.
