Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research in Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1994  
File        : a9215134

Award Number: 9215134
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvain E. Cappell cappell@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator will be carrying out research projects on                
              several basic problems in topology and geometry of high and low                
              dimensional manifolds and of stratified spaces and on topological              
              and algebraic-geometric invariants of varieties.  One set of                   
              problems to be studied concerns the role, calculation, and                     
              relationships among fundamental invariants of varieties and                    
              stratified spaces, such as the characteristic classes.  Another                
              group of problems concerns the classification of fixed points of               
              transformation groups and their relationships to these basic                   
              invariants.  Still a third set of projects to be investigated                  
              concerns deep new invariants of three-dimensional manifolds and                
              their relationship to the representation theory of the fundamental             
              group.  This work will entail a study of relevant analytical                   
              problems concerning spectral flow and symplectic geometrical                   
              questions concerning the Maslow index.                                         
                   The details of these parts vary, but all are concerned with               
              reducing geometric information to a subject for calculation.  The              
              nature of the geometric information involved is the crux of the                
              difficulty.  While questions about lengths, areas, angles, volumes,            
              and so forth virtually cry out to be reduced to calculations, it is            
              far different with what are known as topological properties of                 
              geometric objects.  These are properties such as connectedness                 
              (being all in one piece), knottedness, having no holes, and so                 
              forth.  All systematic study of such properties, for example, how              
              to tell whether two geometric objects really differ in respect to              
              one of these properties or are only superficially different, or how            
              to classify the variety of differences that can occur, all these               
              have only truly been comprehended and mastered when they have been             
              reduced to matters of calculation.
