Title       : U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Study on the Control of Linear and
               Non-Linear Chemical Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1995  
File        : a9215832

Award Number: 9215832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: W. Y. B. Chang                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17490              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmet N. Palazoglu anpalazoglu@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 5912,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is a collaborative effort between research groups                 
              headed by Professor Ahmet N. Palazolgu at the University of                    
              California, Davis and Professor Jose A. Romagnoli at the                       
              University of Sydney.  This award will provide support for the                 
              U.S. investigator to travel to Australia once each year for the                
              next two years to spend a month working in the facilities at the               
              University of Sydney which includes a unique pilot-plant                       
              distillation column with computer interface.                                   
                                                                                             
              The collaborative research is focused on the control of linear                 
              and nonlinear chemical processes with equal emphasis on both                   
              theoretical developments and experimental verification results.                
              Development of control strategies for such processes ultimately                
              benefits processing industries in both countries by assisting                  
              them to operate process units with greater confidence under                    
              controlled situations. Robust control and nonlinear control                    
              research are recognized as being among priority research in both               
              countries. This study will utilize the complementary skills of                 
              the investigators in theoretical analysis and experimental design              
              and the collaborative effort has the potential to provide new                  
              insights and solutions. The exchange visits by Dr. Romagnoli are               
              supported through the Australian Department of Industry,                       
              Technology and Commerce (DITAC).
