Title       : Mathematical Sciences: CBMS Reg Conf -Semiparametic MixturesModels: Theory and
               Methods with Applications in Empirical Bayes, Measurements Error and Random
               Effects Models - May 93
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1993   
File        : a9215869

Award Number: 9215869
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean Thiebaux                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23906              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Grego   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Recently there has been substantial research on mixture                   
              models based on a nonparametric mixing distribution, also called               
              semiparametric mixture models.   Applications have ranged from                 
              clinical trials, astronomy and marine biology.  Within                         
              statistics, research from semiparametric mixture models extends                
              to empirical Bayes' estimation, measurement error models and                   
              random effects models, as well as other fields.  Insights into                 
              these questions and others have been greatly aided by work done                
              by the principal speaker, Bruce Lindsay.  Professor Lindsay 's                 
              research on the geometry of mixture likelihoods has provided a                 
              unified approach for interpreting, solving and formulating models              
              of mixed distributions.   His intuitive approach and geometric                 
              insights make him an ideal lecturer for an NSF/CBMS conference on              
              the subject.                                                                   
                   This project will support an NSF-CBMS Regional Research                   
              Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on Semiparametric Mixture              
              Methods: Theory and Methods - With Applications in Bayes,                      
              Measurment Error, and Random Effects Models to be held May 24 -                
              28, 1993, on the campus of the University of South Carolina.                   
              Professor Bruce Lindsay of the Pennsylvania State University will              
              be the principal lecturer.                                                     
                   To stimulate interest and activity in mathematical research,              
              the National Science Foundation each year supports a number of                 
              NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conferences in the Mathematical                     
              Sciences.  Each five-day conference features a distinguished                   
              lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic on important                     
              current research in one sharply focused area of the mathematical               
              sciences.  The lecturer subsequently prepares an expository                    
              monograph based upon these lectures, which is normally published               
              by the American Mathematical Society or the Society for                        
              Industrial and Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the American                 
              Statistical Association and the Institute of Mathematical                      
              Statistics.  Certain features differentiate these conferences                  
              from typical research conferences.  These are:  (1) Focus on a                 
              single important and timely area of research by a leading                      
              practitioner,  (2) Continued effect and local stimulation through              
              regional emphasis,  (3) Panel review for quality, breadth, and                 
              timeliness, and  (4) Published monographs for a wider audience.
