Title       : Combined Experimental/Theoretical Study of Mold/Casting Interface Behavior
               During Directional Solidification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1995   
File        : a9215110

Award Number: 9215110
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149935             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. N. Ozisik   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The project will investigate experimentally and theoretically             
              the effects of mold surface morphology, physical and thermal                   
              properties of casting and mold, wettability of molten aluminum over            
              the mold surface, and temperature and pressure at the mold casting             
              interface on the heat transfer rate, interface conductance, and                
              physical and chemical structure of the casting surface.  The                   
              surface quality of castings is closely related to the cooling rate             
              during solidification, but no quantitative results are readily                 
              available on how surface structure of the casting is affected by               
              mold surface morphology and heat transfer rate across the metal-               
              mold interface.  Thus, this interdisciplinary project encompasses              
              the areas of heat transfer, tribology, metallurgy, and stress                  
              analysis and combines the theoretical predictions with experimental            
              verifications.  Semi-empirical relations will be developed for the             
              effects of the various factors stated above on interface                       
              conductance and heat transfer rate across the casting mold                     
              interface.                                                                     
                   Since the ultimate goal of this research with heat                        
              transfer/mechanics and mold surface design, is to positively                   
              influence the surface quality of the casting ingot, the                        
              investigators will evaluate the metallurgical structure of the cast            
              ingots and attempt to correlate it to the heat transfer model as               
              well as to mold surface properties.  The success of the project may            
              allow the production of higher quality, lower cost casting.
