Title       : STRATMAN: Design and Operation of Cellular Manufacturing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1995   
File        : a9215432

Award Number: 9215432
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $610000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald G. Askin ron@sie.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Asoo J. Vakharia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,9279,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   Flexibility for product customization, low variable production            
              cost, short lead times, and high quality of manufacture have become            
              essential for maintaining competitiveness in discrete parts                    
              manufacturing.  Cellular Manufacturing (CM), the assignment of                 
              dissimilar machines and workers to a team to produce one or more               
              families of similar parts, has been shown to be effective at                   
              achieving all four performance measures.  This project will be                 
              devoted to enhancing the ability to optimally design and operate               
              CM systems.  The specific objectives include:  (1) interacting with            
              industry interested in CM to determine the real-world objectives               
              and key constraints of cell formation; (2) development of optimal              
              cell formation algorithms based on the realistic cell formation                
              problem formulation using discrete and stochastic optimization                 
              techniques; (3) inclusion of human and organizational factors into             
              the cell design problem including issues such as group recognition             
              systems, employee cross-training, multi-functional operation,                  
              decentralized organizational structure, performance measurement and            
              activity-based costing; (4) determination of optimal cell operation            
              strategies for various environments including the use of  pull type            
              systems, mixed and multiproduct model scheduling, and determination            
              of optimal work scope for cross-trained operators; and (5) transfer            
              of developed techniques to industry.                                           
                   Relative to existing results for CM, the research will                    
              significantly broaden the scope of the CM design problem to include            
              all relevant factors including flexibility to temporal changes and             
              training/allocation of employees.  In addition, the application of             
              new production strategies to cells will be examined analytically.              
              The anticipated outcome of this project is a clear understanding               
              of how to optimally design and operate cells from both a technical             
              and human perspective, and an estimation of the improvements from              
              CM relative to process layouts as a function of the manufacturing              
              environment.
