Title       : Collaborative Research on High Angular Momentum Phenomena in Nuclei, Award in
               U.S. and Indian Currencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 13,  1995   
File        : a9215295

Award Number: 9215295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23720              (Estimated)
Investigator: Umesh Garg umesh.garg.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5919,5976,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:  This proposal is for the support                                 
              of travel and living expenses associated with a                                
              collaborative research project between the                                     
              University of Notre Dame (ND) and the Panjab                                   
              University, Chandigarh, India (PU).  The major                                 
              thrust of the work is to study high-angular                                    
              momentum phenomena in nuclear physics, in                                      
              particular studies of exotic shapes and                                        
              lifetime measurements using the recoil distance                                
              technique.  Experiments will be carried out at                                 
              the Nuclear Science Center (NSC), New Delhi, at                                
              the University of Notre Dame Nuclear Structure                                 
              Laboratory, and at the Argonne National                                        
              laboratory ATLAS facility.  For experiments in                                 
              which the PU group takes the lead, most of the                                 
              data analysis will be performed there, the                                     
              measurements will be made there to determine                                   
              feasibility and optimal conditions.  The final                                 
              experiment would then be performed using the                                   
              full power of the Argonne-Notre Dame facility                                  
              if warranted by  experimental data from NSC.                                   
              This investigation offers an excellent                                         
              opportunity to make optimum use of facilities                                  
              available both in India and in the U.S. since                                  
              much of the work could be done at the NSC in                                   
              India.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              Scope:  The proposed research involving the                                    
              study of exotic shapes of nuclei represents one                                
              of the most active fields in structure physics                                 
              at the present time.  The division of                                          
              experiments between the two facilities is very                                 
              useful considering that the Argonne-Notre Dame                                 
              Facility is in high demand and the accelerator                                 
              over-subscribed.  Postdoctoral fellows and                                     
              graduate students at both institutions will be                                 
              included in this research.  ***
