Title       : Deformation Processing: Crystallographic Texture Evolution and Shear Band
               Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1995      
File        : a9215246

Award Number: 9215246
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lallit Anand anand@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   Workability is often defined as the degree of deformation that            
              can be achieved in a particular deformation processing operation               
              without failure.  Failure may be the basic material related                    
              phenomena of cracking or fracture, but it could also be any other              
              undesirable condition, for example lack of die fill or poor surface            
              finish.  The major factors which influence the workability of a                
              material are: (1) the external process variables of stress,                    
              temperature, strain, strain rate, frictional and heat transfer                 
              boundary conditions, and their evolution; and (2) the internal                 
              microstructural variables, for example porosity, crystallographic              
              texture, deformation localization and their evolution culminating              
              in ductile failure.  While considerable attention has been paid to             
              developing a capability for predicting defects associated with the             
              growth of porosity in deformation processing operations, much                  
              remains to be done with regard to incorporating the evolution of               
              other important microstructural features in macroscopic                        
              mathematical models.  Specifically there is need for incorporating             
              the effects due to crystallographic texture and deformation                    
              localization and failure.                                                      
                   This project is to develop accurate anisotropic thermo-                   
              elastic-viscoplastic constitutive equations and computational                  
              procedures for modeling and simulation of inelastic deformations               
              due to both crystallographic slip and twinning in face-centered                
              cubic and hexagonal-closed packed alloys.  The computational                   
              capability will be useful in simulating the development of                     
              anisotropy due to the evolution of crystallographic texture, and               
              the development of material processing defects associated with                 
              localized shear bands at large deformations at both low and high               
              homologous temperatures.  The mathematical models should be useful             
              in the design and analysis of a variety of cold and hot deformation            
              processing operations.  Such models will allow the faster and more             
              accurate design of tools and procedures for forming metal parts.
