Title       : Small Grant for Exploratory Research: Molecular Engineering at Ultrathin Organic
               Films for Membrane Separations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1992      
File        : a9215577

Award Number: 9215577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49499              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Kyle Vanderlick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The effectiveness of a membrane in a separation process is                     
              based on the degree of its selectivity and its permeability or                 
              throughput.  Unfortunately, selectivity and permeability are                   
              generally traded off - the same mechanisms which control                       
              selectivity, such as pore size, regulate the flux of material                  
              through the membrane.  This SGER proposal suggests fabricating                 
              composite membranes in order to maximize both selectivity and                  
              permeability.  A porous substrate is used as the backing                       
              material thus providing mechanical strength and insuring high                  
              permeability.  Selectivity is then controlled by mounting a                    
              nonporous ultrathin microstructured film over the backing                      
              sheet.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              The PI suggests making these microstructured films out of                      
              cohesive, molecularly ordered, organic mono- or multi-layered                  
              films formed either by the Langmuir Blodgett technique or self                 
              assembly via adsorption from solution.  The permeability of                    
              these films to gases of interest will be measured by using                     
              either a quartz crystal microbalance or a surface acoustic                     
              wave device.  In this type of measurement this film is                         
              attached to a (typically) quartz piezoelectric crystal, and an                 
              oscillating electric field is applied to the crystal.  This                    
              application causes an acoustic wave to propagate with a                        
              particular resonant frequency.  Minute changes in mass of the                  
              film can be detected by shifts in the resonant frequency of                    
              the crystal.  The film will be exposed to a gaseous                            
              environment, and frequency shifts will be measured in time in                  
              order to measure the permeability.  The study will focus on                    
              how the microstructure architecture and physicochemical                        
              properties of the films relate to the permeability.                            
              Specifically films of different fluidity, surface                              
              characteristic, chemistries and defect structure will be                       
              examines.
