Title       : Mathematical Sciences: NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences
               on Equivariant Homotopy and Cohomology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1992  
File        : a9215332

Award Number: 9215332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean Thiebaux                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24574              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Piacenza   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The main topics of the conference are the recent                          
              developments in equivariant homotopy and cohomology theory.                    
              Special emphasis will be given to the Segal and Sullivan                       
              conjectures and their generalizations.  Professor May's ten                    
              principal lectures will include the following interrelated                     
              topics.                                                                        
                   - Unstable equivariant homotopy theory                                    
                   - The Sullivan conjecture and its applications                            
                   - Equivariant bundles and classifying spaces                              
                   - RO(G)-graded cohomology theory                                          
                   - The Segal conjecture                                                    
                   - The stable category; G-spectra and their completions                    
                   - Tate, Borel and co-Borel homology                                       
                   - The Atiyah-Hirxebruch-Tate spectral sequence                            
                   - Equivariant K-theory                                                    
                   - Equivariant infinite loop space theory and algebraic                    
              K-theory                                                                       
              A main value of this conference will be to let interested                      
              researcher "see the forest, not just the trees" of this area of                
              algebraic topoloty.  The lecturer, Peter May, is one of the                    
              leaders in the field.                                                          
                   This project will support an NSF-CBMS Regional Research                   
              Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on Equivariant Homotopy                
              and Cohomology to be held August 2 - 6, 1993, at the University                
              of Alaska in Fairbanks.  Peter May of the University of Chicago                
              will be the principal lecturer.                                                
                   To stimulate interest and activity in mathematical research,              
              the National Science Foundation each year supports a number of                 
              NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conferences in the Mathematical                     
              Sciences.  Each five-day conference features a distinguished                   
              lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic on important                     
              current research in one sharply focused area of the mathematical               
              sciences.  The lecturer subsequently prepares an expository                    
              monograph based upon these lectures, which is normally published               
              by the American Mathematical Society or the Society for                        
              Industrial and Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the American                 
              Statistical Association and the Institute of Mathematical                      
              Statistics.  Certain features differentiate these conferences                  
              from typical research conferences.  These are:  (1) Focus on a                 
              single important and timely area of research by a leading                      
              practitioner,  (2) Continued effect and local stimulation through              
              regional emphasis,  (3) Panel review for quality, breadth, and                 
              timeliness, and  (4) Published monographs for a wider audience.
