Title       : Studying Intermolecular Interactions and Bimolecular Reactions Through van der
               Waals Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1995   
File        : a9215213

Award Number: 9215213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $341095             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hai-Lung Dai dai@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9119,9156,9188,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program                 
              of the Chemistry Division, H.L. Dai of the University of                       
              Pennsylvania will investigate intermolecular interactions such                 
              as electronic energy transfer and bimolecular reactions through                
              van der Waals complexes.  The study consists of several                        
              parts,namely investigation of collision induced electronic                     
              relaxation processes in van der Waals complexes by means of                    
              laser induced fluorescence spectroscopy; molecular orbital                     
              dependence in the electronic relaxation of molecules like                      
              glyoxal and pyrimidene and the effect of different collision                   
              partners; and the chemistry of electronically excited molecules,               
              or molecules excited to selected vibrational levels in a van                   
              der Waals complex.  The structure and frequencies of the van                   
              der Waals vibrational modes will be determined by means of                     
              fluorescence excitation and stimulated emission spectroscopy.                  
              These results will be used to test theoreticel models  for                     
              calculating intermolecular potentials.                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              This research deals with the problem of how energy flows within                
              and among vibrationally and electronically excited molecules.                  
              The molecules of study are incorporated in molecular clusters                  
              which are held together by weak intermolecular van der Waals                   
              forces.  Vibrational or electronic excitation of the component                 
              molecules will generally cause the complex to dissociate.  This                
              dissociation process mimics the energy transfer that occurs                    
              between colliding molecules.  The experiments with molecules                   
              embedded in a van der Waals complex provide a measure of                       
              control over the reaction process that is not available with                   
              molecular gases in which the molecules have random orientation.                
              The experiments will provide information useful for the                        
              understanding of the reactivity of different molecular                         
              orbitals, and for the determination of the potential energy                    
              surface which characterizes the reaction.  With this                           
              information it will be possible to devise novel photochemical                  
              reaction pathways.
