Title       : Dissertation Research: Analysis of Michoacan Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1994      
File        : a9215542

Award Number: 9215542
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5814               (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan M. Healan healan@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christine Hernandez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Dan Healan, MS Christine Hernandez will             
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. For several years with             
              National Science Foundation support Dr. Healan has conducted                   
              archaeological excavation in the Zinapecuaro region of Central                 
              Mexico. What makes this area important are its abundant deposits of            
              high quality obsidian (volcanic glass). Because this material may              
              be worked to produce sharp edges it was highly prized raw material             
              for tools in pre-metal times. Evidence to date indicates that                  
              Zinapecuaro obsidian was traded over a wide region and that                    
              patterns of exchange varied over time. Dr. Healan and his                      
              colleagues have excavated in a number of mining and production                 
              areas and collected large amounts of material. The problem they now            
              face is dating each occurrence. Luckily numerous ceramic remains               
              have been recovered and because ceramic styles change over time                
              analysis of them provides a fruitful approach. MS Hernandez will               
              travel to Mexico and study these ceramic materials. Applying a                 
              standard type variety approach in conjunction with stratigraphic               
              information, she will seriate these materials to establish a                   
              sequence. Through the identification of exotic or foreign potsherds            
              she will tie the local sequence into a broader inter-regional                  
              context. Finally she will study how inter-regional relationships               
              developed and changed over time.                                               
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide a              
              chronological sequence which many archaeologists can use for a                 
              variety of goals. It will shed light on the economic and political             
              relationships between societies at a relatively simple level of                
              development and elucidate the ways in which they interact. It will             
              also assist in the training of a promising young scientist.
