Title       : U.S.-Brazil Science Program: Genetic Manipulation of Garlic(Allium sativum L.)
               in Vitro and in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1994   
File        : a9403486

Award Number: 9403486
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3555               (Estimated)
Investigator: Philipp W. Simon simon@calship.cals.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Agricul Res Serv Madison
	      1925 Linden Dr West
	      Madison, WI  537061108    /   -

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              60        Life Sciences                           
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9403486  Simon    This U.S.-Brazil award will support collaboration between  Dr.
              Philipp Simon of the University of Wisconsin, and Dr.  Amaury Buso of Empresa
              Brazileira de Pesquisa  Agropecuaria  (EMBRAPA). This project will establish
              cooperative research  to advance the genetic manipulation of garlic (Allium 
              Sativum L.) in vitro and in plants. The research will  perfect and expand true
              garlic seed production and develop  methods of garlic cell culture and genetic
              transformation.    Garlic, which is an important vegetable crop the world over,
               has been domesticated for thousands of years but sexual  reproduction has been
              unknown.  Generation of sexual  recombinants is limited.  Because a system of
              genetic  transformation has not been developed which would allow  foreign genes
              to be introduced, a virus-free garlic can be  produced, but viral genes for
              cross-protection cannot be  inserted.    The U.S. researcher's work has enabled
              sexual reproduction  and evaluation of variation in garlic, while the Brazilian
               researchers have worked extensively with garlic cell culture  and plant
              production.  The two sides will  exchange their  expertise and complementary
              skills to generate new garlic  variation from sexual reproduction and develop a
              system for  introducing foreign genes into garlic.    The research will be
              accomplished through an exchange of  visits between the U. Wisconsin 
              Agricultural Research  Service and EMBRAPA.      ***
