Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Multivariate Polynomial Splines for Function Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1994       
File        : a9403371

Award Number: 9403371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Kooperberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               There are numerous situations in which observed data is generated by some
              (unknown) mechanism, where interest lies in estimating a function that is
              related to a model for the data. Using polynomial splines, an unknown function
              is modeled to be in a linear space. An algorithm employing stepwise addition
              and stepwise deletion of basis functions makes it possible to determine this
              space adaptively. The coefficients of the basis functions are estimated by the
              maximum likelihood method. The problems that are discussed in this proposal are
              hazard regression, including situations in which there are time-dependent
              covariates or interval censored data; bivariate survival estimation; bivariate
              survival regression; modeling of aftershocks of a major earthquake;
              polychotomous regression and classification; rotation invariant regression and
              density estimation. The primary aim of this project is to develop methodologies
              for the estimation of unknown functions using polynomial splines in a variety
              of problems. Polynomial splines are building stones that can be used to model
              functions without making assumptions of their form. The problems that are
              discussed in this proposal are: survival analysis, including situations in
              which there are time-dependent explanatory variables, situations in which the
              survival times are only known to be in an interval and situations in which more
              than one survival time is measured for each unit; modeling of aftershocks of a
              major earthquake; classification of observations based upon explanatory
              variables; rotation invariant regression and density estimation. For each of
              the problems that we propose, there are vast amounts of data whose improved
              analysis would be of much scientific interest.
