Title       : Upgrading the Imaging and Data Management Capabilities of the DSV ALVIN:
               Cameras, Lighting, Navigation, and Data Management Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1996      
File        : a9403696

Award Number: 9403696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343685             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barrie B. Walden bwalden@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5413      OCEANOGRAPHIC INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #94-03696    The Oceanographic Instrumentation program funds the
              acquisition of shared-used scientific instrumentation aboard research vessels
              and other oceanographic facilities that are primarily used by NSF-funded
              investigators.  This award to Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI)
              provides funding for instrumentation upgrades for the submersible ALVIN which
              is owned by the Navy and operated by WHOI in support of oceanographic research.
               Funding for operation of the ALVIN is supported by NSF, NOAA and ONR.   
              Instrumentation to be acquired or upgraded includes a new 3-chip CCD camera and
              a new 1-chip CCD camera, HMI and Quartz-iodide lighting systems, a laser
              ranging system, an EXACT high precision navigation system, computer upgrades
              for improved post-dive data processing, and new video recording equipment in
              order to record data from all camera systems and provide more efficient
              post-processing of video data.  In addition, the award provides funding for the
              PI to develop specifications and seek bids for an improved long-baseline
              navigation package for the ALVIN. Additional funding will be considered for the
              long-baseline navigation system if the PI is able to find a commercially
              available system.      Joint funding for this award is being provided by the
              NSF Oceanographic Instrumentation program, the NSF Biological Oceanography
              Program and NOAA.  ONR participated in the review process and may provide
              funding to support any future acquisition of a long-baseline navigation system
              if a suitable system is found.
