Title       : Investigating Bonding Symmetry on Surfaces and at Interfaces Using
               Perturbed-Angular-Correlation Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1998 
File        : a9403210

Award Number: 9403210
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Catchen g9c@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9403210  Catchen    This is an interdisciplinary program to investigate bonding 
              symmetry on surfaces and at interfaces using perturbed-angular-  correlation
              spectroscopy.  The investigations will use the indium-  lll radioactive PAC
              probe to measure nuclear electric quadruple  interactions on well characterized
              semiconductor surfaces of  gallium-arsenide and related compounds produced by
              molecular beam-  epitaxy (MBE).  In addition, interactions at strained
              interfaces  will be investigated, within as-grown and annealed low-temperature 
              gallium arsenide, and epitaxial metals deposited in-situ.  These  experiments
              can produce information on:  (1) the strength and  symmetry of bonds between
              probe and surface atoms, (2) the thermal  stability of various semiconductors
              and metal surface sites, (3)  the kinetics of indium-lll probe diffusion and
              redistribution at  semiconductor-semiconductor and semiconductor-metal
              interfaces, (4)  the local strain at the indium-lll probe in pseudomorphic 
              materials, (5) the interaction of these probe atoms with point  defects in the
              crystals and the evolution of those interactions  with annealing, and (6)
              magnetic hyperfine fields and the character  of surface magnetism in epitaxial
              magnetic-metal films.    % % % %    This is an interdisciplinary program to
              investigate chemical  bonding symmetry on surfaces that are prepared by
              molecular-beam  epitaxy.  Surfaces of gallium-arsenide semiconductors and
              related  compounds, and interfaces between surfaces of dissimilar but  related
              crystals such as the interface between gallium-arsenide  surface and an indium
              arsenide surface will be investigated.  The  work will be extended to the
              investigation interfaces between  gallium arsenide and various magnetic metals.
               The study also will  include epitaxial growth under non-optimal and
              non-equilibrium  conditions.  The investigations will use a nuclear technique
              known  as perturbed-angular-correlation (PAC) spectroscopy.  The technique 
              involves measuring the interactions of ra dioactive probes, which  are
              deposited during crystal growth, with the effect of local  electric field and
              magnetic fields in the vicinity of these  radioactive probe nuclei.  The
              indium-lll isotope will be the  isotope of choice.  ***
