Title       : PRF/J: Metabolic Cost of Detoxifying Plant Secondary Compounds and the Evolution
               of Herbivore Host Specialization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1994      
File        : a9403318

Award Number: 9403318
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dana A. Garrigan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510601   Biology of Pest Organisms               
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9403318  Garrigan     The metabolic load (ML) hypothesis suggests that
              quantitative  differences between specialist and generalist insect herbivores
              are  responsible for the evolution of dietary specialization.  This  hypothesis
              is underpinned by two critical assumptions: that the  capability to detoxify
              plant secondary compounds is physiologically  costly to insects and that
              specialists have a detoxification  advantage relative to generalists.  Rigorous
              evaluation of the ML  hypothesis will only be possible when reliable data are
              collected  in a consistent fashion for several specialist and polyphagous 
              herbivore.  Bomb calorimetry and newly - developed flow through  respirometry
              will be employed to calculate growth and metabolic  efficiency for 12
              Lepidopteran herbivore (six generalist and six  specialist) species being fed
              six different plant - derived toxins;  cost and efficiency estimates will be in
              comparable energetic  units.  %%%  This research addresses the topic of host
              specialization in plant  / insect interactions.  Within the past five to ten
              years, the  scientific community has come to recognize that a treasure trove of
               biologically active chemical compounds exists within the natural  world.  The
              most intelligent way to understand this complexity is  by ascertaining how it
              evolves over ecological / evolutionary time.   One of the most elegant ways of
              accomplishing this goal is by  "assaying" coevolved ecological relationships
              using a battery of  extractive and quantitative chemical methods of analysis. 
              Results  of such studies can then be adapted for pharmacological purposes.  ***
