Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1994     
File        : a9403083

Award Number: 9403083
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53333              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Jankowski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IL Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, IL  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9403083    Dr. Jeffrey A. Jankowski has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral 
              Research Fellowship in Chemistry. Dr. Jankowski received his  doctoral degree
              from the University of North Carolina at Chapel  Hill under the supervision of
              Professor Mark Wightman.  Dr.  Jankowski will continue research at the
              University of Illinois  under the sponsorship of Professor Jonathan Sweedler.
              Dr.  Jankowski's postdoctoral research will focus on the analytical  chemistry
              of neuroscience. He will develop skills in capillary  electrophoresis with
              laser-induced fluoresence and  radiochemical detection to study the release of
              neuropeptides  from individual nerve cells. Longer term, he plans to develop 
              the use of electrochemistry and capillary electrophoresis to  characterize
              steroid secretion and quantify steroid synthesis  at individual adrenal
              cortical cells. This work will provide  great insight into steroid biochemistry
              and the physiology of  the adrenal cortex with implications in the fields of
              medicine  and pharmacology.    The Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in
              Chemistry Program is  viewed as an important infrastructural program designed
              to  broaden the knowledge and experience of new Ph.D.s and attract  them into
              meaningful careers in contemporary chemical research  and teaching.  ***
