Title       : Improved Aequorin for Ca Assay in Functioning Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1996     
File        : a9403183

Award Number: 9403183
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $378864             (Estimated)
Investigator: Osamu Shimomura shimomur@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9197,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9403183  Shimomura    The photoprotein aequorin first isolated by the P.I. in
              1962, has  been widely used as an indicator for cellular calcium for more than 
              25 years.  In the last several years, three improved forms of  aequorin were
              made available: 1) various iso-forms of aequorin  isolated from natural
              aequorin, with properties considerably  different from each other; 2)
              recombinant aequorin prepared from  the apoaequorin genetically produced in E.
              coli, which can be mass  produced, and 3) more than 30 kinds of semi-synthetic
              aequorin have  been obtained by replacing the coelenterazine moiety of aequorin
               with various synthetic analogues of coelenterazine.  Semi-synthetic  aequorins
              showed various properties that are highly advantageous in  measuring calcium,
              including the widely different ranges of  sensitivity to calcium.  Recently, a
              new trend in the use of  aequorin began.  In the new method, apoaequorin is
              genetically  produced in cells utilizing aequorin cDNA, then the apoaequorin is
               intracellularly regenerated into aequorin by the addition of  coelenterazine
              and finally the recombinant aequorin produced is  used to study calcium in the
              cells.  The next objectives of this  research are:  1) Further improvement of
              semi-synthetic aequorin,  based on the data of various semi-synthetic aequorins
              that contain  various coelenterazine analogues modified at position 2 of the 
              imidazopyrazine ring.  2) In the new method that involves the  production of
              semi-synthetic aequorins in cells, the regeneration  of aequorins from
              apoaequorin and coelenterazine analogues is a  crucial step that is strongly
              influenced by the characteristics of  the analogue used.  Thus, the
              characteristics of all coelenterazine  analogues will be investigated, and the
              analogues that are suitable  for intracellular aequorin regeneration will be
              identified.  3)   Various preparations of aequorin, including isoaequorins and
              semi  synthetic aequorins, will be produced for the purpose of  distribution to
              cell biologists and p hysiologists for their use in  research.  In addition,
              coelenterazine analogues suitable for the  intracellular regeneration of
              aequorins will also be supplied.  4)   On the basis of the recent discovery
              that some of the  coelenterazine analogues are extremely sensitive and highly 
              specific to superoxide anion, the measurement and monitoring of  superoxide
              anion in biological systems with those analogues will be  explored.  %%%  One
              of the most important components of cellular signal  transduction is the
              calcium ion.  Levels of intracellular calcium  are closely regulated and
              changes of calcium are commonly involved  as steps in the cascade of responses
              to extracellular signals.  The  mechanisms by which cells control internal
              calcium and how calcium  changes are involved in cellular signaling are major
              current themes  in cell research.  Much current research in this field has been
               made possible by the availability of indicators that measure  intracellular
              free calcium and determine its location within cells  over the time course of a
              physiological response.  The subject of  this research is aequorin, a naturally
              occurring complex of a  protein (apoaequorin) with an associated smaller
              organic molecule  (coelenterazine).  When one aequorin molecule binds a calcium
              ion  it gives off a pulse of light.  Aequorin is thus an invaluable tool  for
              measuring and localizing intracellular calcium.  This  laboratory first
              isolated aequorin from a marine jellyfish in 1962  and has since, primarily
              with NSF support, developed a wide range  of important variants of the aequorin
              molecules for various  applications in cell biology research.  The next goals
              of this  project are to produce further specialized calcium indicators and,  if
              possible to develop variants to extend the use of the components  of aequorin
              to measure another class of important cellular signal  molecules, superoxide
              anion.  These indicators will be made  available for use in research on a wide
              range of problems in  biology.  ***
