Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows: Stabilization of Triple Helical Nucleic
               Acids for Control of Oncogene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1994      
File        : a9403368

Award Number: 9403368
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail C. Silver   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9403368    Silver        This award is under the International Junior
              Investigator  and Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S.  scientists
              and engineers to conduct three to twelve months  of research abroad at research
              centers of proven excellence.  The program's awards provide opportunities for
              joint  research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities,  expertise
              and experimental conditions abroad.    This award will support a twelve-month
              postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Gail C. Silver to work with  Dr. Claude
              Helene  of the Museum National d'Historie Naturelle in Paris,  France.    This
              research concerns the stabilization of triple-helical  nucleic acids for
              control of oncogene expression.  This is  based on the recently investigated
              possibility of  interfering directly with gene expression by targeting 
              deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) with oligonucleotides.  The  "anti-gene"
              oligonucleotides bind in a sequence-specific  manner in the major groove of the
              double-stranded target to  form a triple helix, also known as a triplex. 
              Cancers are  often the result of over expression of certain genes or the 
              expression of mutated genes.  These strategies have the  potential to be used
              to inactivate the expression of genes  that contribute to cancer development. 
              If the sequence of  the oncogene is known, a complementary sequence can be made
               to bind to that particular gene and thus overcome cell  proliferation.  Though
              the potential of triplex technology  is hard to assess, there is promise and
              these experiments  will help further understanding by providing a means of 
              stabilizing the triple helix structure. ***
