Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Matrix Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1996  
File        : a9403224

Award Number: 9403224
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl D. Meyer meyer@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9216,HPCC,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9403224  Meyer       This research focuses on the analysis of stochastic
              matrices  and associated Markov chains concepts. Both theoretical and 
              computational issues are addressed.  The theoretical objective is  to make a
              significant impact on the traditional perturbation  theory for stochastic
              matrices and Markov chains. One goal is to  completely describe the nature and
              characteristic features of  sensitive Markov chains and to build a clear and
              concise theory  of perturbations in the eigensystems of stochastic matrices.
              This  perturbation theory will be used to better understand the  convergence
              and stability properties of a variety of multilevel  algorithms for computing
              stationary probabilities.  The  computational aspect is concerned with the
              numerical  determination of stationary probabilities associated with 
              large-scale irreducible Markov chains with special emphasis on  those which are
              nearly uncoupled (systems comprised of a  collection of loosely coupled
              subsystems).  The focus is on the  development, implementation, and analysis of
               aggregation/disaggregation algorithms.  Both iterative and exact 
              aggregation/disaggregation methods are to be considered along  with some hybrid
              A/D techniques.       This research focuses on the analysis of stochastic
              matrices  and associated Markov chains concepts. Markov chain techniques 
              constitute a unifying theme and are the basis for an extremely  wide variety of
              mathematical models which are used to describe,  predict, and analyze the
              dynamics of large evolutionary systems.  Markov chain models are fundamental
              mathematical tools in areas  as diverse as engineering, economics, physical
              science, and  social science. In particular, analyzing and computing stationary
               probabilities associated with large scale Markov chains is a  primary concern
              in problems involving queueing models and  networks, telecommunications,
              computer performance evaluation,  economic modeling and forecasting,
              manufacturing systems  modeling, and more generally in applications  where
              stochastic  models are used to understand the behavior of systems that evolve 
              with time. This project emphasizes both computational and  theoretical issues,
              and special attention is devoted to the  analysis of nearly uncoupled problems
              (systems comprised of a  collection of loosely coupled subsystems). The
              following specific  research topics are to be investigated:  (1) As they evolve
              with  time, many physical systems eventually settle down into some sort  of
              steady state.  If the physical system is modeled by utilizing  the theory of
              Markov chains, then the steady state nature of the  system is characterized by
              a set of probabilities called  "stationary probabilities."  Consequently,
              analyzing the behavior  of the stationary probabilities is a fundamental issue.
              The  theoretical component of this research involves studying the  stability
              properties of stationary probabilities. The results of  this research should
              clarify the understanding of the mechanisms  which contribute to either the
              stability (or instability) of the  underlying physical system being examined. 
              (2) The computational  facet of this project is to develop new algorithms for
              computing  stationary probabilities and to develop new methods by means of 
              which such algorithms can be analyzed. In practical applications  such as those
              mentioned above, it is usually the case that the  physical system under
              question involves an extremely large number  of components, but these
              components can often be grouped into  clusters for which there is strong
              interaction within any given  cluster but weaker interaction among the clusters
              themselves  (e.g., consider the economy of the United States).  This research 
              effort devotes special attention to analyzing and computing the  stability and
              steady state nature of such systems.  Mathematically, this involves computing
              and analyzing the  stationary probabilities of such systems. To this end,
              numerical  algorithms known as aggregation/disaggregation techniques will be 
              designed to specifical ly to exploit the special features of these  types of
              nearly uncoupled systems.
