Title       : Enhancing Diversity in Graduate Education (EDGE): A Transition Program for Women
               in the Mathematical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a0209478

Award Number: 0209478
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rhonda J. Hughes rhughes@brynmawr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sylvia T. Bozeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bryn Mawr College
	      
	      Bryn Mawr, PA  19010    215/645-5000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports several aspects of the second phase of the EDGE Program,
              "Enhancing Diversity in Graduate Education."  Core funding for the first phase
              of the program was provided by the National Science Foundation from 1998 to
              2001, with additional support from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation and the
              National Security Agency.  The goal of the program is to increase the number of
              women and minority students who successfully complete graduate programs in the
              mathematical sciences, by strengthening the ability of the targeted student
              population to successfully negotiate the transition from undergraduate to
              graduate education in mathematics, and to succeed in their respective graduate
              programs.
  
The EDGE Program has two basic components: an intensive summer
              program prior to graduate school enrollment, and a follow-up mentoring program.
               In the first phase of the program, the summer component alternated between
              Bryn Mawr and Spelman Colleges.  The second phase of the EDGE Program
              will
consist of three major components:

[1] a centrally administered
              program with a core staff consisting of the Co-Directors Rhonda Hughes of Bryn
              Mawr College and Sylvia Bozeman of Spelman College, as well as an
              Administrative Assistant.  The core staff would maintain data on all EDGE
              participants, manage advertising and selection of participants, select host
              sites for the summer program, and coordinate the follow-up mentoring
              program;
[2] a portable design for the EDGE Summer Program.  By involving a
              core group of select institutions as EDGE sites, the program will be made more
              visible, it will reach a wider audience of students, and the number of
              undergraduate and graduate programs aware of the goals of the program would
              necessarily 
expand.
[3]  a biennial EDGE Symposium.  This event would
              include an EDGE Reunion of past participants, as well as a forum to promote the
              advancement of women, and in particular minority women, involving a broader
              segment of the mathematics community.  The first symposium will be hosted by
              Spelman College in 2003.
 
This award will specifically support several
              aspects of the proposed activities:  travel funds for prospective Local
              Coordinators, who will participate in the expansion of the program to other
              sites; support of the EDGE Symposium, as well as smaller reunions for past
              participants who have strongly expressed the need to return to the program in
              the year following their participation; participant support costs for two
              "returning" women who have interrupted their academic careers for a variety of
              reasons and wish to attend a graduate program in mathematics; and consultant
              support for an improved and expanded web site.
