Title       : Spatio-Temporal Emergence of Morphological Patterns in Liquid Crystalline
               Polymer and Rigid-Rod Polymer Systems during Solidification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0209272

Award Number: 0209272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thein Kyu TKYU@UAKRON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The present proposal entails experimental and theoretical elucidation of (i)
              dynamics of hollow fiber (or nano-tube) formation during solidification of main
              chain liquid crystalline polymers (MCLCP) and/or rigid-rod polymer solution,
              (ii) dynamics of nano-porous membranes of monomeric mesognes during pattern
              polymerization, (iii) dynamics of microfibril formation during dry-jet
              spinning, and (iv) hybrid-composites.  The well-established time-dependent
              Ginzburg-Landau TDGL (Model C) will be applied in conjunction with the
              advection term  for the tracking of solvent evaporation and flow.  The physical
              significanace of all parameters pertaining to the governing non-linear
              reaction-diffusion equations will be clarified, and their predictive
              capabilitieis will be demonstrated.  The dynamics of pattern formation will be
              investigated by comparison with the recent experimental observations made in
              dry-jet and/or electro-spinning.  Recognizing the possible control of domain
              morphology and improved understanding of mesogenic interactions, the proposed
              study will be extended to microporous membranes and nano-composites.  The
              theoretical scheme proposed here demonstrates the spation-temporal evolution of
              the order parameters (such as density, concentration and orientation
              fluctuations) based on the local free energy and non-local gradient (diffusive)
              terms.  The numerical simulation further illustrates the emergence of the local
              internal structures during solidification.  Moreover, this methodology can
              applied to elucidating the microfibrillation dynamics in spinning of
              semicrystalline polymers and hydrogen bonding systems.

It is encouraging to
              discern unique morphological features encompassing (i) nano-tube formation,
              (ii) concentric rings/spiral-breakup leading to microfibrillation and (iii)
              viscous fingering patterns.  The observed phenomenon of spiral breakup is one
              of the most debated topics in the no-linear dynamics of excitable media and
              biological systems.  Furthermore, it clearly demonstrates a new approach to the
              decades-old problem of predicting morphology development in solution-spun
              fibers such as rough skin/core structures, collapsed kidney shape morphology,
              and microfibrils.  This methodology has potential for modern technological
              applications including electro-spinning of nano-fibers/tubes, microporous
              membranes through pattern photopolymerization induced phase separation, and
              nano-hybrid composites.  It is anticipated that these microporous membranes
              have widespread applications usch as fuel cell membranes, filtration, and drug
              delivery.  Furthermore, some of the simutaion programs have been written in C++
              and can be shown on live-mode with the aid of an LCD projector.  Such
              interactive programs are proven to be useful for classroom teaching and
              demonstration to the public.

