Title       : CRC: Micro Imaging for Sensory and Materials Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0209898

Award Number: 0209898
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2262500            (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel G. Nocera nocera@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Moungi G. Bawendi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Manoochehr M. Koochesfahani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1991      Chemistry Projects
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,7202,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Daniel G. Nocera and Moungi G. Bawendi of MIT and Manoochehr M. Koochesfahani of
              Michigan State University are jointly supported by the Division of Chemistry,
              the Division of Chemical Transport Systems and  the Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate for their
              interdisciplinary collaboration on new molecule-based optical diagnostic
              techniques to measure flow on small spatial scales. They will use newly
              synthesized fluorescent tracers based on caged laser dye molecules and
              nanocrystalline quantum dots to image flows at speeds of less than 1 mm/s. New
              optical techniques will be developed for the quantitative measurement of
              multivariable flow properties (e.g., flow velocity field, temperature,
              concentration) and transport in small dimensions. The diagnostics will
              interrogate important fundamental principles of flows in microchannels
              including transport to within 50-150 nm of surfaces. Understanding the flow
              behavior in microchannels is a key step in the development of active flow and
              mixing control on small spatial length scales. These principles defined from
              these flow studies will be incorporated in microchannels that contain
              Distributed Feedback (DFB) lasers as optical sensor elements. The integration
              of flow control and mixing with DFB architectures may lead to unprecedented
              analytical sensitivity on exquisitely small length scales. These principles are
              the underpinning of many emerging microdevice technologies, especially
              microsensors and microreactors. 

Collaborative Research in Chemistry (CRC)
              awards are given to interdisciplinary teams of scientists working on problems
              of broad chemical interest. The emphasis in these awards is on new
              collaborative modes of research and training.



