Title       : Experiments in Education: Development of a Week-long Summer Shortcourse in
               Polymer Chemistry for Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  2002    
File        : a0209835

Award Number: 0209835
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60150              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Tyler dtyler@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark C. Lonergan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a week-long summer program in polymer for
              undergraduates.  Participants will be selected from applicants from across the
              nation.  The purpose of "PolyCamp" is to expose undergraduate students to the
              fascinating field of polymer science with the ultimate goal of getting them to
              consider graduate school and eventual employment in the field.  A second key
              purpose is to expose the students to the various exciting career opportunities
              in polymer science.  The week-long program consists of a number of introductory
              lectures on polymer chemistry; industrial plant tours; industrial and academic
              lab tours; three laboratory experiments; and group and individual discussions
              of career pathways and opportunities in the polymer field.  Although PolyCamp
              has is only one week in duration, it will especially appeal to students who,
              for whatever reason, cannot commit to a full summer.  It is proposed that
              programs such as PolyCamp are an excellent way to increase the number of
              students who are interested in polymer science, which will benefit the entire
              polymer community.  Long-term assessment data will be collected and used to
              determine to what extent the PolyCamp experience stimulated the students'
              interest in polymer science and how it has helped them develop and execute
              their career plans.  The program has the strong backing of industrial
              affiliates, who eager to give plant tours and lead discussions of career
              opportunities.
