Title       : Collaborative Research: Maintaining High Species Diversity in Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0209736

Award Number: 0209736
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan J. Tessier                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. McPeek mark.mcpeek@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: MAINTAINING HIGH SPECIES DIVERSITY IN
              COMMUNITIES

Ecosystems frequently contain species that are evolutionarily
              and ecologically similar.  However, whether this diversity is actually
              maintained by mechanisms that directly promote coexistence or rather is lost
              very slowly from systems is unclear.  Many mechanisms have been proposed that
              could promote the indefinite coexistence of species on both local and regional
              scales.  These mechanisms of coexistence are only present when vital rates
              (survival, growth, reproduction) vary with the environment and when individual
              species have different responses to the same environment change.  The
              alternative is that species do not differ in their responses to the environment
              and are slowly being lost through a random process called "ecological drift" in
              which the population size of one species relative to another is determined by
              the unpredictability inherent in survival, growth, and reproduction.  This
              process is akin to "random genetic drift" in which random evolutionary changes
              among the relative abundances of so-called neutral genes occur due to
              unpredictability in the process of inheritance.

	This project will elaborate
              recent models of ecological drift by incorporating mechanisms of coexistence
              into these "neutral" ecological models.  Like the neutral models, development
              of the new theory will take advantage of analogies between the ecological
              mechanisms that determine species diversity patterns and the evolutionary
              processes that determine genetic diversity.  The goal of the research is to
              develop a set of predictions that incorporates both ecological drift and
              various coexistence mechanisms that operate on local and regional scales. 
              These predictions will be statistically compared with existing data on
              community diversity across local and regional scales.  The research will
              provide indirect but highly practical tests for mechanisms that shape community
              diversity.

