Title       : Distributed Access Control for Accountable Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0209083

Award Number: 0209083
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dominic Duggan dduggan@cs.stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan Vitek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 2802      Trusted Computing
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1667,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Assurance for distributed systems is based on constantly strengthening the
              protective boundaries that prevent and detect unauthorized access to computer
              systems. Accountability, ensuring that principals are liable for their actions,
              is an equally important issue. This project investigates a programming language
              approach to tracking accountability in distributed systems, specifically by
              extending the Java language to maintain a fine-grained audit trail for
              accountability purposes.

The proposed approach is based on associating
              secrecy (access control) and integrity information with data as it is retrieved
              and copied over the network.  Distributed access control is not just enforced
              at one point in the network where the data is accessed, but may be enforced
              wherever a copy of the data is accessed.  Distributed information flow types
              enforce access rights and enforce a form of causality that supports tracking of
              tracking of accountability for principals.  In recognition of the fact that
              communication may be over an insecure network, sensitive data is assumed to be
              "virtually" signed or encrypted, for integrity and secrecy guarantees,
              respectively.  The computational burden of the ubiquitous application of
              cryptographic operations is avoided through the use of cryptographic types for
              static checking where possible.


