Title       : RUI: Halide Oxidation by Peroxometal Complexes: Mechanism and Reactivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0209868

Award Number: 0209868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha S. Reynolds mreynolds@mail.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Martha Reynolds, Department of Chemistry, Colgate University, is supported
              by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division for a study of the oxidation of halide ions by metal-bound
              peroxides. A series of new molybdenum(VI), vanadium(V), and tungsten(VI) 
              peroxo complexes with ligands that vary systematically in their
              electron-donating properties will  be synthesized and the reactivity toward
              bromide oxidation will be measured spectrophotometrically.  These experiments
              will test the hypothesis that the electronic structure of a chelating ligand
              controls the strength of the peroxo bond in predictable ways, which in turn
              governs the reactivity of the complex as an oxidant.  The reactivity of
              complexes that contain both peroxide and bromide or chloride directly bound to
              the metal will be examined.  Such species represent possible intermediates in
              the peroxometal-mediated oxidation of halide ion. Because of the sensitivity of
              peroxo and metal-oxo  vibrational frequencies to chemical changes, infrared
              spectroscopy will be used to obtain more detailed information on the mechanism
              of bromide oxidation and infrared-spectroelectrochemistry will be employed to
              compare the molecular details of the one- and two-electron oxidation chemistry
              of peroxometal complexes.

Peroxide-containing metal complexes find
              application as catalysts for the oxidation or bromination of a variety of
              organic compounds.  A biological example of such a catalyst is vanadium
              bromoperoxidase, an enzyme found in seaweed that produces oxidized  bromine for
              the purpose of protecting the seaweed against predators or microorganisms. This
              project will provide an increased understanding of peroxometal complexes -  and
              thereby of vanadium haloperoxidase enzymes - and holds promise for the
              development of new oxidation and  bromination catalysts that may prove useful
              in the synthesis of anticancer, antimicrobial, and  insulin-mimetic
              pharmaceuticals, and of oxidized or brominated organic compounds more 
              generally.  Students undertaking this research will gain facility in chemical
              synthesis, spectroscopic and electrochemical techniques, and chemical kinetics.
              

