Title       : Collaborative Research: MASSA: Mobile Agent System Security Through Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0209322

Award Number: 0209322
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294881             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary J. Harrold harrold@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alessandro Orso  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2802      Trusted Computing
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1667,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Mobile agents systems allow applications to explicitly relocate themselves
              across the network. The mobile agent paradigm provides a number of advantages
              in terms of service customizability and flexibility, optimized access to
              distributed resources, and natural support to the deployment of applications in
              a mobile networking environment. However, despite the advantages provided by
              the mobile agent paradigm, some fundamental security issues must be addressed
              before mobile agents receive widespread acceptance.

The overall objective of
              the project is to develop a general framework that provides automated support
              for modeling and analysis of security issues in the use of secure mobile agent
              systems. Preliminary work conducted at UCSB and Georgia Tech shows that
              appropriate analysis techniques facilitate identification of security
              vulnerabilities in mobile agent systems. In particular, the researchers at UCSB
              and Georgia Tech have successfully applied both dynamic black-box techniques
              and static white-box techniques to diagnose the presence of security threats in
              mobile agent systems.

The proposed research involves three primary efforts.
              First, a framework for assessing security threats for mobile agent systems will
              be developed. The framework supports the high-level modeling of security issues
              and mechanisms, by abstracting the details of specific mobile agent
              technologies, and encompasses static and dynamic analysis techniques. Second, a
              prototype system that supports the security analyses in the framework will be
              designed and implemented. Third, experimental subjects will be collected and
              experimentation will be performed. The experiments performed will allow for
              evaluating the effectiveness and practicality of the proposed framework on real
              examples defined for existing mobile agent systems.

