Title       : Integrated System-Theoretic and Software-Enabled Strategies for Embedded Smart
               Sensors in Hybrid Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0209179

Award Number: 0209179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bonnie Heck bonnie.heck@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay H. Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda M. Wills  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George Vachtsevanos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Bonnie Heck
CCR-0209179
"Integrated System-Theorectic and Software-Enabled
              Strategies for Embedded Smart Sensors in Hybrid Systems"

This research
              addresses the efficient design and effective operation of "smart" sensor
              suites, which are to be embedded in complex hybrid systems with multiple modes
              of operation and multiple mission / fault scenarios.  An integrated approach is
              being pursued in which system-theoretic analysis is combined with real-time
              embedded software design techniques that focus on composition and dynamic
              reconfiguration issues.   This integrative approach supports the design of the
              sensor suite, including its management software, which is capable of fusing
              information from heterogeneous sensors to develop estimates for physical
              parameters and detect / diagnose faults, and of dynamically reconfiguring
              itself in the face of identified fault scenarios or mode changes.  
The
              research addresses system-theoretic issues and software-design issues on a
              concurrent basis so that the requirements and capabilities of the two sides can
              be understood and taken into account.  Hence, issues such as synchronizing data
              from multiple distributed sources and managing transitions while reconfiguring
              continuous components, are being formalized and explicitly accounted for
              throughout the design, beginning with the sensor selection / placement decision
              to the development of algorithms for sensor fusion and dynamic reconfiguration.
               This work is drawing upon existing results in the hybrid systems literature
              and developing some additional theories and tools as necessary.  The topics
              studied in this research include:
o Sensor placement in a distributed hybrid
              system:  What types of sensors should be placed where so that important
              changes, both continuous and discrete, can be observed with required
              accuracies.
o Sensor fusion:  How the signals generated from a heterogeneous
              sensor array will be combined to generate useful information, such as physical
              states, parameter values, and fault status, under different modes of
              operation.
o Dynamic reconfiguration: How to reconfigure on the fly the
              processing and fusing of signals from different sensors, in the face of an
              identified fault or a mode change, and how the information will be transitioned
              from one mode to another.

The research is creating system-theoretic and
              software modeling tools for constructing smart sensor suites that can adapt to
              changes and faults that occur in a complex hybrid system.  The research is also
              expected to improve the fundamental understanding into the observability
              property of hybrid systems and the design and analysis of a state estimator for
              such a system. The theoretical / methodological development is being validated
              on sensor suites for real applications (e.g., a three tank process
              demonstrator) so that no important real issues are overlooked.

On the
              educational front, cross-disciplinary course(s) and research programs are being
              developed that breed a unique set of students versed in both systems-control
              theories and real-time software design.

