Title       : RUI: Inverse Spectral Problems in One and Two Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0209562

Award Number: 0209562
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96259              (Estimated)
Investigator: C M. McCarthy maeve.mccarthy@murraystate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Murray State University
	      328 Wells Hall
	      Murray, KY  42071    270/762-3537

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9229,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This work investigates the numerical and analytic solution of inverse
spectral
              problems in one and two dimensions. In one dimension, the
appearance of an
              eigenparameter in the boundary condition of a
Sturm-Liouville problem causes a
              loss of self-adjointness. Although
uniqueness of the inverse problem has been
              established, there are no
constructive schemes available that lend themselves
              to numerical
computation. This work (with William Rundell) develops and
              analyzes two
constructive schemes involving to recover the potential in this
              type of
problem. In two dimensions, the eigenvalues of particular membranes
              are used
to find an approximation to a function representing the
              nonhomogeneity in
the boundary value problem governing the elastic membrane.
              Projection of the
boundary value problem and its coefficients onto appropriate
              vector spaces
leads to a matrix inverse problem, which is solved using
              optimization
techniques. This work will consider various domains and
              investigate the
recovery of multiple coefficients. Theoretical questions
              regarding circular
domains will also be investigated. In particular, the
              recovery of a radial
density using techniques from differential geometry and
              the properties of
the radial spectrum of a vibrating circular membrane will be
              investigated.

There are many situations in which it is not practical to
              measure an object's
 properties directly.  Doctors do not perform surgery to
              determine the size
of a brain tumor prior to a patient's treatment.  An
              engineer does not
dismantle an airplane to determine the level of corrosion in
              its wing.
Instead external measurements of an object are made and used to
              determine
the internal properties of the object.  This research focuses on the
              use of
vibrational information to determine physical parameters of an object.
              If
these parameters are known, the vibration is modeled mathematically by
              a
boundary value problem.  If the parameters are not known, but the
              vibration
is known, then the problem to be solved is an inverse boundary
              value
problem - also known as an inverse spectral problem.  This project
              develops
several constructive algorithms for the solution of this type of
              problem.  It
is important to realize that while mathematical inverse problems
              often have
multiple solutions, their physical counterpart may not.  Choosing
              the
"correct" solution is also addressed in this work.
