Title       : Adaptive hr-mesh refinement for the numerical solution of advection-diffusion
               equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0209313

Award Number: 0209313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90252              (Estimated)
Investigator: Weiming Cao wcao@math.utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0209313
PI: 			Weiming Cao
Institution:
              		University of Texas,  San Antonio
Program: 		Computational
              Mathematics
Program Manager: 	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: Adaptive hr-mesh
              refinement for the numerical solution of advection-diffusion equations

A
              fundamental issue in the numerical solutions of partial differential equations
              (PDEs) is adaptive mesh refinement. Local refinements (the h-methods) and
              moving mesh methods (the r-methods) are two basic types of approaches.  Each
              has its features. The h-methods are robust and reliable. The r-methods can be
              highly efficient and effective for time dependent problems. The goal of this
              project is to develop a comprehensive combined h- and r-refinement method to
              achieve the advantages of both approaches. This combined method is especially
              useful in solving advection-diffusion problems, with which the numerical
              diffusion and advection speed can be significantly reduced. Major issues to be
              addressed in this research include: the error estimates used to guide the
              hr-refinement, stable and accurate time integration methods used in conjunction
              with the spatial hr-refinement; the conservative numerical schemes based on the
              hr-refined meshes; the efficient solution of the linear algebraic equations
              arising from the discretization; the implementation and software development.
              While the analysis and algorithms will be established in the context of general
              time dependent advection-diffusion problems, we shall focus on two specific
              applications: the contamination and remediation of ground water systems in
              environmental science, and the motion and deformation of white blood cells in
              biophysics.

With the advances of modern computer technology, numerical
              experiments have now become one of the two primary tools in science, industry,
              and engineering (the other is physical experiments). Numerical simulation of
              many important processes involves the solution of advection-diffusion problems.
              Examples include optimal design of aircrafts and automobiles, forecast of
              global weather change, remediation of surface and ground water contamination,
              and innovation of biomedical devices. This project aims to develop a robust,
              reliable, and highly efficient mesh refinement method used for solving the
              advection-diffusion problems. Major issues
in the design, analysis, and
              implementation of this method will be addressed. In particular, it will be
              applied directly to solve environmental and biophysical problems. We anticipate
              that successful completion of this project will not only enrich the
              mathematical theory of adaptive solution of partial differential equations, but
              also generate highly efficient and accurate numerical algorithms, which will
              find applications in a variety of industrial and engineering areas that are
              essential to our national economy and security.


Date: May 22nd, 2002

