Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: Visual Informatics Tools to Interactively Link Arabidopsis
               Metabolic and Regulatory Network Maps with Genome-Wide Expression Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0209809

Award Number: 0209809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eve S. Wurtele mash@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dianne H. Cook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julie A. Dickerson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1684,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Emerging molecular technologies are enabling the collection of massive data sets
              that contain information about the full complement of mRNAs, proteins and
              metabolites in an organism. These data sets detail the fluctuations in levels
              of mRNAs, proteins, and metabolites in different organs, tissues and cell
              types, over time, and as the organism is subjected to environmental stresses.
              The development of Arabidopsis as a model plant system, and the ensuing
              emphasis on functional genomics in the Arabidopsis 2010 program, is leading to
              the generation of a multitude of such data sets. These data sets can compare
              wild-type and genetically modified Arabidopsis to understand how a change in a
              single gene can affect the function of the entire genome.  The overall goal is
              to understand the interactions occurring between all the genes in a simple
              plant system, as the basis for developing a logical framework to improve the
              composition and yield of agronomically important plant species.
Computational
              technologies are essential to integrate and interpret these large data sets.
              The goal is to develop and implement powerful software tools for analysis of
              genome-wide expression data.  The software tools will consist of three modules
              that will integrate the visualization of the mRNA, protein, and metabolite data
              sets with our current understanding of the Arabidopsis metabolic and regulatory
              network.  These are: 1) A metabolic and regulatory network mapping capability
              with an interactive graph display.  2) A data integration capability, wherein
              global profiling data can be clustered, visualized, superimposed on the
              metabolic and regulatory map. 3) A modeling capability in which the metabolic
              or regulatory flow in the network is modeled using fuzzy cognitive maps.  These
              tools will be used by the biological community to generate and test hypotheses
              about the regulation of metabolic pathways that contribute to the final
              composition and yield of the plant.  The 24-month deliverable will provide a
              proof-of-concept for the software, using test data sets from Arabidopsis.
The
              proposed multidisciplinary research will provide invaluable opportunities for
              the integration of genomics and bioinformatics education into undergraduate and
              graduate curricula.  Three-five undergraduate students and two graduate
              students will be involved over the course of two years.  In addition,
              interations  with local high school teachers are planned to enable motivated
              high school students to participate in this research.  There is also a plan to
              integrate students from underrepresented groups into the research project.  The
              ability to reach young, computer savvy students even in high school will be
              further enhanced by the high power computer graphics used in the project.
              Development of this software will lead directly to its use as a teaching tool
              in secondary education.
This coordinated approach to displaying multiple views
              of metabolic networks, cellular functions, and datasets will put abstract data
              in the context in which it arises, and facilitate studies of uncertainty and
              variation in metabolic networks.  Although the software will be directed
              specifically towards the biology of Arabidopsis, it can be modified for use in
              any species.  These tools, and the database will be freely available to the
              scientific community for academic purposes
              http://www.botany.iastate.edu/~mash/metnetex/metabolicnetex.html.  They will
              provide a novel framework to formulate testable hypotheses regarding the
              function of specific genes and expand our holistic understanding of
              metabolism.

