Title       : CRC: An Integrated Approach to Understanding the Air-Water Interface In
               Atmospherically Relevant Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0209719

Award Number: 0209719
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2669000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Finlayson-Pitts bjfinlay@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Dabdub  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas J. Tobias  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Hemminger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Benny Gerber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1991      Chemistry Projects
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5930,5941,9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Barbara J. Finlayson-Pitts, Donald Dabdub, R. Benny Gerber, John. C. Hemminger
              and Douglas J. Tobias of UC Irvine are jointly supported by the Division of
              Chemistry, the International Programs Office and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
              Directorate  for their interdisciplinary collaboration aimed at significantly
              advancing our understanding of chemistry at the air-water interface. More
              specifically, they will be looking at the interaction of gases such as SO2,
              oxides of nitrogen (NO2, N2O4, HNO3), CO2 and HCl with water in films of
              varying thickness. In addition, interactions of these thin films with
              surfactant layers will be studied. Both theory and experiments will be applied
              to understand the chemical and physical interactions at the air-water interface
              in these systems. The potential importance of such processes at interfaces
              involving particles and other surfaces in the troposphere will be probed using
              a comprehensive airshed model.  This award includes international
              collaborations with Pavel Jungwirth, Czech Academy of Sciences, and Leon
              Phillips, University of Canterbury, New Zealand, that will include
              international training opportunities for the students and postdoctoral
              researchers involved with this work. 

Collaborative Research in Chemistry
              (CRC) awards are given to interdisciplinary teams of scientists working on
              problems of broad chemical interest. The emphasis in these awards is on new
              collaborative modes of research and training.

