Title       : Deriving Perceptually-Based Texture and Color Features for Image Segmentation,
               Categorization, and Retrieval
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0209006

Award Number: 0209006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thrasyvoulos N. Pappas pappas@ece.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The rapid accumulation of large collections of digital images has created the
              need for efficient and intelligent schemes for image retrieval.  Since humans
              are the ultimate users of most retrieval systems, it is important to organize
              the contents semantically, according to meaningful categories.  This requires
              an understandingof the important semantic categories that humans use for image
              classification, and the extraction of meaningful image features that can
              discriminate between these categories.  Recent research efforts have addressed
              the first problem, but the second remains quite elusive.  This research effort
              is aimed at addressing this second problem, that is, the extraction of
              low-level image features that can be correlated with high-level semantics and
              used to capture the semantic meaning of an image.

The key to this research
              is the development of a new methodology for segmenting images, based on
              perceptual models and principles about the processing of texture and color
              information.  This involves the identification of semantically important,
              spatially adaptive, low-level color and texture features that can be combined
              algorithmically to obtain image segmentations that convey semantic information.
               The same perceptual models and principles can be used to relate the features
              of the segmented regions (color and texture features, as well as segment
              location, size, and boundary shape) to semantic concepts that can be used for
              content-based image retrieval.
An integral part of this research is the design
              and execution of subjective experiments in order to obtain some key parameters
              for the color and texture features, as well as for linking low-level image
              features to image semantics.


