Title       : Using Simultaneous Multithreaded Processors for Soft Real-Time Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0209198

Award Number: 0209198
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarita V. Adve sadve@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research concerns the use of simultaneous multithreaded (SMT) processors
              for soft real-time applications such as multimedia applications.  SMT
              processors have the potential to provide high throughput by running multiple
              threads at the same time, and soft real-time applications are an
increasingly
              important workload.  The use of SMT processors for real-time applications,
              however, has largely been unexplored.

Most work on SMT has been driven by
              the goal of increasing throughput.  Real-time applications additionally require
              high schedulability (i.e., the ability to meet deadlines) and predictability. 
              Further, such applications often run in energy and thermal power constrained
              environments. This work
seeks to develop co-schedule selection and resource
              sharing algorithms (and consequent admission tests) for SMT processors that
              will (1) maximize instruction throughput, (2) maximize schedulability,
              (3)
maximize execution time predictability, (4) minimize energy, and (5)
              minimize thermal power, for soft real-time applications such as multimedia
              applications.  This is the first work that considers the issues of temporal
              schedulability and predictability, and integrates them with energy and thermal
              considerations, for real-time applications and SMT.  Without this research, an
              increasingly important class of workloads would be unable to exploit an
              architectural advance that has provided large benefits in other domains.

