Title       : Thermodynamic Modeling of Aluminum and Nickel Ternary Alloy Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  2002     
File        : a0209624

Award Number: 0209624
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270062             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip G. Nash nash@iit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zi-Kui Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to develop a thermodynamic description for the
              free energy of each phase as a function of composition and temperature in
              ternary aluminum and nickel base alloys. The heats of formation are determined
              using a custom built high temperature reaction calorimeter with a typical
              accuracy of +/-    1kJ/mole. In addition, differential thermal analysis will be
              used to determine melting points and other phase transitions and differential
              scanning calorimetry will be used to determine heat capacity of selected alloys
              as a function of temperature. The DTA and DSC experiments will be performed in
              a new SETARAM 1750 C calorimeter. The data determined from the experiments will
              be used to develop an improved, self-consistent thermodynamic database for
              Aluminum-Nickel-base alloys that find application in technologies requiring
              high temperature structural alloys. Such data on Al and Ni-base alloy systems
              are scarce or non-existent. The experimental results will be used to compute
              the minimum in free energy for a particular composition at a given temperature.
              Such thermodynamic modeling of phase diagrams provides an opportunity to
              approach the phase equilibria aspects of alloy development in a more efficient
              manner. The improved database will be used to compute several isothermal
              sections in each of the ternary alloy systems using THERMOCALC. The data will
              also be used to validate various extrapolation models from the literature for
              the prediction of heats of formation of ternary compounds from binary data.
              

The work finds application in the design of multi-component nickel and
              aluminum based alloys that are used in many technologies as structural
              materials. The experimental results of the study will provide the needed data
              for phase diagram calculations using CALPHAD methodology that is far more
              efficient than the currently available techniques. These experimental data are
              not available and this will be the only facility in USA that has the expertise
              to fill the need. From a fundamental viewpoint, the project will advance a
              largely uncharted area of research that is concerned with multi-component,
              multi-phase systems with varied phases. These systems find application in many
              technologies that require high temperature structural materials.

