Title       : System Level Design of Embedded Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0209193

Award Number: 0209193
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren P. Alexander alex@ittc.ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,9150,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A. Project Summary

The objective of this research is to develop and
              demonstrate
capabilities for analyzing complex interactions between
              heterogeneous
embedded systems specification domains.  Three research
              activities are
being undertaken: (i) development of domain models for
              important
embedded systems requirements domains; (ii) development of
              semantics
for combining heterogeneous embedded systems specifications; and
              (iii)
development of techniques for predictive analysis of
              composed
specifications.  The results of this research are being
              evaluated
using problems from the Ambient Computing Environments (ACE)
              research
center at The University of Kansas / ITTC.

The facet-based
              approach being investigated involves modeling and
integrating heterogeneous
              specifications using domain specific
semantic systems.  Each system model, or
              facet, is defined by
extending a domain.  A domain provides a vocabulary and
              model of
computation for describing a system from one perspective.  Facets
              use
domains as modeling semantics and are composed to describe components
and
              systems.  Specifically, individual models are composed to define:
(i) multiple
              aspects of the same component; and (ii) heterogeneous,
multi-component
              systems.  Projection functions and morphisms support
specification
              transformation and composition using category and
institution theoretic
              semantics.  Special projection functions, called
interactions, model how and
              when models from one domain interact with
models from another. Interactions
              support integrated component
analysis and modeling communication between
              heterogeneous components.

Developing domain models, domain interaction
              models, and prototype
analysis tools demonstrates the effectiveness of the
              facet-based
approach for modeling embedded systems.  The first and second
              research
tasks encompass the development of domain and domain
              interaction
models for defining embedded components.  Both functional
              and
performance constraint models are being supported.  Domain models
              are
being developed to represent basic models of computation and
vocabularies
              for specification. Interaction models consisting of
projection functions and
              specification morphisms are being defined to
move information between domains.
               The third research task is the
development of software systems for analyzing
              specifications.  Two
complimentary approaches are being explored: (i) formal
              analysis; and
(ii) simulation.  Formal analysis is achieved by mapping
              domain
definitions to existing formal analysis environments. 
              Specification
simulation is achieved by mapping domain definitions to
              communicating,
heterogeneous simulation environments.

Challenge problems
              from the NSF and DARPA sponsored Ambient Computing
Environments (ACE) research
              infrastructure at ITTC are being used to
evaluate ongoing research.  ACE
              provides an environment where
computing moves seamlessly with individuals
              within a physical
environment.  ACE is implemented as a collection of highly
              mobile,
heterogeneous embedded systems that perform tasks including
              personal
data management, control of robotic devices, and various
              sensor
related tasks The results of this research have widespread impact
              on
the research and industrial communities.  The Rosetta systems
              level
specification language is being used for domain models,
              interaction
definitions and system specifications for embedded systems. 
              Rosetta
is being standardized by the Accellera CAD standards organization as
              a
next-generation systems level design language.  Successful results
from
              this research activity are being disseminated as a part of the
base Rosetta
              domain system and are being integrated into the
collection of standard Rosetta
              domain models.



