Title       : Spectroscopy of Main Group Reactive Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a0209896

Award Number: 0209896
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis J. Clouthier dclaser@uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Clouthier will conduct research on the electronic spectra
              of main group intermediates. These intermediates are based on Si, Ge, and Sn
              atoms, whose chemistry is significantly different from that of carbon
              atom-based molecules. Information about the electronically excited states is
              very sparse but is of great importance to the reaction chemistry of these
              species. The results of these investigations will be of importance to the
              physics of interstellar clouds and circumstellar atmospheres, as well for CVD
              fabrication of industrially important thin films. 

Our basic understanding
              of the behavior of the chemical vapor deposition process for the fabrication of
              industrially important thin films, as well as for the molecular modeling of
              interstellar clouds and circumstellar atmospheres is not well developed. While
              the chemistry of molecules based on the carbon atom is well understood, this is
              not the case for molecules in which silicon, germanium, or tin atoms take the
              place of carbon atoms. This research is directed to provide information on the
              properties of such molecules. The studies will be conducted with the assistance
              of students, postdoctoral research associates and collaborators from other
              institutions. Students will gain experience in modern techniques of molecular
              spectroscopy in preparation for advanced studies or entry into the
              scientific/technical workforce.


