Title       : Configurable and Composable Systems Mechanisms Supporting Multi-Property Quality
               of Service for Memory and Power Constrained Embedded Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0209211

Award Number: 0209211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100001             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Bakken bakken@eecs.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
              Krishna M. Sivalingam  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract
Embedded systems are rapidly becoming pervasive and are being
              deployed on a wide range of devices for an even wider range of applications. 
              The chief device constraints are memory and power, and embedded applications
              require a wide range of Quality of Service (QoS) properties.  A serious problem
              with systems software for embedded systems is that it is not yet suitable for
              reuse in different situations.  Commercial and research systems software
              typically falls short in one or more of four ways.  First, the software is
              derived from a larger base or from high-level abstractions such as patterns,
              and does not scale down far enough.  Second, the software offers a point
              solution, with hard coded constraints on both the systems software
              infrastructure and the embedded device's characteristics.  Third, different QoS
              levels are not offered or are very limited.  Fourth, power conservation is not
              usually considered.
The goal of this two-year research project is to develop a
              scientific foundation to overcome the limitations outlined above.  This
              research addresses fundamental questions in four areas: baseline architectural
              constraints, QoS properties and their compositions, network-wide composition,
              and software engineering.  As a byproduct, a new systems software framework
              with new and more configurable systems mechanisms is in development to quantify
              and validate the answers to these fundamental questions.
The project's
              research on baseline architectural constraints ascertains necessary conditions
              to achieve small memory and constrained resource usage (ignoring QoS) at a fine
              granularity, exploring the fundamental tradeoffs in systems software mechanisms
              and functionality that enable this.  This baseline is then extended for
              multiple QoS properties, including new combinations of lightweight QoS
              mechanisms, given the fundamental QoS costs, alternative composition
              strategies, and tradeoffs among them.  Research on network-wide composition
              investigates the fundamental interactions in networks of devices, including
              techniques to predict and regulate the effect of a given node's behavior on
              global system properties.  The work on software engineering investigates ways
              to utilize aspects, patterns, and tools in composing middleware for embedded
              systems. The long- range goal is that application code can be auto-generated in
              a fine-grained manner so that it does not contain overly general or unnecessary
              functionality.
QoS mechanisms are being developed to address various issues.
              For example, computer security encompasses many concepts (e.g.,
              confidentiality, integrity, authorization) each of which can be provided at
              multiple levels or strengths of service. Likewise, many fault tolerance
              mechanisms exist. This project extends the understanding of how multiple
              mechanisms from multiple QoS properties (e.g., security, fault tolerance,
              real-time behavior) can be composed.
The impact of this research, if
              successful, is broad.  First, it will enable embedded systems applications to
              be more easily programmed, more robust, and more easily verified. The
              multi-property QoS analysis and mechanisms from this project will be
              transitioned through integration into the GridStat research effort, led by the
              PI under NIST's Critical Infrastructure Protection research program. GridStat
              is middleware that must deliver status information to the power grid.
              Exploiting multiple QoS, properties, namely security, timeliness, and fault
              tolerance, can support in better control and monitoring of the electric power
              grid, a critical (and vulnerable) infrastructure.


