Title       : Externally Linear Low-Power Analog Signal Processing Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a0209109

Award Number: 0209109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yannis Tsividis tsividis@ee.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
0209109
Columbia U
Yannis Tsividis
This research explores the
              possibilities of performing linear analog signal processing using systems which
              are internally nonlinear. The context is fully integrated systems, fabricated
              on a single silicon chip, containing a digital signal processor or a computer
              plus an analog signal processor; the latter is often a necessary part of the
              interface to the physical world. Conventional linear techniques for
              implementing analog processors often result in very large energy consumption,
              which rules them out in many practical cases. We are investigating the use of
              internally nonlinear processors to bypass those  limitations. The applications
              of this work extend from wireless communications and computer hardware to
              consumer products to biomedical intrumentation.

The use of input-output
              linear signal processors which are permitted to be internally nonlinear allows
              the internal signals to have, for a large input signal range, a magnitude well
              above that of noise and interference, while at the same time remaining safely
              below overload levels. The result is an adequate signal-to-noise ratio over the
              entire input range, without requiring large power dissipation and chip area. A
              number of other related ideas are being investigated as well.  One is the use
              of dynamic biasing, in which the bias levels of dynamical analog circuits, such
              as filters,  are dynamically varied depending on the signal level; the other is
              the use of multiple signal processors, each being placed dynamically in the
              path of the signal as required. Since output disturbances would normally occur
              when the internal parameters of a dynamical system are varied, a key
              consideration in this research is how to eliminate such disturbances or prevent
              them from occurring.  



