Title       : Chemical Applications of Vibrational Circular Dichroism Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a0209957

Award Number: 0209957
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Stephens pstephen@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Philip J. Stephens of the University of Southern California is funded for
              his research on chemical applications of vibrational circular dichroism
              spectroscopy by a grant in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry
              Division. Dr. Stephens will  develop instrumental and theoretical methods for
              the measurement and prediction of the vibrational circular dichroism (VCD)
              spectra of chiral molecules and will apply  VCD spectroscopy to the elucidation
              of the stereochemistries of chiral molecules.  A dual-modulation methodology
              will be implemented for the reduction of polarization artefacts and the
              enhancement of the sensitivity of VCD instrumentation.  The ab initio DFT/GIAO
              methodology for predicting vibrational rotational strengths will be improved by
              inclusion of anharmonicity and solvent effects.  Applications will focus on the
              
determination of absolute configuration and conformational
              analysis.

Chiral molecules exist in two forms - enantiomers - which are
              mirror images.  The different biochemical behavior of enantiomers of a
              pharmaceutical molecule is leading to increasing development of single
              enantiomer, chiral drugs.  Methods for efficiently characterizing the
              structures of chiral molecules are therefore of increasing importance.  Dr.
              Stephens will develop the methodology of vibrational circular dichroism (VCD)
              spectroscopy, a technique for studying chiral molecules.  New methods will be
              developed for measuring and predicting VCD spectra with much greater accuracy
              than heretofore possible, which in turn will greatly enhance the application of
              VCD spectrosopy to the structural characterization of chiral molecules,
              including chiral drugs.  Graduate students and postdoctoral associates will be
              trained in these techniques.

