Title       : Boundary Layer Effects on Atmospheric Fronts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0209288

Award Number: 0209288
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66473              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger T. Williams rtwillia@nps.navy.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Naval Postgraduate School
	      Code 09
	      Monterey, CA  93943    408/656-2099

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the goals of the U. S. Weather Research Program is to improve the
              prediction of heavy precipitation events that are often associated with frontal
              systems.  The objective of this research is to improve understanding of the
              influence of the planetary boundary layer (PBL) on atmospheric fronts. 
              Extensive research has been devoted to frontal dynamics and the influence of
              the underlying topography on them.  However, the effect of the boundary layer
              on the development and modification of fronts as they move over various
              surfaces is not well understood.  

The goal of the current proposal is to
              improve understanding of the influence of the planetary boundary layer on
              atmospheric fronts.  In his study, the Principal Investigator (PI) will utilize
              numerical models and data from three completed field programs.  The PI lists
              four research thrusts, which are to investigate the role of the boundary layer
              (marine and land, including topography) on:

1. the evolution of fronts over
              topography;
2. the development of marine fronts;
3. the evolution of fronts
              that travel from the ocean to a coastal mountain range;
4. the evolution of
              unbalanced fronts.

This study will enhance understanding of frontal
              development and variation that are crucial in mid-latitude weather prediction. 
              If the research is successful, results could positively impact the forecasting
              of frontal related weather (e.g. precipitation) through better numerical
              forecasts and better conceptual models.

