Title       : Improving the Stability of Molybdenum Carbide Catalysts for Fuel Reforming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0209372

Award Number: 0209372
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209872             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Thomson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the proposed research is to identify and quantify the
              conditions that lead to carbide oxidation and to investigate the use of
              promoters and promoted supports to improve the stability of these catalysts.
              Because of its widespread use in other applications, the project will focus
              only on molybdenum carbide catalysts. Since it is likely that catalyst
              stability is highly dependent on redox chemistry, the first stage of the
              proposed research will focus on determining the effects of reactant/product
              compositions on the oxidation kinetics of bulk molybdenum carbide catalysts
              synthesized by various methods to produce relatively high surface areas per
              unit mass. Since excess synthesis carbon can lead to subsequent coking
              problems, the catalyst synthesis protocol will be carried out so that excess
              carbon can be controlled or eliminated. The methodology will consist of dynamic
              x-ray diffraction and TGA/MS experiments (at reforming conditions), combined
              with appropriate catalyst characterization techniques (FTIR, XPS, SEM/TEM). In
              the second stage of the proposed work, the PI will investigate methods to
              increase the range of catalyst stability through the use of supported
              molybdenum carbide catalysts, promoted with an in oxygen buffer (curia).
              Parameters to be investigated in this phase of the project will include the
              characteristics of the support (surface area, acidity), the catalyst synthesis
              methodology and the catalyst/promoter loading. This project has the potential
              to provide a more efficient route for making hydrogen for fuel cells.
