Title       : CRC: Atom and Group Transfer Reactions: A Combined Synthetic, Structural,
               Theoretical, Kinetic, and Solution Calorimetry Investigation.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0209977

Award Number: 0209977
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $660000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher C. Cummins ccummins@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl Hoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elena V. Rybak-Akimova  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1991      Chemistry Projects
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Christopher C. Cummins of MIT, Carl Hoff of the University of Miami and Elena V.
              Rybak-Akimova of Tufts University are supported by the Division of Chemistry
              and  the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and
              Physical Sciences Directorate for their interdisciplinary collaboration aimed
              at obtaining a complete mechanistic description of several atom and group
              transfer reactions. These model reactions are rapid and quantitative, making
              them amenable to study by stopped-flow kinetics and solution calorimetry. The
              controlled transfer of a single atom (oxygen, sulfur, phosphorus, nitrogen) or
              a small group such as NCN offers great possibilities for environmentally benign
              synthesis of commodity chemicals, pharmaceuticals, plastics additives and other
              specialty chemicals. This focused study of this important class of reactions
              should provide increased understanding of the driving force and kinetic
              barriers to atom transfer reactions as well as how to incorporate this
              knowledge into design of new catalytic systems. 

Collaborative Research in
              Chemistry (CRC) awards are given to interdisciplinary teams of scientists
              working on problems of broad chemical interest. The emphasis in these awards is
              on new collaborative modes of research and training.

