Title       : Theoretical Studies of Structure and Reactions of Transition Metal Atoms, Ions,
               Complexes and Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0209660

Award Number: 0209660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keiji Morokuma morokuma@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Djamaladdin G. Musaev  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,7202,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Keiji Morukuma of Emory University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to study the structure and reactions of
              transition metal clusters and complexes using ab initio, density functional,
              and ONIOM (hybrid molecular orbital plus molecular orbital or molecular
              mechanics) methods.  The ONIOM method, which allows inclusion of complex real
              ligands into computations, will be developed and calibrated for large
              transition metal complexes.  As well, the ONIOM-PCM (polarized continuum model)
              method will be tested and employed to study organometallic reactions in
              solutions.  Close contact with experimental chemists will be maintained, while
              experimentally relevant problems are explored.  Gas phase reactions of
              dihydrogen, alkynes, and alkenes with bare transition metal clusters and C-C,
              C-H and molecular nitrogen bond activation, along with skeletal rearrangement,
              on trinuclear ruthenium complexes will be studied, with the goal of examining
              metal clusters that can catalyze reactions not possible on a single transition
              metal center.  As well, the mechanisms of several important reactions in
              organometallic chemistry will be elucidated, encompassing a wide variety of
              reactions of mononuclear transition metal complexes and full homogeneous
              catalytic cycles including (a) olefin copolymerization, (b) element-element
              addition to unsaturated hydrocarbons, (c) utilization of metal-ligand multiple
              bonds, (d) transition metal catalyzed cycloisomerizations, (e) reaction of
              allylic compounds with formic acid or metal-hydride, and olefin metathesis. The
              knowledge of structure, spectroscopic properties, and energies of reaction
              intermediates and transition states that will be gained from this research is
              expected to promote fundamental understanding as well as aid logical design of
              new catalysts for better control of complicated chemical reactions.  

This
              computational research project complements efforts in experimental chemistry,
              and is expected to promote the fundamental understanding of complex chemical
              reactions.  Although many industrial catalytic processes have been developed in
              the past, the chemical industry is trying hard to switch to catalysts using
              clean homogeneous processes.  Designing efficient catalysts is one of the areas
              where computational chemistry can make a substantial impact in the chemical
              industry.
