Title       : Iterative methods for Non-Hermitian Problems and Related Matrix Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0209437

Award Number: 0209437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75965              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan S. Edelman EDELMAN@MATH.MIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marko Huhtanen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Edelman 
0209437
     The investigator, Marko Huhtanen, studies iterative
              methods and develops related matrix analysis for solving large-scale problems
              in linear algebra. The emphasis is on problems involving non-Hermitian
              matrices. Recently he has extended optimal methods for Hermitian matrices to
              problems with normal matrices. This gave rise to two fundamentally different
              families of algorithms. One is based on a direct extension of the classical
              Hermitian Lanczos algorithm and the other on using real analytic techniques.
              These methods can be employed, e.g., in solving linear systems and finding
              eigenvalues, as well as in multivariate least squares approximation problems
              and interpolation. Moreover, he has introduced a classification of normal
              matrices to measure complexity of the algorithms. In light of these methods the
              investigator aims at finding ways to extend these solution techniques to
              nonnormal problems. The matrix analytic part of the study deals with, e.g.,
              matrix nearness problems and classes of matrices with which matrix-vector
              products can be performed inexpensively, typically with the FFT techniques.
              

     The motivation behind the project is to increase the speed of
              computations for solving real world problems. Modeling problems of science and
              engineering realistically leads invariably to large scale problems. Then the
              number of unknowns to be solved can be millions. To solve problems of this size
              within a reasonable time limit calls for new algorithms and solution
              techniques. A concrete example can be given with signal processing: a faster
              algorithm means faster signal processing and the fast Fourier transformation
              has revolutionized this particular field of engineering. The investigator
              studies methods at the most fundamental level of numerical analysis because
              linear systems need to be solved  practically in every problem one can imagine.
              Consequently, the impact of the study can be very large. In addition to
              inventing fast solution methods, in this project mathematical tools are
              developed that are of interest from a pure matrix analytic point of view.


