Title       : US-Jordan Cooperative Research: Studies of Large and Angle Anomalies in
               Pion-Nucleus and Alpha-Nucleus Scattering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0209583

Award Number: 0209583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Bary Malik fbmalik@physics.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5988,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0209583
Malik

Description: 
This award is for support of a joint research
              project by Dr. F. Bary Malik, Department of Physics, Southern Illinois
              University, Carbondale, Illinois and Drs. Mahmoud Hasan and Zuhair Shehadeh,
              both of the Physics Department at the Applied Science University, Amman,
              Jordan.  Many large angle elastic scattering pion-nucleus data have remained
              unexplained for decades.  Preliminary calculations done using Klein-Gordon
              equation (KG) indicate that these data could probably be explained provided one
              uses KG, rather than Schrodinger equation.  The investigators will attempt to
              analyze many of these unexplained anomalous data using full KG equation.  To
              facilitate such analyses, they propose to determine some of these potentials
              using an inverse scattering theory at a fixed energy developed by Shehadeh,
              Malik and others for cases where phase shift analyses are available.  A
              detailed study of the solution of the KG equation in the presence of an
              external Coulomb potential will also be done.  Additionally the underlying
              cause for the difference in p +- cross section and some inelastic scattering
              cross sections will be investigated.  Concurrent to this investigation actual
              and virtual -excitation possibilities will be investigated.   The inverse
              scattering theory at a fixed energy will also be applied to determine some
              alpha-nucleus potentials, which will then be used to analyze relevant data.
              

Scope:
This project will bring two senior and well-established scientists
              and a young scientist (Shehadeh) to collaborate on the problem of large angle
              anomalies of pion-nucleous and alpha-nucleus scattering.  Each of these
              investigators have special expertise and analytical skill, thus the
              collaboration is likely to be beneficial for the scientific research and to the
              United States and to Jordan.

