Title       : EHS: Composable Execution Environments: A Foundation for Building Robust
               Embedded Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0209185

Award Number: 0209185
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310431             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay Lepreau lepreau@cs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Regehr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Lepreau, Jay
CCR-0209185 
"Composable Execution Environments:   A Foundation
              for Building Robust Embedded Systems"
				   
Real-time and embedded systems
              are built using a wide variety of "execution models"---collections of rules for
              sequencing actions and mediating access to shared resources.  In general,
              systems developed using restricted execution models are easier to understand,
              debug, and test than are systems developed using powerful models.  They are
              also more efficient and permit stronger properties to be proven about
              them
with less effort, such as non-violation of timing constraints and freedom
              from deadlock, livelock, or race conditions.

The instantiation of an
              execution model with a specific set of tasks and their associated timing and
              resource sharing requirements is called an "execution environment."  The
              central premise of this project is that it is feasible and useful to structure
              embedded systems as hierarchical compositions of execution environments.  If
              successful, this research will result in a new way to develop embedded systems
              software that permits developers to make use of powerful compositions of
              execution environments without sacrificing the software engineering benefits of
              individual, more restricted environments.

To accomplish this, the
              researchers must solve a number of research problems.  First, compositions of
              execution environments must be analyzed and mapped to threads and schedulers in
              such a way that no
real-time deadlines or other constraints of the individual
              environments are violated.  This will be accomplished by leveraging the
              researchers' experience with hierarchical real-time scheduling,
              with
constraint checking for component systems, and with flexible execution
              models in operating systems.  Second, compositions of execution environments
              must not suffer from undue or unexpected degrees of inefficiency and
              unpredictability. The researchers will accomplish this by leveraging their
              experience in developing and optimizing component-based operating systems.

