Title       : CRC: Next Generation Aromatics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0209857

Award Number: 0209857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory H. Robinson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Schleyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter R. Schreiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry F. Schaefer III  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1991      Chemistry Projects
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Gregory H. Robinson, Robert B. King, Henry F. Schaefer, III, Paul von Rague
              Schleyer and Peter R. Schreiner of The University of Georgia are supported by
              the Division of Chemistry and  the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of
              the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate for their interdisciplinary
              collaboration aimed at significantly advancing our understanding of the
              concepts of aromaticity and metalloaromaticity. Aromatic compounds have
              electronic structures containing "closed circuits of mobile electrons" that
              lead to enhanced stabilities.  Their geometries tend to be more regular and the
              magnetic as well as spectroscopic properties have special characteristics. To
              study next generation aromatic species, these researchers will explore the
              possibilities of extending the aromatic M2(GaR)3 chemistry to other elements.
              These compounds of lead, tin, thallium and indium, including the initial
              target, Li2(InH)3, will be studied from both synthetic, and theoretical
              perspectives. A prominent goal will be the synthesis of a truly metallic 6
              pi-electron analog of benzene-a Ga6 6- moiety. The role of aromaticity in
              superconductivity, in transition metal derivatives, on curved surfaces such as
              Mobius aromatics and in new cyclization reactions will also be studied.
              Finally, this investigation will explore theoretical  methods for evaluating
              aromaticity in molecular species. 

Collaborative Research in Chemistry (CRC)
              awards are given to interdisciplinary teams of scientists working on problems
              of broad chemical interest. The emphasis in these awards is on new
              collaborative modes of research and training.

