Title       : Towards Certification by Verification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0209237

Award Number: 0209237
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zohar Manna zm@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Certification of medical device software is a major concern for the Food and
              Drug Administration: it is costly and time-consuming for the companies
              involved, and there is a growing suspicion that the current certification
              requirements are becoming more and more inadequate with increasing system
              complexity. At present certification of medical device software is
              process-oriented. There is a strong desire to move to a more product-oriented
              approach, but it is as yet unclear what methods/evidence should be required.
              The goal of this research is to show that existing formal methods can be
              adapted and augmented such that they can be used effectively in the
              certification process.  The research to achieve this consists of the following
              three components:

Automatic Generation of User Models:
For many medical
              devices operability is an important concern, but it is not explicitly designed
              for. Automatic generation of user models (that is, what does the user need to
              know about the system to be able to operate it) allows evaluation of
              operability in early stages of the design and guarantees a correct
              correspondence between user model and machine model.  The project is
              formalizing user model requirements and developing methods to construct these
              models automatically from the machine model.

Run-time Verification:
              
Run-time verification can complement design-time verification when the system
              is too complex to be realistically verified in full. Run-time analysis
              techniques can also be used for performance modeling and improvement of the
              system based on run-time characteristics.  The project investigates the
              usefulness of run-time analysis in the certification process, both in the
              specification phase
(to stress test the model generated from the
              specification), and in actual operation (to establish audit trails and catch
              unexpected behaviors).  The research is directed at the development of adequate
              specification languages and logics for run-time verification, and efficient
              data structures for program instrumentation.

Case study:  
At the request
              of the FDA, the Walter Reed Army Institute of Research (WRAIR) has made
              available a requirements document for a medium-sized medical device. It is the
              intent to use this system as a basis to study the feasibility of
              product-oriented certification.  The modeling
of this device has already
              started and some preliminary analyses have been performed. The goal is to use
              formal methods to produce a fulll set of proof documents and evaluate, in
              cooperation with the FDA, whether these documents would be considered adequate
              evidence for certification.
