Title       : LATTICED: An Algebra for Intrusion Correlation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0209046

Award Number: 0209046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert Schorr schorr@isi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ted Faber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Tung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 2802      Trusted Computing
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1667,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Intrusion detection (ID) is an imperfect science.  With state-of-the-art
              techniques, simple attacks with unambiguous signatures can be detected fairly
              easily, but trying to diagnose more complex attacks often results in a flurry
              of false positives and undetected attacks.

This situation would be improved
              if ID systems could work together, so that the weaknesses of one would be
              covered by the strengths of another.  However, most of the recent work in
              combining ID results has focused on the protocol and architecture of the
              systems.  Even a process as simple as corroboration--attempting to agree on a
              single attack diagnosis--is not assured with only protocol and architecture. 
              Without an underlying body of theory, efforts to combine the results of
              multiple ID systems
will still fail.

The LATTICE plan is to define a
              consistent and comprehensive way to combine the results of multiple ID systems.
               The research will employ a graph theory approach to representing the
              conclusions of individual ID systems.  Operators can be defined to combine the
              graph representations of ID diagnoses in rigorous ways that can be comprehended
              and analyzed.  The results generated by these methods can be understood as the
              conclusions of the multiple systems, taken as a whole.  The outcome of this
              approach is a rigorous unifying of the abilities and strengths of all the
              involved ID systems.


