Title       : Collaborative Proposal: A Coalgebraic Framework for Development and Composition
               of Hybrid Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0209004

Award Number: 0209004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dusko Pavlovic pavlovic@kestrel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas R. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kestrel Institute
	      3260 Hillview Avenue
	      Palo Alto, CA  943041216    650/493-6871

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Mislove & Pavlovic
CCR-0208743--0209004

This project focuses on mathematical
              foundations and design methodologies for embedded hybrid systems (EHS). The
              essential feature of such systems is that software components interact not only
              with each other, but also with the physical world, through sensors and
              actuators. The discrete dynamics of computation thus adds up with the
              continuous dynamics of physical systems. Hybrid systems are an attempt to
              capture this double dynamism in a unified framework. To limit the interference
              of the formidable complexities of dynamical systems of both types, the
              continuous trajectories are usually encapsulated into states, at the static
              points of the discrete computational paths. The methods of continuous
              mathematics are then simply combined with the methods of discrete mathematics
              to analyze such combined systems.

The starting point of the planned research
              is a belief that the burgeoning field of coalgebra provides methods and
              techniques that will allow uniform representation and implementation methods
              for continuous and discrete objects and aspects. While algebraic methods allow
              specifying and programming of finite objects and inductive structures, such as
              expressions or well-founded trees, coalgebraic methods allow specifying and
              programming infinite objects, as coinductive structures: they include automata
              and various state machines on the one hand, as well as iterative function
              systems, analytic functions and operators, and real numbers on the other
              hand.

In a real sense, coinduction permeates analysis just like
              induction
permeates arithmetic. The difference is that the latter has been
              recognized as a fundamental logical principle a long time ago, whereas the the
              former has been recognized only recently, although it has appeared implicitly
              for some time (e.g. in most existence-of-the-solutions theorems, although it
              has been recognized as backwards induction in game theory).

The task is now
              to make explicit and systematize the use of coinductive and coalgebraic
              methods, and to apply them in analysis and design of embedded hybrid systems.

