Title       : Testing Based on Hybrid System Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0209024

Award Number: 0209024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Insup Lee lee@central.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Oleg Sokolsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1667,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Lee, Insup
CCR-0209024

Many embedded systems are part of safety-critical
              applications, e.g.,
avionics systems, manufacturing, automotive controllers,
              and medical
devices.  The safety-critical nature of embedded applications
              requires a higher
level of robustness and reliability than is called for in
              conventional
software systems development.  In the attempt to insure a higher
              level of
confidence in the design and implementation, current practice
              merely
increases the duration, frequency, scope, etc. of
              traditional
verification practices.  The net result is substantially
              higher
development costs and longer design cycles, leading to a design
              cycle
where a verification bottleneck is impacting overall
              operational
effectiveness, efficiency and safety.  

This project seeks to
              mitigate the verification bottleneck by identifying
appropriate specification
              formalisms, and using those formalisms as a
basis to develop fully automated
              techniques for verifying
implementations using testing.  An important
              distinguishing 
characteristic of the embedded applications listed earlier is
              the 
hybrid (discrete and continuous)nature of behaviors. The continuous
              
components of embedded systems, and the large state
spaces of all
              industrially relevant systems, make verification
techniques based on
              exhaustive exploration of the state space
intractable.  Therefore, it is
              necessary to approach the verification
problem with techniques based on
              sampling, i.e., testing.  This requires 
abstracting the original system state
              space to
create a condensed state space that can be explored to
              determine
valuable points to sample.  Methods of abstraction, methods
              for
selecting test points, and methods for evaluating the relative merit
of
              one set of test points vs. another are all issues addressed by this
work. The
              research also explores the use of traditional
notions of test coverage applied
              to formal specifications of hybrid
systems.  Test suites are generated using
              the counterexample or
witness generation techniques of model checkers as well
              as random path
generations.

The practical issues of demonstrating the
              working techniques, and the
efficacy of these techniques when applied to
              realistic systems, are
addressed through the implementation of tools that
              automate all
steps of the process: abstraction, test selection, test
              derivation,
test application to concrete implementations, and the evaluation
              of
test results.  Tools are developed on top of the existing
CHARON framework
              for creating hybrid system models.
Case-study work based on real system
              specifications and
benefit from interaction with practicing engineers working
              for Honeywell, a
leader in the development of advanced avionics systems.  One
              issue is how
to integrate the techniques into development processes that
              conform 
to the DO-178B avionics certification process.
Among the broader
              impacts that are anticipated from this work are (1)
an increase in awareness
              of and actual use of formal methods by
practicing developers, and (2) an
              acceleration of the safety-critical
embedded system development process that
              will enable the creation of
safer, more reliable systems with shorter
              development cycle times.

