Title       : Responsive Polymer Multilayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a0209439

Award Number: 0209439
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Svetlana A. Sukhishvili ssukhish@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on understanding the principles of building responsive
              polymeric materials by means of self-assembly of polymers at surfaces.  
              Applications of the multilayering technique to produce new materials for
              controlled delivery of chemicals have been recently proposed, yet there is
              presently no adequate understanding of the response properties of multilayered
              films.  Multilayers will be built using various copolymers that contain centers
              for both electrostatic and hydrogen bonding; and the fraction of monomer units
              within a copolymer will be systematically varied to control pH/ionic strength
              at which the films delaminate or swell.  Novel modifications of the polymers
              will produce non-delaminating films with targeted response properties.  The
              film growth and response properties will be determined by in situ ATR-FTIR
              spectroscopy, in situ ellipsometry in phase-modulated mode, and permeability
              ionizations and degree of hydrogen-bonding among the layered molecules.  The
              second will enable measurements of the swelling of the films in different
              environmental measurements.  The question of how they are translated into
              changes in film density and stability will be addressed.  Finally, the
              knowledge of interlayer interactions, swelling and permeability of the films
              will be used to build polymeric containers with rationally designed response of
              the membrane.

This research might enable the design of novel layered polymer
              films and capsules with targeted response characteristics.  The potential
              applications of these materials include temporary protection layers, responsive
              coatings and controlled delivery of chemicals, such as pesticides, fragrances
              or drugs.

