Title       : Coevolution of Marine Sponges and Symbiotic Cyanobacteria and Eubacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0209329

Award Number: 0209329
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179066             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Thacker thacker@uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

DEB-0209329


Dr. Robert W. Thacker of the University of Alabama
              at Birmingham has been awarded a grant to investigate evolutionary
              relationships between marine sponges in the family Dysideidae and the microbial
              symbionts [cyanobacteria ("blue-green algae")] and other bacteria] that live
              inside these sponges.  Many species in the Family Dysideidae produce chemical
              compounds with anti-viral and anti-cancer properties.  Although the porous
              bodies of these marine sponges can host diverse microbial communities, the role
              of microbial symbionts in the production of pharmaceutically active compounds
              remains unclear.  A preliminary study by Dr. Thacker suggests that as sponges
              have evolved and split into distinct species, their microbial communities have
              evolved in tandem and are specific to each species of sponge.  This study will
              examine several species of Dysidea and related genera from the Western Pacific,
              Caribbean, and Mediterranean regions.  Sponge DNA sequences and microbial DNA
              sequences will be compared to test the hypothesis that sponges and their
              symbionts share parallel evolutionary histories.  This study will also
              investigate the placement of the Family Dysideidae into either Order
              Dendroceratida or Order Dictyoceratida by comparing DNA sequences among members
              of the Dysideidae and selected sponges from the two orders.  In addition, this
              study will test whether the production of pharmaceutically active compounds is
              associated with the presence or absence of specific symbionts. 
This research
              project will provide a rare, direct comparison of the evolutionary histories of
              sponges and their symbionts, with an immediate impact on the fields of sponge
              taxonomy, drug discovery, and host-symbiont coevolution.  The project will also
              provide a greater understanding of the evolutionary histories of sponges and
              their symbionts, which will accelerate and enrich the search for new anti-viral
              and anti-cancer drugs.  Increased knowledge of these host-microbe interactions
              will directly impact our understanding of all types of animal-microbe
              interactions, including those involving humans.

