Title       : SGER: Discovery of Substrates and Inhibitors of the Anthrax Lethal Factor using
               Peptide Libraries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0209454

Award Number: 0209454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lewis C. Cantley cantley@helix.mgh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin Turk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beth Israel Deaconess Med
	      330 Brookline Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02215    617/667-0808

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              `Inhalational anthrax is nearly always fatal unless antibiotic treatment begins
              early in the course of the disease.  There is therefore an urgent need for
              novel agents to treat the disease in the event of further terrorist use of
              anthrax.  Fatality from anthrax is attributable to a toxin produced by the
              bacteria called lethal toxin.  Much attention has turned to the development of
              agents which target lethal toxin as an adjunct to antibiotic therapy.  The
              enzymatically active component of lethal toxin is a zinc-dependent
              metalloprotease called lethal factor (LF).  LF causes the activation and lysis
              of macrophages as a consequence of the specific cleavage of proteins in the
              cell cytosol.  Data on the cleavage site specificity of LF is at this point
              limited, and no specific inhibitors of LF have thus far been reported.  The
              substrate specificity of LF will be determined using recently developed peptide
              library methodology.  Data from peptide library screens will be used to prepare
              model substrates for monitoring LF activity both in vitro and in living cells. 
              Peptide analogous inhibitors based on the optimal cleavage motif will be
              prepared.  Improved inhibitors will be generated based on additional peptide
              library screens incorporating non-proteogenic "unnatural" amino acids, thus
              allowing a virtually unlimited source of chemical  diversity to be tapped in an
              unprecedented manner.  Such inhibitors can serve as lead compounds in the
              development of novel anthrax drugs.  The technologies developed will be
              generally applicable to the design of substrates and inhibitors for proteases
              essential for the pathogenesis of other infectious diseases.  



