Title       : Collaborative Research: Arabidopsis 2010: In Vivo Genomics: Visualizing G
               Protein Interactions in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0209694

Award Number: 0209694
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1316488            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah M. Assmann sma3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1684,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Heterotrimeric G proteins couple multiple and diverse signals (e.g. light,
              pathogens, hormones) recognized by receptors to downstream effectors in a
              cell-specific manner. In Arabidopsis, hypothesized G-protein involvement in
              multiple signal transduction and developmental processes can be assessed using
              the tools developed by this project. The gene set comprises 16 heptahelical
              membrane proteins (candidate G protein-coupled receptors), one canonical Ga
              subunit, one Gb, and two Gg subunits (of the heterotrimeric complex), and three
              'extralarge' Ga-related proteins (XLGs). The resources/tools that will be
              developed are: 1) GUS constructs allowing localization of expression for the
              gene set and; 2) constructs allowing visualization of physical interactions
              between members of the gene set in vivo in real time and with spatial
              dimensions using fluorescence energy transfer (FRET) between cyan fluorescent
              protein (CFP)-tagged and yellow fluorescent protein (YFP)-tagged proteins. The
              GUS constructs will be available at the conclusion of the first year of
              funding, and the YFP and CFP translational fusion constructs will be available
              at the conclusion of the second year of funding. 

Vector maps, images of
              expression levels and patterns, protocol updates, and instructions for
              obtaining material will be posted weekly at the following URL, which will be
              TAIR-linked: www.plantbiology.unc.edu/ Constructs will be available for order
              via the webpage. For each translational fusion, three stable transgenic lines
              will be deposited in the stock center following validation.

The significance
              of the proposed work in relation to the overall 2010 project objectives is
              twofold. Function of the members of the gene family that is the target of this
              project will be determined as follows. Expression patterns of the genes will be
              evaluated in plants.  The role the gene projects have in root cell
              proliferation and guard cell signaling will be evaluated, and novel small
              molecules that modulate plant G protein signaling pathways, as assessed by the
              FRET 'readout', will be identified.  Tools developed by the project will allow
              the community to perform direct in vivo tests of hypothesized G protein
              involvement in any signal transduction or developmental context. As insights
              are gained into use of plant cell in vivo FRET analysis for monitoring the
              interaction between G protein complexes and G protein-coupled receptors, this
              tool will be made available to other plant research groups for evaluation of in
              vivo protein:protein interactions in other systems. In addition, the YFP
              constructs and lines will be compatible with BRET analysis being developed by
              the von Arnheim/Johnson 2010 project (Univ. Tennessee).

The broader impact
              of the proposed research includes pre- and postdoctoral training by direct
              mentorship of the two Principal investigators, and a hands-on tutorial on FRET
              measurements during a G protein workshop organized by the PIs. The workshop
              will be advertised in particular at small liberal arts colleges and minority
              institutions and undergraduate students will be eligible to apply for travel
              grants.

