Title       : NER: Terahertz Detection of Electron Spin Precession
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0209279

Award Number: 0209279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: C. Denise Caldwell                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven T. Cundiff cundiffs@jila.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1248      PHYSICS-OTHER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1676,1767,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale Science and Engineering
              Initiative, Program Solicitation NSF 01-157, in the NER category.  The overall
              effort focuses on direct detection of electron spin dynamics by sensing the
              emission of terahertz radiation mediated by the magnetic dipole of a population
              of electrons precessing in an applied magnetic field.  The goal of this initial
              exploratory project is to determine if measurable terahertz radiation is
              produced from an optically excited population of spin-oriented electrons in
              n-doped GaAs and possibly semimagnetics such a CdMnTe.  A superconducting
              split-coil magnet will be used to apply fields upto 6.5 Tesla.  Detection of
              the radiated intensity of the terahertz will be done by using a liquid helium
              cooled bolometer to avoid the alignment difficulties presented by electrooptic
              or photoconductive detection.  The population of spin-oriented electrons will
              be generated by optical excitation with circularly-polarized femtosecond
              pulses.  To obtain populations that are sufficient large to generate a
              detectable signal, either amplified pulses, or "spin amplification" by
              excitation that is resonant with the spin precession will be used. 

Based on
              measurement of the intensity alone, the optimum configuration can be determined
              and saturation characteristics studied. These results will complement prior
              studies made using Faraday rotation and provide the background for using more
              sophisticated detection of the terahertz radiation to measure the emitted
              electric field, which reflects the spin dynamics. This will provide a direct
              probe of the electron spin dynamics without the ambiguities present in the
              currently used indirect optical probes such as Faraday or Kerr rotation. Such a
              direct probe will answer important basic questions about spin dynamics for
              larger spin densities than can be probed with current techniques.  The results
              will provide important fundamental knowledge necessary for the development of
              nanotechnology devices based on the manipulation of electron spins.  In
              addition, they could provide the basis for a source of terahertz radiation
              based on advances in spin manipulation using nanotechnology.


