Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: A Transposon-Based System for Site-Specific Recombination in
               Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0209818

Award Number: 0209818
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $911106             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Peterson thomasp@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel F. Voytas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1684,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                      The goal of this project is to develop a method for efficient
              homology-dependent site-specific recombination (SSR) in Arabidopsis.  The
              approach used is based on the recombination-inducing properties of transposable
              elements, coupled with alternative methods of delivering recombination
              substrates to plant cells.  In previous research, the PI and co-PI have shown
              that DNA and RNA transposable elements can stimulate recombination.  First,
              excision of maize Ac/Ds DNA transposons greatly induces homologous
              recombination in plants, including Arabidopsis.  Second, retrotransposons can
              generate high levels of cDNA that recombine readily with genomic sequences. 
              This project will develop two-component (recipient and donor) transgene
              constructs that contain partially-overlapping visible and selectable marker
              gene fragments.  The recipient component contains, in addition, a maize Ds
              element inserted between the marker genes. The recipient construct is
              integrated into the Arabidopsis genome; upon expression of Ac/Ds transposase,
              Ds excision generates a recombination hotspot in the recipient construct. The
              donor construct sequences are delivered into the plant cells via several
              alternative methods, including  Agrobacterium T-DNA transformation, particle
              bombardment, ectopic chromosomal position, and retrotransposon-generated cDNA. 
              Recombination of recipient and donor sequences can be detected in somatic cells
              by the visible marker, and events transmitted to progeny can be genetically
              selected.  Heritable recombination events will be characterized by molecular
              and genetic analysis to gain a greater understanding of SSR mechanisms in plant
              cells. Project results will be available at the following web site:
              <http://www.public.iastate.edu/~voytas/rec_arab.html>.  All reagents (seeds of
              transformed lines, plasmid vectors) will be made available upon
              request.

Homology-dependent recombination is a powerful tool for genetic
              modification in many organisms; however, methods for routine SSR are not yet
              available for higher plants.  An explicit goal of the Arabidopsis 2010 project
              is the development of methods for directed mutations and SSR.  Successful
              completion of this project will provide an important new means for making
              precise changes in plant genomes for both fundamental research and practical
              applications.

