Title       : Numerical Simulation of Complex Incompressible Viscous Flow in Time Varying
               Geometries: Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0209066

Award Number: 0209066
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368802             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roland Glowinski roland@math.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Dean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tsorng-Whay Pan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent progress by the investigators in the simulation of incompressible viscous
              flow modeled by the Navier-Stokes equations and their visco-elastic and
              visco-plastic generalizations in two and three dimensions has led to the
              proposed work in challenging three-dimensional problems. Specifically, the
              authors intend to study the direct simulation of pressure-driven particulate
              flow in three dimensional pipes and horizontal drilling wells, the fluid being
              either Newtonian or non-Newtonian with the number of particles ranging in the
              thousands. They will also study the direct numerical simulation of blood flow
              around three-leaflet prosthetic heart valves. These problems require
              methodological advances such as the numerical treatment of collisions, the
              motion of non-spherical objects in viscous fluids and the coupling of
              fictitious domain and Chimera type methods in order to improve the treatment of
              boundary layers. 

During the past six years, the investigators of this award
              have developed a methodology well suited to numerical simulation of flow in
              regions with moving boundaries. The resulting methodology has been successfully
              applied by the authors and other scientists and engineers to the solution of
              difficult problems from Sciences and Engineering. Among these problems are the
              direct simulation of sedimentation, fluidization and particle transport
              phenomena, which play an important role in various areas in Sciences and
              Engineering (Petroleum Engineering, Food Industry,...). The main goals of this
              project are to (1) improve the existing methodology so that it can address
              fluid/particle interaction for particles of relatively complicated shape, (2)
              develop realistic models and efficient methods for the computational treatment
              of the collisions taking place in fluid/particle interactions, (3) apply the
              resulting methodology to an important problem in cardio-vascular medicine
              namely, the simulation of blood flow/heart valve interaction and (4) simulate
              slurry transportation in horizontal pipelines and wells, an important issue in
              enhanced oil recovery. In the heart valve project, the goal is to use the
              simulation tool to design artificial heart valves generating much less thrombin
              (a natural blood thickener causing artery clotting) than the ones currently
              used, which require the patient to take blood thinning drugs which have in
              general health damaging side effects. The hope is that with an improved design
              the need for blood thinners will be substantially reduced if not eliminated.
              This part of project will be done in collaboration with cardio-vascular
              specialists (including heart surgeons) in the  USA and Europe. 
