Title       : Collaborative Research: Thermal Spray of Multiscale Polymer/Ceramic Composite
               Coatings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0209319

Award Number: 0209319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314643             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Cairncross cairncro@coe.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Knight  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1238,5209,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project will integrate experimental and modeling approaches to
              establish and understand the relationships between processing conditions,
              coating microstructure and coating properties thermal spray processing.
              Multi-institution, multidisciplinary collaborative research will expand the
              application of thermally sprayed polymer/ceramic composite coatings by
              incorporating nanoscopic to microscopic scales of reinforcement. The high
              velocity oxy-fuel [HVOF] thermal spray process will be used to deposit mixed,
              layered and functionally gradient matrix composite coatings. Thermally sprayed
              nanoscale silica reinforced Nylon 11 and polycarbonate matrix composites have
              previously exhibited significant improvements in scratch and wear resistance,
              modulus and barrier properties. Multiple scales of ceramic reinforcement should
              produce further improvements in properties, bridging the nano-to-conventional
              material interfaces, and providing fundamental understanding of the effect of
              the reinforcement size scale on matrix structure and composite
              properties.

Three graduate students will be cross-trained through research
              tasks in thermal spray processing, microstructural and mechanical
              characterization and transport phenomena modeling. Integration of the
              computational model of particle melting, impact, deformation and solidification
              with experimental process and microstructural characterization will guide
              development and optimization of the HVOF spraying process.
This research
              should stimulate new and improved applications nylon 11/silica composite
              materials as protective coatings, and for thermally sprayed composite
              protective coatings in general. Industry interest in thermally sprayed coatings
              is growing, as indicated, for example, by participation in technical
              programming on thermally sprayed polymers. Thermal spray technology is well
              established for metals, ceramics and cermets. The current project should
              support future commercialization of sprayed polymer/ceramic composites by
              characterizing the fundamental process/structure/ property relationships of
              these materials.

