Title       : Improving Sequence Proximity Search
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0209145

Award Number: 0209145
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185001             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Cenk Sahinalp cenk@eecs.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Piotr Indyk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Z. Meral Ozsoyoglu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Finding sequences similar to a given query sequence in a large data set
is a
              fundamental problem in many database applications including
computational
              genomics and proteomics, computational finance, audio, text
and multimedia
              image processing.  This proposal considers proximity search
problems for
              strings and sequences in such applications where existing
methods typically
              employ distance functions based on character edits only
(commonly unweighted
              edit distance) and modify off-the shelf index
structures to improve search
              efficiency.  However, in many applications
block edit operations such as
              translocations, deletions and copies, as well
as linear transformations on
              strings are as common and important
as character edits.

Unfortunately,
              computation of distance measures that allow block edits
are generally known to
              be NP-hard.  Thus the investigators propose to work
on practical methods for
              approximating the block edit distances and performing
approximate searches
              under such measures.  These measures are many times
not symmetric
              (transforming a long sequence to a short one may be
performed through a single
              deletion whereas transforming the short
sequence to the long one may require
              many copy operations) or do not
satisfy the triangular inequality (string
              space under edit operations is
fundamentally different from Euclidean space)
              and thus do not provide a metric.

However many of them can be proven to be
              almost-metrics, i.e.,
the symmetry and/or the triangular inequalities may be
              satisfied within
multiplicative constants. This property can be fundamental in
              sequence
proximity search as it seems possible that known distance based
              indexing
methods for metric spaces could be extended for use in
              almost-metric
spaces.  Thus a main component of the proposal is the
              investigation of
the limitations and extendibility of distance based indexes
              for
almost-metrics and other string/sequence measures which may
              be
non-symmetric or fail to satisfy the triangular inequality because
              they
allow block edits.

An alternative/complementary approach to distance
              based indexing is based
on approximate random mappings of the space of items
              to be searched to
Euclidean spaces. This general strategy has received
              considerable
attention in the context of vector spaces. The mappings used
              guarantee
(with high probability) to reduce the number of comparisons during
              search
from linear to poly-logarithmic, provided some error of approximation
              can
be tolerated in the answers obtained. This approach was later
              generalized
to sequence spaces through a mapping of sequences under block edit
              distance
to binary strings under Hamming distance. The error tolerance is
              not
very practical. Thus a second component of this proposal is to
              obtain
novel mappings of sequence spaces to Euclidean spaces within
              smaller
approximation errors. The goal is to generalize such mappings to
              both
character and block based edit distances, especially those which
              assign
weights to edit operations (that reflect the likeliness of
              that
particular edit).


