Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: Using Functional Genomics to Determine How and Why Plants
               Synthesize Diverse Triterpenoids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0209769

Award Number: 0209769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1692279            (Estimated)
Investigator: Seiichi P. Matsuda matsuda@ruf.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bonnie Bartel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1684,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This multidisciplinary collaborative research is aimed at determining how and
              why plants synthesize diverse triterpenoids.  This project will integrate
              reverse genetics in Arabidopsis, heterologous expression of cDNAs in yeast,
              spectroscopic and chromatographic structural determination, and gene expression
              analysis to elucidate the function of Arabidopsis triterpenoid biosynthetic
              genes and thereby triterpenoid biosynthetic pathways, control mechanisms, and
              biological function.  Three of the characterized triterpenoid biosynthetic
              enzymes convert a shared substrate to different compounds; other enzymes to be
              studied may similarly provide structural diversity, metabolize different
              substrates, or provide means to spatially or temporally control expression and
              thus product formation.  The effects of the mutations on plant growth,
              development, and triterpenoid composition will facilitate linking each
              triterpenoid biosynthetic gene with an enzyme of known catalytic activity and a
              specific biological role.  Genes to be studied include apparent oxidosqualene
              cyclases, farnesyl pyrophosphate synthases, squalene synthases, squalene
              epoxidases, and cycloeucalenol isomerase.  This work will provide a
              comprehensive accounting of triterpenoid skeletons synthesized by Arabidopsis,
              establish which compounds are derived from each gene product, and determine the
              spatial and temporal expression patterns of the various biosynthetic genes. 
              These experiments will not only elucidate the biological importance of
              triterpenoid diversity, facilitating future modifications for agricultural
              benefit, but will provide students with broad interdisciplinary training that
              bridges modern chemistry and biology.  The data from these studies will be
              publicly available on the project web site
              (http://www.bioc.rice.edu/~bartel/At_triterpenoids.html), and the knockout
              seeds will be deposited in the ABRC at Ohio State University for distribution
              to the community.


