Title       : CRC: Multi-dimensional Molecular Metals, Crystal Design, and Superconductivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0209934

Award Number: 0209934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $770000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Lee sl137@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Francis J. DiSalvo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dhandapani Venkataraman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1991      Chemistry Projects
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Stephen Lee and Francis J. DiSalvo of Cornell University and Dhandapani
              Venkataraman of the University of Massachusetts are supported by the Division
              of Chemistry and  the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate  for their interdisciplinary
              collaboration aimed developing crystal design strategies for molecular metals.
              They will study ways to control the transition from the insulating state to the
              metallic state in organic systems. Because the superconducting critical
              temperature, Tc, is highest in metals containing light elements, (ie., the
              carbon and oxygen in fullerides and copper oxides) this study will focus on a
              number of distinctly different multi-dimensional organic metals. Important
              multi-dimensional crystal design parameters, such as packing efficiencies,
              local dipole-dipole interactions, hydrophobic-hydrophilic interactions,
              hydrogen bonding and coordination bonding, will be delineated.  In these
              systems, which will include multidimensional pi coordinated molecular networks,
              pthalocyanines and inorganic clusters coupled to pi organics, effects of
              electronic structure on Tc- will be investigated, and connections made to the
              problem of hole and electron mobility in organic semiconductors.
              

Collaborative Research in Chemistry (CRC) awards are given to
              interdisciplinary teams of scientists working on problems of broad chemical
              interest. The emphasis in these awards is on new collaborative modes of
              research and training.

