Title       : FRG: X-Ray Scattering Studies of Structure and Dynamics of Polymer Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0209542

Award Number: 0209542
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sunil K. Sinha ssinha@physics.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a Focused Research Group award between the University of California in
              San Diego, Northern Illinois University, and Yale University.  Its aim is to
              carry out detailed structural and dynamical studies of polymer films, using the
              non-invasive proves of x-ray and neutron scattering at national synchrotron
              radiation and neutron scattering facilities, in order to achieve a better
              scientific understanding at the microscopic level of the static and dynamic
              behavior of macromolecules at solid/liquid interfaces and at free
              (liquid/vapor) surfaces in the fluid state and around the glass transition. 
              This scientific understanding is needed because at present there is a
              considerable divergence of results from experiments and also of theoretical
              views regarding the nature of the fluctuations at polymeric surfaces and of the
              glass transition in thin polymer films.  The roles of confinement (e.g. when
              the film thickness is comparable to the radius of gyration of the polymer
              chains) and of the polymer-substrate interactions need to be elucidated in more
              detail to achieve such an understanding.  The techniques to be brought to bear
              on these problems include x-ray and neutron reflectivity, diffuse x-ray
              scattering, small-angle neutron scattering and x-ray photon correlation
              spectroscopy.

The scientific interest driving this project stems from our
              present limited knowledge of how the conformation and mobility of polymer
              molecules are affected by confinement to a thin film and by interactions with
              the substrate and how these materials transform into the glassy state.  It's
              technological importance is related to the important role played by polymer
              films in industry and technology in the form of coatings, adhesives, filters
              for chemical separations, packaging materials, lithographic masks for
              microelectronic devices, etc.  Further, it will provide an opportunity for
              students and postdoctoral researchers at three different educational
              institutions to be trained in this important area of materials science and in
              the use of advanced research methods utilizing the nation's premier national
              facilities for research using synchrotron x-ray and neutron beams.

