Title       : Composing Data-Rich Embedded Systems the Easy Way
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0209122

Award Number: 0209122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207737             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henrik Nilsson henrik.nilsson@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arvind Krishnamurthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian M. Scassellati  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Composing Data-Rich Embedded Systems the Easy
              Way
-------------------------------------------------

Arvind Krishnamurthy
              and Henrik Nilsson
Department of Computer Science, Yale
              University


Embedded computing increasingly takes place in a sensor rich
              environment where
the acquisition of raw information is much easier than its
              interpretation. In
addition to building components to process this data,
              embedded systems
programmers must also arrange the communication among
              potentially hundreds of
components, distributing computation to the processing
              elements so as to
minimize communication costs and maximize responsiveness,
              and scheduling of
the processing elements to adapt to changing priorities and
              communication
patterns. These challenges must be addressed at the system level
              rather than
the processor level.

This project develops a framework for
              composing distributed, data-rich
embedded systems that automates many of the
              low-level process allocation and
scheduling tasks. It takes place against a
              backdrop of a "next generation"
humanoid robot currently being developed at
              Yale. The robot contains a
significant number of processors connected in a
              heterogeneous fashion. The
project addresses two fundamental research issues.
              The first is the use of
modern programming language techniques to address
              critical embedded system
concerns such as composability and dynamic
              configuration change. The second is
improving overall system performance by
              exploiting high level system knowledge
in the run-time system. The end result
              will be a design methodology that will
enable rapid and reliable construction
              of complex data-rich interactive
systems.

