Title       : NMR Studies of Dynamics and Structure of Penetrants and Polymers in High
               Permeability Membrane Materials and Barrier Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a0209614

Award Number: 0209614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $351000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan A. Jones ajones@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The dynamics and structure of high permeability polymeric systems will be
              studied to develop a molecular to morphological level of understanding of
              transport.  Transport in high permeability systems will be tailored through the
              use of structural modification of repeat units, blending, crystallization,
              sample preparation and sample history.  The tailoring procedures will be used
              to make the materials inhomogeneous to produce rapid diffusion through regions
              of poor packing, low density, and high free volume.  Disordered high
              permeability glasses will be produced by increasing the fraction of high free
              volume regions by for instance having bulky, slowly rearranging backbone units
              that are unable to pack well as the glass is formed.  In blends, high free
              volume regions will be produced by combining a low glass transition polymer
              with a high glass transition polymer.  The molecular level characteristics of
              the defect or high free volume regions will be determined and the longer length
              scale organization of the regions will be characterized.  Nuclear magnetic
              resonance (NMR) spectroscopy will be used as the primary experimental method
              since NMR is well established as a tool for the study of materials on the
              length scale of molecular structure.  Sorption sites of penetrants will be
              examined using xenon-129 NMR and the short range aspects of translational
              motion will be observed as exchange between sites in xenon-129 spectra.  Local
              segmental motion in high free volume regions in a blend will be studied using
              spin-lattice relaxation and solid state line shapes.  These experiments will
              look at properties on the nanometer scale while longer length scale,
              morphological properties on a scale of 100's nanometers to microns will be
              studied by pulse field gradient (PFG) diffusion experiments.  This method will
              be shown to detect structure associated with the longer range organization or
              connectivity of the nanometer sized defect regions.  We will attempt to show
              that these regions lead to rapid diffusion in high permeability systems and to
              the observation of the signature of tortuous and restricted diffusion in high
              permeability systems where the apparent diffusion constant slows as the time
              scale over which diffusion is observed increases in the PFG experiment. 
              Computer simulation will be used to aid in understanding such behavior and to
              clarify the role of sample preparation, sample history and aging in high
              permeability polymers.  PFG NMR experiments will be used to provide a unique
              view of aging and conditioning effects on the long length scale associated with
              the organization of defects.  NMR will be used to quantify the changes in side
              chain crystalline systems upon crystallization when the side chains lock the
              backbone into a rigid though poorly packed state.  The investigators will
              combine the results of the NMR experiments with information from traditional
              permeability and solubility experiments, mechanical experiments, scattering
              experiments and dielectric experiments through interaction with a network of
              collaborators.

These polymer systems are of fundamental interest but also
              serve as the basis for separation membranes, controlled delivery systems and
              solid electrolytes in batteries.  Membrane separation systems are an energy
              efficient form of separation of permanent gases such as nitrogen and oxygen. 
              Separation membranes can be used in environmental applications to collect
              organic gases while releasing water and carbon dioxide.  The side chain
              crystalline polymers are used as controlled delivery systems which will allow
              the passage of small molecules above the melting point of the side chain and
              will contain the small molecules above the melting point.  The low glass
              transition component in two of the blends to be studied is polyethylene oxide
              which acts as a solvent for lithium salts in battery applications.  The
              understanding developed from the proposed research will aid in improving such
              applications.

