Title       : Histogram-based Query Estimation for Datasets with different Modalities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0209112

Award Number: 0209112
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214892             (Estimated)
Investigator: Divyakant Agrawal agrawal@cs.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amr El Abbadi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Data summarization and estimation can serve as a useful tool for a diverse set
              of applications ranging from traditional database query optimization to OLAP
              applications and the exploration of large data sets.  During the course of this
              project, data estimation and summarization techniques will be developed for
              datasets with different modalities: point datasets, datasets containing objects
              with spatial extents, and stream datsets.  The approach is specifically based
              on the use of histograms in different contexts.  One of the main problems of
              applying estimation techniques in a database management system is the unknown
              characteristic of the distribution of the data that will populate a given DBMS.
               In fact, in order for such a technique to be useful, the estimation technique
              should be effective for different kinds of data distributions and query
              patterns.  This is because a DBMS is used for a variety of applications
              resulting in a wide spectrum of data that populates the database.  A new
              estimation technique called the golden estimator has been identified that
              employs cumulative probability distributions for creating histograms and
              captures the underlying data distribution. This technique can also be used to
              adapt to changes in the query patterns.  For objects with spatial extents, this
              project will lead to histograms derived from Euler's formulation for graphs.
              For stream datasets, a variety of approaches will be explored that are amenable
              to maintain histograms dynamically. The research results will be evaluated in
              the context of the Alexandria Digital Library and the Digital Campus projects
              at UCSB.




