Title       : RUI: Independent and Simultaneous Tailoring of Surface Topography and Chemical
               Structure for Controlled Wettability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a0209282

Award Number: 0209282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei Chen weichen@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9161,9178,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The funds requested in this proposal will support the PI's efforts in uniting
              productive research and excellence in teaching in the Chemistry Department at
              Mount Holyoke College.  Over the next three years, a research program that
              involves the independent and simultaneous tailoring of surface topography and
              chemical structure for controlled wettability will be established and several
              teaching initiatives that aim to promote polymer chemistry at the undergraduate
              level will be implemented.

The objectives of the proposed research are to
              nationally control wettability of surfaces by manipulating surface topography
              and surface chemical structure and to provide a fundamental understanding of
              the basis of wettability.  The research involves:  (1) the adsorption of
              charged polystyrene latex particles to oppositely charged poly(ethylene
              terephthalate) surfaces to form surfaces with different topographies/roughness,
              (2) the introduction of discrete functional groups to first smooth and then
              rough surfaces through organic transformations.  The two research stages
              combine to form a method for preparing robust stable surfaces of variable
              wettability.  The combination of surface topography and density, location and
              identity of surface-chemical functionality should, in principle, control
              wettability.  Holyoke College undergraduate students will be involved in all
              phases of this project, from latex particle adsorption, characterization o0f
              surface topography, organic chemistry transformations of surface functional
              groups, determination of surface composition, to measurement and interpretation
              of wettability.

The introduction of polymer chemistry to chemical education
              at Mount Holyoke College is also proposed in order to respond to the new demand
              of the rapidly changing nature of chemical sciences.  We need to get students
              excited about chemistry, and to reinforce the traditional disciplines of
              chemistry and show how they can be used.  Over the next three years, the PI's
              efforts in this area will be focused on the following initiatives:  mentoring
              undergraduates carrying out independent research in polymer surface chemistry,
              designing and teaching a polymer chemistry course, an integrated laboratory
              course, and a first-year honors tutorial on polymer chemistry, incorporating
              polymer chemistry into undergraduate introductory courses.
***

