Title       : NER: Microscopic Modeling of the Surfactant Mediated Reactive Assembly of
               Nanostructured Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0209915

Award Number: 0209915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanat K. Kumar   (Principal Investigator current)
              Evangelos Manias  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1676,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Microscopic Modeling of the Surfactant Mediated
Reactive Assembly of
              Nanostructured Materials


Sanat K. Kumar
Department of Materials Science
              and Engineering and

Department of Chemical Engineering, Pennsylvania
              State
Univ., University Park, PA.


Evangelos Manias
Department of
              Materials Science and Engineering
Pennsylvania State Univ.
University Park,
              PA.


Executive Summary


We propose to develop highly integrated
              multiscale simulation tools to model the surfactant-mediated synthesis of
              nanomaterials. The proposed research will focus on a prototypical example of
              this methodology, the synthesis of ordered arrays of metal nanodots. The
              development of the proposed multiscale simulation approach is essential for two
              reasons. First, these synthesis methods involve reactions and self-assembly
              which span a variety of length [and hence time] scales, from the molecular [A
              and fs] to the macroscopic [m and s]. Second, since current synthesis routes
              were developed by empirical methods, predictive strategies for creating
              materials with desired structures are missing. This is, perhaps, the biggest
              bottleneck to the broad-based use of these novel materials. As a first step
              towards providing a predictive understanding of these syntheses, in this NER we
              shall model molecules as catenated strings of structureless beads so as to
              examine (a) if multiscale methods can be developed to successfully span from
              local, nanoscopic length and time scales to the macroscopic and (b) more
              importantly, if these coarse grained models can qualitatively capture the
              essential physics in these situations and identify the rate limiting mechanisms
              in each synthetic method. If this exploratory research is successful, then, the
              long term goal will be to include the critical molecular-level details so as to
              gain quantitative insights into synthesis strategies. These will directly aid
              in the development of new, generally applicable paradigms for synthesizing
              nanostructured materials which are relevant to a variety of interdisciplinary
              contexts that cross the boundaries of physics, chemistry, biology, and
              materials science.


