Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Environmentally Friendly Technology for
               Production and Modification of Cellulose Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0209877

Award Number: 0209877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Riad H. Gobran RHGobran@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0209877
Gobran

Description: 
This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. Riad Gobran, Department of Materials Engineering, Drexel
              University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and Dr. Houssni El-Saied, Cellulose and
              Paper Department, The National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt.    Production of
              cellulose from bacteria (Acetobacter xylinum) is considered as one of the most
              beneficial developments in meeting environment regulations.  The objective of
              this proposed project is to investigate the potential of the bacteria for the
              production of cellulose products, on both laboratory and pilot plant scale.
              This project is also to explore the production of cellulose derivatives by
              using bacteria from the nascent stage of cellulose production.  Further
              reduction of the production cost and pollutant materials will be also
              investigated by applying certain agro-industrial wastes, including molasses
              by-product and black liquors of rice straw and sugar cane bagasse pulping, as
              cultivation medium for production of bacterial cellulose (BC). The applications
              of the produced BC in preparation of cellulose derivatives, high quality paper,
              and in health food industries will be studied.

Scope:  
There is a great
              amount of pollution caused by paper and cellulose industry effluents,
              especially those produced from non-wood fibrous materials, e.g. rice straw and
              sugar cane bagasse. Using new technologies or redesign of products will help
              meet new environmental criteria and reduce this pollution.  This project is
              funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the Division
              of Bioengineering and Environmental Systems.

