Title       : The Prediction and Interpretation of Protein pKa's Using QM/MM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0209941

Award Number: 0209941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan H. Jensen jan-jensen@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1164,1954,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to establish a QM/MM methodology for the
              prediction and interpretation of protein pKa's that have unusual values and/or
              are difficult to model with current methodologies.  The methodology will be
              applied to three proteins (turkey ovomucoid third domain, ubiquitin, and
              xylanase) for which detailed experimental studies of the factors that influence
              pKa's have been performed.   A three-layered computational (QM/MM/LPBE)
              methodology for protein pKa prediction will be developed.  The ionizable
              residue and its immediate environment will be treated by ab initio electronic
              structure (QM) methods (including energy minimization and harmonic vibrational
              analysis).  The rest of the protein will be treated with a polarizable,
              multipole-based electrostatic model (MM) derived specifically for each protein
              by separate ab initio calculations.  The bulk solvent will be treated by a very
              accurate solution of the linearized Poisson-Boltzmann equation (LPBE).  The
              combined use of this new method with current methods will contribute
              significantly to the experimental design of proteins with greater stability or
              new functions.

This research is at the intersection of molecular physics,
              quantum chemistry, and structural biology, and will therefore offer important
              cross-disciplinary training to the postdoctoral associate, graduate student,
              and undergraduate students involved.  Their training is further enhanced by
              tight collaboration with experimental research groups.  The resulting
              scientists will be well versed in both the mathematical foundations and
              practical aspects of quantum chemistry (including algorithm development and
              parallelization) and macromolecular modeling within the context of an
              interdisciplinary research environment.  Furthermore, all algorithmic
              developments will be implemented in the quantum chemistry program GAMESS, which
              is distributed free of charge to the scientific community.  This work is funded
              jointly by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program  in the
              Chemistry Division and the Molecular Biophysics Program in the Division of
              Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.

