Title       : Nearly Axisymmetric Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0209856

Award Number: 0209856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Howard jhoward@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nearly axisymmetric systems occur in many physical problems, including the
              motion of charged dust grains in planetary magnetospheres, plasma fusion
              devices, ion motion in Paul traps, and the complex orbits of asteroidal moons. 
              In all these examples the motion is well described by an autonomous Hamiltonian
              with an approximately conserved canonical momentum, for which an averaged
              effective potential exists.  For small deviations from axisymmetry the motion
              remains essentially two-dimensional, simply averaging over nonaxisymmetric
              perturbations.  This effect has major consequences for the long time
              confinement of orbits, such as pairs of ions in a Paul trap.  In this research
              we will develop new analytic methods for describing this transition from two-
              to three-dimensional behavior using canonical perturbation theory, Morse
              theory, and Birkhoff normal forms.  Global bifurcations of critical points and
              Arnold diffusion will also be investigated.  The results are expected to have
              immediate impact on several fields under active investigation, such as
              high-performance computers utilizing quantum computation and the confinement of
              charged dust grains under the influence of solar radiation
              pressure.

Axisymmetric systems have circular symmetry about an axis;  a
              communication satellite in geosynchronous orbit about Earth is an example.  In
              reality the Earth has small longitudinal deviations from sphericity, causing a
              geosynchronous satellite to wander in the sky rather than remain directly
              overhead, unless it is carefully placed at a stable longitude.  Nevertheless,
              its orbit remains very nearly circular.  This simple example illustrates a
              nearly axisymmetric system with quasi-two-dimensional behavior.  This project
              investigates the detailed dynamics of such nearly axisymmetric systems.  The
              resulting increased quantitative understanding will greatly aid in design,
              numerical simulation, and operation of such systems.  Other (much more complex)
              examples include two-ion motion in ion traps, which are often constructed to be
              slightly elliptical rather than circular, and the orbits of small moonlets that
              have been recently discovered about many asteroids. 

