Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: Functional Genomics of Arabidopsis Starch Granule Metabolism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0209789

Award Number: 0209789
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2048943            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan M. Myers ammyers@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eve S. Wurtele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martha G. James  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1684,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The molecular and physiological functions of the Arabidopsis starch metabolism
              gene network will be determined.  The glucose polymers that make up starch,
              despite their simple chemical structures, display a complex molecular
              architecture that is essential for starch function.  The Arabidopsis genome
              sequence allows identification of all the genes involved in starch biosynthesis
              or mobilization, and determination of the function of each gene product
              individually and within the metabolic network.  This aspect of metabolism is a
              distinguishing feature of all plant life, by which the metabolic gains of
              photosynthesis are stored and used later when light is not available as the
              energy source.  Understanding starch assembly and disassembly as a
              comprehensive chemical system, therefore, is required for a complete functional
              description of how the sequence information in the Arabidopsis genome is
              translated into the plant life form.
        In this project, "determination
              of function" implies that the role of each protein in the assembly or
              disassembly of starch polymers will be understood at the level of specific
              molecular interactions.  The project focuses on 28 genes that are likely to be
              involved in starch metabolism after the production of the glucosyl unit donor. 
              The gene set includes starch synthases, branching enzymes, debranching enzymes,
              a-amylases, b-amylases, disproportionating enzymes, and starch phosphorylases. 
              In each instance the genome sequence predicts multiple isoforms.  The two
              organizing hypotheses of the project are that most isoforms have specific,
              non-overlapping roles in creating or dismantling the molecular architecture of
              starch, and that many components of the network act via direct functional
              interactions rather than in a series of independent enzymatic steps.
       
              Results will be shared through scientific publication, regular web postings
              (www.starchmetnet.com), and via scientific conferences.  Resources that will be
              developed and made available to the scientific community include mutant lines,
              isoform-specific antibodies, and purified recombinant enzymes.  
        The
              project will have broader impacts in the training of scientists at all levels
              in areas such as mRNA profiling, biochemistry, and bioinformatics.  The project
              will strive to involve members of under-represented groups in this activity at
              the undergraduate level, through established partnerships with universities
              that traditionally serve such students.  Starch provides the majority of
              calories in the human diet, and is also a renewable resource for energy
              production and industrial raw materials.  Comprehensive understanding of this
              energy storage system will provide a greater ability to exploit renewable plant
              resources to meet the continually increasing demands of our changing society
              and environment.


