Title       : Statistical Description of Stochastic Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0209959

Award Number: 0209959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Vanden Eijnden eve2@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is a three-part research program aimed at a better understanding
              of stochastic dynamical systems.  In the first part, entitled Stochastic
              Equations in Infinite Dimensions, I propose to study some prototype stochastic
              partial differential equations which arise in connection with hydrodynamic
              turbulence and other problems in nonequilibrium statistical mechanics.  The
              emphasis is on going beyond the more standard existence/uniqueness statements
              for these equations and considering harder questions like: What does a typical
              solution look like?  What are the properties of its probability density
              function?  In the second part of the proposal, entitled Effective Stochastic
              Modeling, I consider large systems where the variables can be separated into
              two groups evolving on different time scales.  Effective equations for the slow
              variables alone are derived by elimination of the fast variables using
              techniques which borrow from singular perturbations techniques for Markov
              processes.  Finally, in the third part of the proposal, entitled Transition
              Pathways -- String Method, I consider systems where, due to the disparity
              between typical energy barriers in the system and the thermal energy available,
              the dynamics proceed by long waiting periods around the metastable states
              followed by sudden jumps from one state to the other.  The effective dynamics
              in these systems is determined by the transition pathways between the
              metastable states and the rates at which these transitions occur.  The
              objective here is to develop and implement efficient numerical algorithms which
              compute these paths and rates.

Despite the rapid improvement of computer
              performance, many problems of scientific and engineering interest will not be
              amenable to direct numerical simulations in the foreseeable future.  Typical
              problems arising, for example, in hydrodynamic turbulence, dynamical critical
              phenomena, climate modeling, molecular dynamics, phase transition in spatially
              extended systems, involve such a large number of variables interacting on so
              many different space-time scales that they vastly overwhelm direct numerical
              computations.  On the other hand, while a complete description of the dynamics
              in these examples is impossible, it is also not necessarily useful.  Indeed one
              is typically interested only in some coarse-grained variables, suitably defined
              by means of averaging over appropriate ensembles (time, space, ...), which
              evolve in a more regular fashion and thereby provide the most useful
              information about the system.  The main objective of the present proposal is to
              improve the techniques for such a statistical analysis of these large systems
              -- including the identification of the coarse-grained variables and the
              equations they satisfy.  The common emphasis is on techniques which are truly
              computational tools -- either analytical or numerical -- and allow for concrete
              and explicit investigation of the properties of the solutions.
