Title       : EXPLORATORY: Microrheology of Particulate Gels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0209936

Award Number: 0209936
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric M. Furst furst@che.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Understanding how interactions, microstructure and microscopic mechanics
              determine
the macroscopic properties and responses of complex fluids is a
              fundamental problem that
impacts materials processing and development, biology
              and medicine. For particulate gels
that occur in the manufacture of ceramic
              parts, coatings, mineral recovery and lubricant
degradation, we seek to
              understand the microscopic origins of viscoelastic, yield, and non-
linear
              behavior that ultimately affects processing and final properties, such as the
              thermal
and mass transport characteristics. 

The goal of this research is
              to explore the use of direct microscopic manipulation
and imaging to
              understand the relationship between microscopic and macroscopic properties
in
              particulate gels. The PI will develop and employ new experimental tools based
              on optical
micromanipulation and visualization, including optical trapping in
              combination with video,
fluorescence, and confocal microscopies. Because the
              techniques will allow investigation of the
basic, microscopic mechanisms of
              rheological and mechanical behavior by quantifying struc-
tural
              rearrangements, stresses and interactions in situ, they are powerful
              complements to
scattering and rheological methods used by other
              groups.

Specific research aims are:

1.  Directly measure the
              micromechanical properties of models of the gel back-
bone. To understand
              fundamental mechanisms of gel elasticity, shear and compressive
yield behavior
              in particulate gels, the PI will develop optical trapping and microscopy
              tech-
niques to measure the bending stiffness, frequency response, and
              relaxation timescales
of model aggregates of the gel backbone. With
              videomicroscopy, the PI will characterize
particle rearrangement mechanisms
              that are relevant to creep, yield and non-linear be-
havior. The PI will
              systematically vary interparticle interactions, particle concentration,
and
              polydispersity, and characterize surface heterogeneity.

2.  Measure the
              mechanical properties of  flocs and floc- floc interfaces. Using
the
              experimental techniques designed for measuring gel backbone properties, the PI
              will
measure the frequency response and rupturing mechanics of flocs formed
              during the
aggregation process. Concurrent videomicroscopy and optical
              trapping will enable the PI
to characterize and correlate mechanics and
              structural rearrangements in flocs that give
rise to strain-hardening in
              fractal colloidal gels. The PI will measure mechanics between
flocs to
              distinguish the contribution of internal and floc- floc mechanics in the
              rheology
of gels.

3.  Develop optical trapping and microscopy for dense,
              gelling suspensions.
Establishing the relationship between individual
              aggregate mechanics, microrheology
and rheology of particulate gels will
              require micromechanical measurements in bulk
suspensions. The PI will develop
              the appropriate core-shell particles and experimental
techniques to take
              advantage of simultaneous optical trapping and confocal microscopy
in dense
              suspensions. This will enable the PI to directly visualize structure while
              inducing
local deformation and stresses in the concentrated, bulk gel,
              ultimately providing a
means of characterizing mechanisms of stress
              relaxation.

