Title       : Collaborative Research: Three-Dimensional Numerical Investigation of Density
               Currents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0209304

Award Number: 0209304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Fischer fischer@mcs.anl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The oceanic thermohaline circulation is strongly affected by
              localized
dense-water formation in high-latitude oceans. Such dense water
              masses
are released into the large-scale circulation in the form of ocean
              bottom
density currents mostly from localized regions (e.g., Denmark
              Strait,
Strait of Gibraltar for the Mediterranean overflow, Bab el Mandep
              Strait
for the Red Sea overflow). Because of the small space and time
              scales
required to resolve their dynamics, such density currents form
              the
``bottle neck'' of the thermohaline circulation investigation. Despite
              their
importance, we have a limited understanding of the dynamics of
              bottom
density currents, and at present, the oceanic density currents are
              poorly
represented in global climate simulations. The main goal of this
              proposal
is to enhance the understanding of the dynamics of ocean bottom
              density
currents from laboratory scale, to geophysical scale, through
              three-dimensional,
nonhydrostatic numerical simulations. The investigators
              accomplish this
in three stages. First, benchmark a parallel high-order
              spectral element
Navier-Stokes solver, Nek5000, by reproducing existing
              laboratory results
of bottom density currents by direct numerical simulations.
              Second,
explore dynamics for which there are few or no laboratory results,
              in
particular dynamics of bottom density currents protruding into a
              stratified
fluid, and in a rotating environment. Third, bridge the gap
              between
laboratory scale and geophysical scale by using large eddy
              simulations.
Geophysical scale calculations are configured for the Red Sea
              overflow,
and confirmed with data from the Red Sea Overflow Experiment.
              Various
metrics are used to quantify density current dynamics.

Variation of
              solar heating with latitude, and other factors, drive the
so-called
              ``thermohaline'' circulation in the ocean, which is closely
linked to the role
              that the ocean plays in climate dynamics. This complex
geophysical problem,
              with its range of scales, physical, mathematical and
computational constraints
              can only be approached through an orchestrated
effort involving
              cross-disciplinary expertise. The investigators conduct
physically-guided
              numerical simulations, quantify dynamical behavior of
ocean density currents,
              and describe the impact of density currents on
the climate. The investigators
              integrate this research project with
education of three graduate students and
              contribute to the training of
US technical workforce for the 21st century.
              This research project
enhances the scientific understanding of oceanic density
              currents, and
helps improve the representation of ocean density currents in
              global
climate simulations and contribute to the climate change research.
