Title       : Psychology of Mathematics Education: An International Conference to be Convened
               in Honolulu, Hawaii in July, 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0209393

Award Number: 0209393
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathryn B. Chval                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95748              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph T. Zilliox zilliox@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Dawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara J. Dougherty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This grant will support Pacific island scholars attendance at the joint meeting
              of the International Group for the Psychology of Mathematics (PME) and its
              North American Chapter (PMENA) to be held in Honolulu, Hawaii in July, 2003. 
              The Pacific island scholars will be selected mathematics specialists from the
              departments and ministries of education and college level mathematics
              instructors from the colleges and universities in Hawaii and on the U.S.
              affiliated Pacific island communities of American Samoa, the Republic of the
              Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Guam, the Commonwealth of
              Northern Mariana Islands and the Republic of Palau.  NSF support will enable
              the Pacific island scholars to engage with the PME community for the first
              time, thereby enhancing national and international collaboration among
              mathematics educators.

The Pacific island scholars and mathematics
              specialists will be introduced to the international mathematics education
              community at a reception to be held in conjunction with the opening of the
              conference.  Following the delivery of the first plenary, which will be given
              by a Pacific islander, the Pacific scholars and mathematics specialists will
              present an overview of their islands' culture and the challenges faced in
              teaching mathematics in their island communities.  During the conference a
              special panel discussion will give the participates the opportunity to obtain
              feedback from the international community of mathematics educators concerning
              these challenges.  Daily "Theory to Practice" sessions will provide
              opportunities for the Pacific scholars to actively contribute and receive
              professional development throughout the conference.  The Principal
              Investigators will attempt to establish a Pacific Network of Mathematics
              Educators as a result of the conference activities.

