Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: Function of the Arabidopsis Small RNAs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0209836

Award Number: 0209836
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1706331            (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Carrington carrington@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kristin Kasschau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1684,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to determine the biological functions of a newly
              recognized class of Arabidopsis regulatory molecules - the small RNAs.  The
              small RNAs typically contain 20-25 nucleotides and are likely generated by a
              dsRNA-specific, RNaseIII-like mechanism.  Recently, 125 small RNAs were
              identified in Arabidopsis.  Several arise from sequences in known or predicted
              protein-coding genes and transposons.  The vast majority, however, arise from
              intergenic sequences between conventional genes.  The Arabidopsis small RNAs
              resemble small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) associated with RNA silencing and
              small temporal RNAs (stRNAs) associated with translational control in C.
              elegans.  These Arabidopsis RNAs are proposed to function in
              posttranscriptional regulation of gene and mRNA activity by several mechanisms,
              including RNA silencing, translational interference and epigenetic mechanisms
              in the nucleus.  New libraries of small RNAs will be prepared using different
              tissues, a database of small RNA information will be assembled, and the small
              RNA sequences will be deposited into GenBank (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov).  The
              function of small RNAs from protein-coding genes in posttranscriptional RNA
              silencing, and the function of small RNAs from intergenic regions in
              translational control and modification of nuclear DNA will be determined. 
              Finally, the roles of each of nine RNaseIII-like proteins in small RNA
              biosynthesis will be analyzed.  Results will be shared in peer-reviewed
              journals, at the  International Conference on Arabidopsis Research, and on a
              database of small RNA information.  The database, which will include
              capabilities for searching small RNA map positions, information about nearest
              genes, whether or not a given gene is near a small RNA, and other interactive
              features and results, will be made web-accessible to the scientific community
              (www.cgrb.orst.edu/carrington/smallRNAs).  The publicly accessible database of
              small RNA information will have broad impact by providing researchers with
              information about small RNAs near or within genes of interest and allowing
              subsequent experiments on the roles of small RNA-based regulation of the
              Arabidopsis genome. 
Genes are controlled by many different mechanisms. 
              Recently, a new type of regulatory system involving an unusual class of small
              RNA molecules was discovered.  The small RNAs are proposed to function by
              binding to messenger RNA from specific gene targets.  The small RNA would then
              trigger either cleavage of messenger RNA or inhibit the function of the
              messenger RNA to which it is bound.   This project will result in discovery of
              new types of small RNA molecules and determine how these regulators affect gene
              expression in the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana.
