Title       : Sixth IMACS International Symposium on Iterative Methods in Scientific
               Computing; March 27-30, 2003, Denver, CO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0209311

Award Number: 0209311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16555              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Knyazev Andrew.Knyazev@cudenver.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harvey J. Greenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Denver
	      Campus Box 129 PO Box 173364
	      Denver, CO  802173364    303/556-4060

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Knyazev
0209311

     The investigator and his colleagues organize a
              conference on 
iterative methods in scientific computing.  Iterative methods
              for the 
solution of linear and nonlinear systems of equations play an
              
increasingly important role in the numerical simulation of physical
              
phenomena. Preconditioning is the key for significant improvement of the
              
performance as it allows one to find a path between Scylla of expensive
              
factorizations of direct methods and Charybdis of slow convergence. The
              
recent surge of activity in computational biology creates new 
opportunities
              for iterative methods. As an example, the protein folding 
problem involves
              predicting the native state of a protein.  This is 
accomplished by minimizing
              a complex energy function.  Global 
optimization methods for solving this
              problem employ iterative methods, 
but computational limitations have
              restricted the application of such 
methods to small proteins (fewer than 100
              amino acid residues). High 
performance computing is one avenue researchers
              are taking.   The 
protein folding problem is only one of a great many
              applications that 
can use iterative methods to solve them.  Some of the
              specific topics 
targeted at this meeting are:  applications (with new
              emphasis on 
computational biology), domain decomposition, preconditioning,
              parallel 
methods, nonsymmetric solvers, nonlinear systems and eigenvalue
              solvers, 
multilevel methods, Krylov methods, interdisciplinary research,
              student 
papers, and open problems. 

     The International Association for
              Mathematics and Computers in 
simulations (IMACS) International Symposiums on
              Iterative Methods in 
Scientific Computing are meetings that have been held
              regularly since 
1988. The investigator and colleagues organize the sixth such
              meeting. 
The conference is dedicated to providing an overview of the state of
              the 
art in the use of iterative methods with an eye to contributions of the
              
past, present and future. The emphasis is placed upon identifying future
              
research directions in the mainstream of modern scientific computing. Of
              
particular interest are talks on interdisciplinary research, open 
problems,
              and applications, particularly in computational biology. A 
special issue of
              the IMACS Journal Applied Numerical Mathematics is 
devoted to the meeting. 

