Title       : People on the Fringe: Exploitation of Contrasting Environments on the North
               American Plains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0209605

Award Number: 0209605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22104              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederic Sellet fsellet@journeymuseum.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Fosha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Journey
	      222 New York Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577011199    605/394-6923

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project explores prehistoric human adaptations on the North American
              Plains. More specifically, it focuses on the mode of exploitation of the
              resources of the Black Hills of South Dakota, a prominent land feature on the
              northern plains. The richness and diversity of the food resources provided by
              the Black Hills contrast sharply with the surrounding barren landscape, so much
              so that they have been labeled an "island in the plains". In order to
              investigate how prehistoric groups of hunter-gatherers exploited such
              contrasting environments, Dr. F. Sellet from the Journey Museum, and M. Fosha
              from the South Dakota Archaeological Research Center, will conduct the
              excavation of a rich and important archaeological site, the Movie Draw site,
              located in Custer State Park. The multidisciplinary project, funded by the
              National Science Foundation, will establish a chronological framework for
              linking paleo-environmental data to significant changes in subsistence
              strategies at the site.

The Movie Draw site is a medium size rock shelter
              that has yielded the most extensive sequence of Late Woodland-Late Prehistoric
              occupations known to date in the Black Hills. These were times of increased
              social complexity and demographic changes, created by, or associated with, the
              intensification of food production. Concomitant with the major social
              reorganization that took place on the northern plains during this period was
              the emergence of new technologies. Chief among them was the adoption of the bow
              and arrow. The Movie Draw project will test the hypothesis that the shift from
              the atlatl (spear thrower) to the bow and arrow had a significant impact on
              strategies of exploitation of the Black Hills. The project will scrutinize
              changes in site function, or visible shifts in hunting strategies for instance,
              and explore how these changes relate to paleo-environmental circumstances or to
              advancements in technology.

Ultimately, the greater understanding of
              strategies of exploitation of marginal ecozones, such as the Black Hills,
              should help refine current archaeological models of prehistoric adaptations to
              the Plains. The Great Plains are often described as a monotonous landscape.
              This perception has affected models of human adaptation in a similar manner and
              resulted in the emphasis of a single dimension of the diet: the reliance on
              bison. The Movie Draw project will test the limitations of such an
              approach.


