Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Household Intensification and Agrarian
               States: Excavation of a House and Terraced Field in a Mixtec Cacicazgo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0209997

Award Number: 0209997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Kowalewski skowalew@arches.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                           With National Science Foundation support Ms. Veronica Perez
              Rodriguez will conduct archaeological and ethnohistorical research in the
              Mixteca Alta region, Oaxaca, Mexico. The Mixteca Alta is a mountainous region
              in southern Mexico, known for its late prehispanic cacicazgos or kingdoms. This
              project will study economy, social stratification, and agricultural
              intensification in Postclassic Mixtec society (AD 800-1521). 

The ancient
              Mixtec adapted to their mountainous environment by building terraces and
              intensifying agricultural production in ways that were sustainable over many
              centuries; historical accounts suggest that the commoners worked these
              terraces, but little else is known about their lives or roles in intensive
              agricultural production. Scholars usually explain agricultural intensification
              as a response to population growth, or the demands of elites and the state. Ms.
              Perez Rodriguez's study takes a "bottom up" perspective by looking at the
              food-producing commoner households and their role in the system of intensive
              agricultural production. Mixtec dynastic history contains accounts of political
              rises and falls. But what actually supported Mixtec society over the long term
              was the stable agricultural production of commoner households. How was Mixtec
              agricultural production organized and sustained over centuries? How did
              food-producing commoner households contribute to the system of intensive
              agricultural production? What lessons are there for today's issues of
              population growth and environmental degradation? This study will investigate
              the proposition that food-producing commoner households could have
              self-directed the Mixtec system of intensive agricultural production. 

Ms.
              Perez Rodriguez will map, survey, and excavate a Postclassic Mixtec
              site-Nicayuhu-a densely populated hilltop terraced site surrounded by
              still-standing prehispanic agricultural terraces. Mapping and survey data will
              be used to identify commoner residential occupations and other areas for
              excavation. Excavations in residential and agricultural terraces will provide
              information on terrace construction and will determine whether commoners lived
              on or had usufruct rights over these terraces. Continuity of occupation in the
              excavated residential area would support the hypothesis that commoner
              households could have created and self-directed intensive agricultural
              production. Agricultural terrace construction that was consistent with gradual
              accretion by household labor (i.e., households secured their tenure rights
              through occupation and use of agricultural terraces and associated residential
              areas) would lend further support. Ms. Perez Rodriguez will study Colonial
              documents at State and National archives in Mexico City to derive an
              ethnohistorical model of prehispanic agricultural production, land use, and
              land tenure that will be used to interpret the excavation results.

This
              research is important because it will provide data on the role of the state in
              the creation and implementation of intensive agricultural production. It will
              explore the possibility that sustainable intensive agricultural systems may
              have originated from household-level initiatives and decision-making that can
              only come from very intimate knowledge of the local environment. This study
              would be the first systematic excavation of Postclassic commoner households and
              nearby agricultural terraces in the state of Oaxaca. The results will provide a
              time-depth perspective to measure terracing sustainability and erosion control;
              and will generate data on the social organization of agricultural
              intensification and the food-producing class.


