Title       : The Causes and Consequences of Differential Press Coverage of Legislators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0209609

Award Number: 0209609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43946              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Douglas Arnold arnold@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project explores how local newspapers covered members of the House of
              Representatives during a two-year period. The project involves searching all
              editions of the chosen newspapers for any articles, editorials, columns, or
              letters that mention the selected representatives, coding the items for their
              content, and analyzing the coded data. 
The project is designed to determine
              whether newspapers report the kinds of information that citizens need to hold
              representatives accountable for their actions in office. The assumption is that
              unbiased and readily available information enhances the prospects for
              accountability, while incomplete or biased information thwarts it. The study
              explores the regularity with which local newspapers report roll-call votes, the
              extent to which newspapers cover representatives' other activities, including
              introducing bills, holding hearings, and building coalitions, and the types of
              policy issues that attract journalists' attention. 

The project involves
              collecting four data sets to answer questions about the volume, content,
              causes, and consequences of newspaper coverage. It includes: (1) a systematic
              account of how 25 newspapers covered 25 representatives between January 1,
              1993, and November 8, 1994, in 8,003 articles, editorials, columns, and
              letters; (2) a comparative analysis of how six pairs of newspapers covered six
              representatives from Boston, Chicago, San Francisco, Seattle, Tucson, and
              Washington during 1993 and 1994; (3) an analysis of the factors that affected
              how extensively 67 local newspapers covered 187 representatives during a
              two-year period, with a data set of 61 ,084 citations; and (4) an analysis of
              how the volume of coverage in local newspapers affected how much citizens knew
              about their local representatives, achieved by linking the data set of 61 ,084
              citations with the 1994 survey conducted by the National Election Studies. The
              current proposal is for a project to clean and document these four data sets
              and prepare them for permanent archiving and public use. 

The project is the
              fIrst systematic study of how newspapers cover individual legislators outside
              the campaign period. It is also the first study to examine press coverage for a
              period longer than a few weeks. Most previous studies estimated the extent of
              press coverage for representatives without analyzing the content of coverage.
              The project demonstrates the utility of computers for identifying and
              retrieving articles about representatives from newspaper archives. All previous
              studies of how the press covered legislators have required that researchers
              browse through newspapers searching for articles that mention individual
              legislators. This study employs computers to do the browsing. Computers have
              the advantage of being more efficient and less error-prone than ordinary labor.
              Thus, they permit a vast increase in sample size. 
A better understanding of
              how the press covers representatives' actions should provide the foundation for
              a better understanding of citizens' electoral decisions, representatives'
              policy decisions, and the nature of political accountability in a large polity
              with separated powers and weak political parties.

