Title       : Hybrid Modeling and Analysis of Error Recovery in Safety Critical Flight Control
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0209094

Award Number: 0209094
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oscar R. Gonzalez   (Principal Investigator current)
              W. Steven Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 2801      Embedded & Hybrid Systems(EHS)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               Oscar R. Gonzalez
CCR-0209094
"Hybrid Modeling and Analysis of Error Recovery
              in Safety Critical Flight Control Systems"


Embedded computer systems have
              become an essential component of technological products and systems. An example
              is the safety-critical real-time computer systems on board the Boeing 777, a
              digital fly-by-wire aircraft. To completely certify that safety-critical
              systems will operate as intended requires the validation and verification of
              both the software and the hardware. An additional challenge is the use of
              safety critical systems in harsh environments that produce electromagnetic
              interference (EMI) such as high intensity radiated fields (HIRF) or lightning.
              Under these harsh conditions, it is known that triple modular redundancy, error
              correcting codes, and other fault-tolerant computing techniques are of limited
              use, since multiple fault containment regions are near-simultaneously affected
              by correlated or common-mode faults. 

 

The project is developing
              enhanced models and analysis tools from the ground up, that is, it starts with
              models of the physical system, the controller, and the environment in order to
              study the stability of closed-loop systems and the safety properties of
              embedded software. To make sure that the theoretical foundations being
              developed are sound, a particular class of systems is considered: computer
              systems with error recovery, which control physical processes and mitigate the
              effects of common-mode faults. The external events are triggered with a certain
              probability by the presence of a harsh electromagnetic disturbance. The
              internal events are generated by the error recovery logic. This class of
              systems is hybrid since it includes the continuous-time dynamics of the process
              under control and of the electromagnetic environment, the discrete-time
              dynamics of the controller, and the models for the transitions. The models and
              tools being developed are enhancements of switched system models and analysis
              tools. Their capabilities are validated together and independently with a
              particular flight control system. The controller is being implemented using an
              architecture that has been evolving for the past 30 years: rollback recovery.
              This architecture has been widely used in digital process control systems and
              in real-time database transaction systems. In particular, a rollback error
              recovery architecture using dual-lock step processors is part of a prototype of
              a recoverable computer system (RCS) being investigated by a NASA-industry
              partnership to deal with transient or soft common-mode faults. The new models
              will be validated using data from NASA Langley Research Center's HIRF
              Laboratory via a Cooperative Research Agreement. The analytical tools developed
              in this project will allow system designers to quickly evaluate new recoverable
              computer architectures before doing the more expensive and time consuming
              physical tests. 

