Title       : Chemical Analysis Of Ancient African Glass Beads
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0209681

Award Number: 0209681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77067              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter T. Robertshaw   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Glascock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St San Bernardino Fdn
	      5500 University Parkway
	      San Bernardino, CA  92407    909/880-5929

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Glass beads have been found at innumerable archaeological sites in sub-Saharan
              Africa.  However, obtaining information from glass beads found on sites that
              date to before European contact has proven difficult.  Since glass was not
              manufactured from raw materials in sub-Saharan Africa (with one possible
              exception), archaeologists know that glass beads were trade items that linked
              large parts of the Old World in an early version of the global economy.  If
              archaeologists could establish where the glasses used to make particular beads
              were manufactured, then they could study patterns of trade that linked Africa
              to the wider world over the last two millennia.  Experience has shown that the
              only way to discover the sources of the glass is through chemical analysis. 
              This was tried thirty years ago but without much success because of imprecise
              analytical techniques and a lack of comparative data from glass-making centers
              outside Africa.  However, much has now changed: accurate chemical analyses have
              been undertaken of ancient European and Asian glasses, including material found
              at glass factories, while a new technique, laser-ablation
              inductively-coupled-plasma mass-spectrometry, has been developed that permits
              quantitative analysis of numerous chemical elements found in glass beads
              without damage to the beads themselves.  With National Science Foundation
              support, Dr. Peter Robertshaw, with the assistance of scientists at the
              federally funded University of Missouri Research Reactor Center, will analyze
              about 1000 glass beads from sites throughout sub-Saharan Africa to answer two
              sets of questions of central importance in understanding the African past. 
              First, they will examine beads found at sites along the coast of eastern Africa
              and in the southern African interior to answer several questions: Where did the
              glass come from - north Africa, southwest Asia, India, China, or southeast
              Asia?  What changes in patterns of Indian Ocean trade occurred in the
              millennium preceding the arrival of the Portuguese in East Africa?  Did
              different African ports obtain their glass from different sources?  Did sites
              in the interior of Africa, such as Great Zimbabwe, receive beads from many
              ports and many sources?  Did patterns of trade between the interior and the
              coast change through time?  Second, Robertshaw and colleagues will seek to
              discover the trade routes that connected Igbo-Ukwu in southeastern Nigeria to
              the wider world.  Igbo-Ukwu is famous for its ninth-century bronze vessels of
              local manufacture.  Here too were discovered 160,000 glass beads.  Nobody knows
              how this wealth was amassed and in which direction lay the trade route that
              connected Igbo-Ukwu with the likely glass manufacturing centers.  Some scholars
              think that the beads came across the Sahara from the north African coast
              (Islamic Ifriqiya) or even Spain, others argue for an origin in Cairo via the
              Christian kingdoms of the Sudan, or perhaps India.  This research will
              investigate these competing hypotheses and also explore whether some of the
              glass was manufactured by an indigenous African glass industry, possibly in
              northern Nigeria.  The results of the research will permit historians to place
              Africa more firmly within the context of a global economy that existed prior to
              European expansion.
