Title       : Mechanisms for Rapid Intensity Changes in Hurricanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0209416

Award Number: 0209416
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278099             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Ritchie-Tyo ritchie@eece.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The problem of better forecasting of the intensity of hurricanes has been
              identified by the U.S. Weather Research Program as a high priority research
              area.  As hurricanes approach landfall, the horizontal distribution of intense
              winds in hurricanes often becomes highly asymmetrical, as does the intense
              convection in the eyewall and rainbands.  Intense mesoscale vortices, as small
              as a few kilometers in scale, are believed to produce major damage in intense
              landfalling hurricanes.  

This project aims to analyze the physical
              mechanisms associated with interaction of a tropical cyclone with environmental
              vertical wind shear using a full-physics, high resolution advanced numerical
              modeling system.  Previous studies have shown that persistent and predictable
              convective asymmetries develop in response to imposed environmental vertical
              wind shear.  By better understanding the processes that produce asymmetries in
              tropical cyclone convection, and by understanding how those asymmetries feed
              back on the tropical cyclone intensity and structure, improved prediction of
              these events should be possible.  Of particular interest is the development of
              asymmetries in the hurricane core convection during interaction with vertical
              wind shear caused by transient circulations.  As the vertical wind shear is
              imposed on the hurricane core, asymmetries should develop that are well
              predicted by the constant-shear studies.  However, as the wind shear recedes,
              the time-evolution of the core structural changes in the hurricane will be
              studied, particularly as they feed back on changes in the storm intensity. 
              

This study seeks to achieve knowledge of these processes through
              examination of a series of initial-value and time varying, full-physics
              simulations utilizing a very fine mesh and explicit moist physics.  The results
              will be synthesized to establish a series of cause and effect relationships
              governing core intensity changes, and these relationships will be tested by
              examining real-data cases.

Successful completion of this research
              potentially will lead to improvements in the forecasting of landfalling
              hurricanes.
