Title       : A Structural Study of Strain Effects in Manganite Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0209243

Award Number: 0209243
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Trevor A. Tyson tyson@adm.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award will support a project with the goal of
              providing insight into the intimate coupling of electron spin, electron
              transport and atomic structure in the manganite system, possibly leading to the
              development of more accurate models of systems with strong electron-lattice
              correlations.  The long-range, nanoscale and local atomic structure will be
              determined in films ranging from the nanoscale to bulk-like to explore how
              magnetic and transport properties are influenced by substrate strain and film
              thickness.  The structure will be determined via a variety of techniques
              including, x-ray diffraction, atomic force microscopy, and x-ray absorption
              spectroscopy.  Direct comparisons will be made with corresponding bulk
              materials and correlations of the structure with resistivity and magnetization
              measurements will be performed.  These materials may be of use in future
              magnetic read-head technologies.  Graduate and undergraduate students will be
              involved in all levels of this work.  To develop scientific literacy in
              students, a seven week summer research and teaching program on transition metal
              oxide preparation and characterization designed for Newark area high school
              students and teachers will be conducted during each year of this grant.

The
              manganite system is a class of materials that exhibit large changes in
              resistivity with applied magnetic field.  These changes are an order of
              magnitude larger than those in sensors currently used in computer hard drives
              and may enable significantly higher storage capacity.  However, the sensitivity
              at low magnetic fields required for use in hard drives must be improved.  From
              the basic scientific perspective, these materials provide an important testing
              ground for systems with large correlations between atomic structure and
              electron transport.  This individual investigator award will support a study of
              a broad range of films relevant to both technological applications and basic
              science understanding.  The goal is to understand how magnetic properties are
              influenced by substrate strain and film thickness.  Graduate and undergraduate
              students will be involved in all levels of this work.  A seven-week summer
              research and teaching program on transition metal oxide preparation and
              characterization, designed for Newark area high school students and teachers
              will be conducted during each year of this grant.  This will serve to develop
              scientific literacy and may influence students to pursue careers in science.

