Title       : Hermitian Geometry of Non-Kahler Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0209306

Award Number: 0209306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58180              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gueo V. Grantcharov geogran@math.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT DMS - 0209306.
PI: Gueo Grantcharov

The project aims to study three
              problems of the Hermitian geometry of the
compact non-Kaehler complex
              manifolds: The geometry of Hermitian manifolds admitting
totally
              non-degenerate torus action, Hermitian structures on Riemannian
              manifolds
admitting many compatible complex structures and geometry of
              hypercomplex manifolds
and connections with totally antisymmetric torsion. The
              methods of investigation
include: Kodaira-Spencer-Kuranishi deformation
              theory, Lichnerowicz formulas for 
Dirac operators and vanishing theorems,
              twistor correspondence, Kaehler orbifolds, 
nilpotent Lie groups, moment maps
              for various spaces with geometric structures, 
harmonic maps  and others. If
              the project is successful, it is expected a new examples 
of Einstein
              Hermitian manifolds to be obtained, the existence problem of HKT structure 
on
              arbitrary hypercomplex manifold to be solved (negatively) and some
              characterization 
or rigidity type results for manifolds with many complex
              structures to be found.


The role of the abstract spaces constructed from
              the complex numbers in the
theoretical foundations of quantum mechanics is
              significant. It increases in the
development of quantum mechanic to the theory
              of quantum fields. A more recent
investigations in the theoretical physics are
              directed toward a unification of the
quantum mechanics and general relativity.
              This, yet hypothetical theory, is called 
string theory and for a long time
              the Kaehler geometry of the complex spaces has served as its
              mathematical
foundation. In mathematics little is known about the structure
              of
a general non-Kaehler complex spaces. However, in the fast-growing
              development
of the string theory an abstract models based on the non-Kaehler
              geometry appeared
in the last years. Such spaces have also additional
              geometrical properties
which makes the study of their mathematical structure
              more tractable. The
investigation on the project will contribute to the
              understanding of some of the 
mathematical problems related to these physical
              models.


