Title       : Nanomachining by Combining Femtosecond Laser Radiation with Near-Field Scanning
               Optical Microscope: Fundamental Studies and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0209817

Award Number: 0209817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188570             (Estimated)
Investigator: Costas P. Grigoropoulos cgrigoro@me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The production of surface nanofeatures has many important applications in
              critical emerging technology fields, including the heterogeneous integration of
              nanoscale components and devices in microelectronics, information storage and
              optoelectronic systems. The ultra-fast temporal scale of femtosecond pulsed
              laser radiation will be combined with the high spatial resolution of near-field
              optical microscope for nanomachining. This hybrid single-step experimental
              methodology offers superior flexibility and control over the nanofabrication
              process. The project will encompass both basic investigation of the extremely
              rapid transport phenomena in nanometer length scales as well as the design and
              demonstration of novel practical processes for nanomachining and
              nanofabrication. The main objectives of the proposed research are given
              below:

1)	Development of experimental procedures for nanomachining by
              coupling femtosecond laser radiation with near-field optical
              microscopes.
2)	Detailed study of the fundamental mechanisms of the ultra-fast
              laser energy deposition and the ensuing nanoscale phase transformations by
              in-situ time-resolved optical spectroscopy.
3)	Investigation of the ultra-fast
              transport phenomena in the machining, cutting and joining of
              nanostructures.

In addition to the impact of the work in many nanotechnology
              applications, fundamental insight will be gained into the complex
              thermophysical phenomena in ultra-fast laser-induced nanoscale surface
              modification processes.  Funding is being provided by the Thermal Transport and
              Thermal Processing Program of the Chemical and Transport Systems Division and
              by the Nanomanufacturing Program of the Design, Manufacturing and Industrial
              Innovation Division.

