Title       : Bifurcation Analysis for Large Problems: Algorithms, Software Applications to
               Micro Electro Mechanical Systems (MEMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0209536

Award Number: 0209536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199308             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Friedman friedman@math.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nonlinear equations depending on parameters are the basis for many scientific
              and  engineering problems. The principal approach of numerical bifurcation
              analysis is based on continuation of  solutions to well-defined operator
              equations. Such computational results give a deeper  understanding of the
              solution behavior, stability, multiplicity, and bifurcations. This project is
              concerned with development of new algorithms and software for bifurcation
              analysis in large nonlinear systems and applications to MicroElectroMechanical
              Systems (MEMS). Typical MEMS devices lead to multiscale-multiphysics problems.
              These devices include coupled mechanical, electrical, thermal and other parts.
              In addition to the bifurcations like beam buckling which involve a single type
              of physics, MEMS also exhibit bifurcations due to interactions between
              different energy domains. Bifurcations in MEMS play a variety of roles: (i)
              bifurcation as a failure mode (lead systems to fail), (ii) bifurcation as a
              design feature (i.e. bistable systems), (iii) bifurcations to extract material
              properties.

From the engine of an automobile to a hospital operating room,
              MicroElectroMechanical (MEMS) products are finding applications in every aspect
              of our lives at an increasing rate. SUGAR is a new system level simulation
              program in MATLAB for three-dimenisonal MEMS developed at the University of
              California Berkeley. It is already widely used in academia and industry and is
              currently under active development, which is a part of the revolution in the
              MEMS design. SUGAR will be made freely available in source and as a web
              service. New algorithms for bifurcation analysis in MEMS will be implemented in
              MATLAB, and then the resulting new code will be incorporated into a MATLAB
              continuation toolbox, developed at Universiteit Utrecht, to enhance its
              capabilities for bifurcation analysis of large systems. The upgraded MATLAB
              continuation toolbox will be integrated into SUGAR and will become a part of
              the MEMS design loop which includes design, simulation, fabrication, laboratory
              measurements, and comparison of simulation with measurements.
