Title       : Web Accessibility for Low-Bandwidth Input
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0209213

Award Number: 0209213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248311             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer Mankoff jmankoff@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6846      UNIVERSAL ACCESS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research is intended to develop technology that will allow motor-impaired
              disabled people to communicate with a computer most effectively, especially
              giving them access to the web.  An important part of the work will be
              development of a tool that can model users with severe motor impairments and
              automatically make the adjustment necessary to provide access to the web. For
              example, a web page may be modified to show preview information about a
              selected link to user to avoid the cost of following a wrong link and then
              backing out again. Preliminary work has identified seven requirements for such
              a tool, ranging from navigation support to dealing with forms.  These
              requirements will be augmented and refined as the work progresses. Two
              complementary systems will be built that meet these requirements. One is a
              dynamic browser interface and leaves the actual HTML unchanged. The other is a
              proxy server that modifies HTML to be more accessible.  Neither requires the
              authors of web pages to make changes.  The first approach will allow finer
              control over modifications and provide a platform for experimentation with
              different mappings between input signals and action based on errors and
              fatigue. The modified browser will be able to track errors and adjust its
              interface accordingly. It will also allow experimentation with different
              approaches to avoiding errors such as confirmation dialogs. The second approach
              will be platform independent, and available to any user without requiring that
              any special software be installed. It will allow the testing of modifications
              on a much wider scale.  These automatic approaches are necessary because it is
              unrealistic to expect that web designers will handcode the necessary
              modifications into their websites.

Additionally, the research will explore
              the feasibility of automatically generating user interface modifications based
              on a user model, something applicable to other common and important
              applications such as email and word processing. Both the web accessibility work
              and this larger goal have applications outside of assistive technology. For
              instance, they may be used to increase accessibility of the web to other users
              with limited input capabilities, for example, to mobile phone users with
              limited (9-key) keyboards.
These systems will be developed and tested first
              with abled and then motor-impaired users. They will be deployed publicly, and
              their impact will be studied over time. Finally, the research will impact
              accessibility guidelines, so that more web pages and other applications can
              support low bandwidth accessibility. 

The contribution of this work will be
              a set of techniques for making the web more accessible in conditions where
              input is extremely limited and errors are likely. This system will be useful to
              people with motor disabilities, or any user with access to limited input
              devices, such as a wearable computer user. 

