Title       : Spin and Other Electronic Properties of InSb Quantum Wells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0209371

Award Number: 0209371
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Santos msantos@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ryan E. Doezema  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheena Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses electron spin properties and ballistic transport effects
              in InSb quantum wells, and aims to optimize such structures for applications
              that rely on these phenomena. Large spin effects such as the Rashba and Zeeman
              terms are correlated with narrow band gaps. Because InSb has the smallest band
              gap of any III-V semiconductor, spin effects are expected to be amongst the
              largest. The approach involves a range of experiments to study these effects in
              InSb heterostructures. First, energy splitting due to the Rashba effect will be
              probed using an electron spin resonance technique. By varying the structural
              parameters of the quantum well, factors that influence the Rashba effect will
              be identified. This is expected to contribute to a more complete understanding
              of the Rashba effect with the goal of optimizing structures for large Rashba
              split-ting. Second, point-contact techniques for studying spin splitting in 1D
              channels will be ex-plored. In these 1D channels the Rasbha effect has been
              predicted to lead to a much richer con-ductance spectra. InSb is well suited to
              this study due to both the large Rashba term and the small effective mass that
              leads to large confinement energies. Third, quantum Hall ferromagnets will be
              sought by exploiting the large Zeeman effect in InSb. Studies of ferromagnetism
              in quantum fluids may improve understanding of ferromagnetism in general.
              Lastly, a newly proposed spin filter that takes advantage of the large Zeeman
              effect will be developed. Experiments on the bal-listic transport properties of
              InSb quantum wells will be performed. The small effective mass of InSb leads to
              long mean free paths. Preliminary data suggests ballistic transport even at
              185K. Although unrelated to spin, ballistic transport is required for some spin
              devices. It is planned to develop structures that exhibit ballistic transport
              at room temperature and structures that have low-temperature mean free paths
              sufficiently long for electron focusing experiments. Continued improvement in
              the quality of heterostructures will be aided by ongoing excitonic studies
              which provide values of materials parameters important for device design. 
%%%
              
The project addresses fundamental research issues in areas of electronic
              materials science having technological relevance. An important feature of the
              project is the strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research
              and education. This research effort enlists contributions from un-dergraduates,
              graduate students, and postdocs. These experiences will contribute to the
              prepara-tion of students and staff for employment in areas of technologically
              importance. The combined resources of collaborations among the PI and two
              co-PIs provide special opportunities for educa-tion and training in highly
              interdisciplinary forefront research.
***  

