Title       : Joint Space-Time Analysis and Characterization of Image Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0209055

Award Number: 0209055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janusz Konrad jkonrad@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Janusz Konrad
Boston University

This research is concerned with the
              processing of visual information captured by a video camera. To date, image
              sequences have been typically analyzed  and processed in groups of two frames;
              by differentiating one 
frame from another, short-term image dynamics can be
              measured, such as changed areas (e.g., occlusions) or pixel displacements.
              Although the approach has been very successful to date (e.g., MPEG compression
              
standards), further gains are difficult to attain based on two image frames
              only. This research project offers a different approach to the analysis of
              image sequences - one based on a joint processing of multiple 
image frames at
              a time. This joint treatment of, for example, 10 or 20 frames is expected to
              result in new gains in video compression, more  reliable video database
              querying, and more accurate  detection of 
innovations (occlusion and exposure
              areas) that are of interest in surveillance applications.

The primary
              problem attacked in the project is the joint space-time segmentation of an
              image sequence into "object tunnels", i.e., 3-D volumes carved out in the space
              of horizontal, vertical and temporal coordinates  
by a moving object. The
              estimation of object tunnels is approached as a  volume competition problem,
              and solved using active-surface evolution equations embedded into the level-set
              solution framework. In order to 
model motion of points within each object
              tunnel, a new spatially-parametric, temporally-quadratic motion model is
              studied. Various cost functionals relating object-tunnel intensities to the
              underlying motion are investigated. Since the standard volume competition can
              only extract a single moving object from background, an extension to more
              objects by means of multiple "repelling" surfaces evolving simultaneously is
              studied as well.


