Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: MSEC Correlation in Cretaceous Rocks from Egypt
               and the United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0209886

Award Number: 0209886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23028              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brooks B. Ellwood ellwood@geol.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : W223      STATE-REPUBLIC OF EGYPT
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 1304,5944,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0209886
Ellwood

Description: This award is to support a collaborative
              project between Dr. Brooks Ellwood, Department of Geology and Geophysics at
              Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana and Dr. Aziz Kafafy, Geology
              Department, Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt.  The investigators plan to study
              the correlation of Cretaceous rock sequences exposed along the Gulf of Suez
              margin in Egypt and in the North American mid continent. Using the
              magnetosusceptibility event and cyclostratigraphy (MSEC) method, they will use
              samples collected from both regions to build a composite MSEC standard that may
              be used for correlation between the two regions.  Recent published MSEC data
              sets have been shown to be useful for global correlation and correlation
              between wells when applied to cutting samples. 

Scope: 
The Cretaceous
              Period, especially in the Middle East, is a significant geologic period in
              terms of applied geology.  MSEC correlation in cretaceous Rocks from Egypt and
              the United States is a logical progression from Paleozoic studies.  This will
              advance knowledge and refine stratigraphic correlation of Cretaceous strata in
              northern Africa and the western United States, complementing and giving
              independent evidence for correlations within biozones and polar reversal
              intervals.  The research has direct application to studies of Cretaceous
              strata, which hold petroleum resources in the United States and elsewhere, and
              the results may have direct application in oil exploration.  Ellwood and Kafafy
              have experience in MSEC techniques and in applications in the field.  The
              project includes undergraduate students who will benefit from taking part in an
              international cooperative research.  This project is being supported under the
              US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers
              in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities.

