Title       : Photodissociation Dynamics of Transient Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0209889

Award Number: 0209889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $578600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hanna Reisler REISLER@USC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project, funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Reisler will undertake a detailed study of binary
              intermolecular interactions that range from weak covalent to van der Waals
              couplings.  Systems to be studied include weakly bound dimers of free radicals,
              hydrogen-bonded dimers of ammonia with weak pi-acids, and adducts of strong
              Lewis acids and bases. Several techniques will be used: pair-correlated
              velocity and angular distributions of dissociation fragments and IR-UV
              excitation/detection; recently developed resolution and detection sensitivity
              schemes will be employed for images of the velocity and angular distributions
              of dissociation fragment; and REMPI and photoelectron spectroscopies will be
              applied to study the fragment properties. 

This project deals with the
              question of how molecules interact with one another.  The results of such
              interactions depend on the strength of forces between the interaction partners.
               This research uses several experimental techniques to investigate the reaction
              dynamics for several select systems that exhibit different strengths of
              interactions.  The research is directed to obtain detailed quantitative
              information of the behavior of interacting molecules and the results will bring
              about a better understanding of gas phase chemical reactions.  The work will be
              conducted with students and postdoctoral research associates.  An effective
              outreach program is part of this project.

