Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: Functional Analysis of the WRKY Transcription Factor Gene
               Family From Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0209819

Award Number: 0209819
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1180000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhixiang Chen Zhixiang@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1684,9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins containing the novel WRKY zinc finger
              motifs are a recently identified superfamily of transcription factors found
              only in plants.  The few cases where functional studies are conducted indicate
              that WRKY proteins play important roles in various biological processes unique
              to plants, including disease resistance, senescence, seed germination and
              trichome development.  This project is aimed at determining the functions of 72
              identified Arabidopsis WRKY genes at three different levels.  First, the
              expression patterns of the Arabidopsis WRKY genes will be determined during
              plant growth, development and responses to biotic and abiotic stress
              conditions.  Secondly, both loss-of-function mutants (RNAi and knockout
              mutants) and constitutive expressing gain-of-function mutants for the WRKY
              genes will be produced and analyzed for altered phenotypes in growth,
              development and responses to environmental conditions.  Thirdly, interacting
              proteins for all expressed Arabidopsis WRKY proteins will be identified in
              order to understand the molecular mechanisms by which individual WRKY proteins
              achieve their in vivo regulatory specificity.  Progress in these studies will
              lead to a comprehensive understanding of the biological functions and molecular
              activities of plant WRKY proteins.  These studies will also provide general
              tools and approaches useful for functional analysis of large gene families,
              particularly those encoding DNA-binding transcription factors.  Sequence and
              expression information of the WRKY gene family will be made immediately
              available through Genbank, publications and the project website
              (http://homepage.mac.com/zchen_/).  The website will also be updated with
              experimental data on functional analysis of each WRKY gene as it becomes
              available.

The knowledge obtained from the project will enhance our
              understanding of the molecular basis for various important plant biological
              processes in which WRKY proteins are involved and provide potential targets for
              improving important agronomic traits in crop plants.
