Title       : US-Bangladesh Cooperative Research: Theoretical Studies of Reaction Processes in
               Light and Medium-Light Nuclei Involving Alpha-Particle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0209584

Award Number: 0209584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Bary Malik fbmalik@physics.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5989,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0209584
Malik

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Professor F. Bary Malik, Department of Physics at Southern Illinois
              University, Carbondale, Illinois, Dr. Arun Basak, Physics Department at
              Rajshahi University, Rajshahi, Bangladesh and Dr. Susanta Das, Physics
              Department, Shahjalal University of Science and Technology, Sylhet, Bangladesh.
               They plan to study the global alpha-nucleus potential for light and medium
              light nuclei by extending the investigations carried out by the PI and his
              collaborators, under the sponsorship of NSF, to other reactions and nuclei.  In
              particular, the study will be extended to reactions with polarized projectiles,
              proton and deuteron, and with carbon, oxygen, sulfur, calcium and nickel
              targets.  In addition, the investigation will be extended to a-silicon case at
              lower energies.  The relations of the alpha-nucleus potential, determined
              herein, to two nucleon potentials will be investigated within the context of an
              energy-density functional theory and folding model.  The study will be extended
              to alpha-transfer reactions involving lithium projectile.  Finally, the phase
              equivalencies for a shallow and deep complex potential with the context of the
              super symmetric transformation will be investigated. 

Scope:  The US and
              Bangladesh collaborators have complementary qualifications.  They have access
              to the necessary computer codes for the research.  The project deals with an
              important point in theoretical physics that may have applications for shielding
              space vehicles.  The collaboration will also benefit the educational and
              research capabilities of two universities in Bangladesh.  Dr. Das, who
              completed his doctorate research in this area through past collaboration
              between Dr. Malik and Dr. Basak, has coauthored a series of papers.   The
              project is funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and
              the Division of Physics. 

