Title       : NER: Efficient Light Emitters Based on Three-Dimensional GeSi Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0209422

Award Number: 0209422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid Tsybeskov tsybesko@adm.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1676,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract



Proposal Number:		ECS - 0209422
Principal Investigator:	Leonid
              Tsybeskov
Institution:			New Jersey Institute of Technology
Title:	NER: 
              Efficient Light Emitters Based on Three-Dimensional GeSi
              Nanostructures


	This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale
              Science and Engineering initiative, NSF 01-157, category NER. As frequency of
              modern processors approach a GHz domain, the search for an alternative
              interconnects has intensified. Thus, within the next ten years a new
              interconnects technology must be developed which can support the exponential
              growth of processor speed experienced over the last three decades. Several
              alternative interconnects technologies are being pursued including transmission
              lines and integrated, high speed opto-couplers. The indirect band structure and
              poor efficiency of radiative recombination in major semiconducting materials
              (Si, Ge, SiGe), have limited the last approach.

Despite the fact that
              silicon and germanium are the most studied semiconductors, not one but several
              totally surprising discoveries have been recently reported. Examples include
              visible photoluminescence from Si nanocrystals and different forms of
              self-organization in Ge nanocrystals grown on a Si substrate. This project is
              aimed to find links between structural and optical properties in
              three-dimensional SiGe nanostructures, to better understand and enhance
              conditions leading to the domination of direct carrier recombination, and to
              explore feasibility of novel devices utilizing efficient light emission in
              these nanostructures. 

The project will be performed at New Jersey Institute
              of Technology in Newark, NJ in close collaboration with industrial partners
              (Hewlett-Packard and IBM). The educational part of this project includes
              development at NJIT, a public research institution, in a diverse major
              metropolitan area a comprehensive, multidisciplinary program focused on
              nanotechnology and nanoscience.




