Title       : Turbulent Transport in Wall Turbulence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0209758

Award Number: 0209758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164551             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dimitrios V. Papavassiliou dvpapava@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI will undertake a computational study of scalar transport (e.g.,
              contaminants or thermal energy) in wall turbulence and the influence of Prandtl
              (or Schmidt) number on near-wall and dispersion behavior.   Central to this
              study will be the development of Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) in
              conjunction with Langrangian Scalar Tracking (LST) for the generation of
              numerical data and the development of descriptive models.  The program will
              incorporate advances in High Performance Computing to allow the detailed
              investigation of heat and mass transfer in turbulent flow for a variety of
              fluid systems.  Central concerns are the prediction of the spatial variation of
              turbulent transport properties, the effect of molecular Prandtl number on
              turbulent transport and the effect of boundary conditions on the scalar
              property transport.  The innovations of the present work are (a) the use of
              hydrodynamics generated by a Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) to generate
              Lagrangian data for turbulent dispersion; (b) the development of plane Couette
              flow simulations for the study of transport in the constant stress region; and
              (c) the study of chemical reaction in turbulence in the Lagrangian framework.
              The results, if successful, will have impact on a variety of practical heat and
              mass transfer problems (heat exchange, mixing, reactor flows, turbine blade
              cooling, pollutant dispersion in the atmosphere).  The work will also foster
              the application of HPC technology in ways that will make DNS more assessable
              and cost effective, and potentially will lead to the ability to study scalar
              transport in other important physical problems, such as transport in very
              small-scale flows.  Specific plans have been laid out to introduce HPC to
              undergraduate students who will participate in the research at different stages
              of the work and through the introduction of HPC into the curriculum of Chemical
              Engineering at the University of Oklahoma.



