Title       : Theoretical Support for Efficient Network Discovery and Reconfiguration
               Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0209234

Award Number: 0209234
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287533             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy M. Pinkston tpink@charity.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on the development of a sound theoretical framework for
              the design of efficient network discovery and reconfiguration techniques that
              are deadlock-free and generically applicable to state-of-the-art
              interconnection networks used in future multiprocessor servers,
              network-based
computing clusters and distributed storage systems.  The theory
              should have wide applicability and serve as an authoritative basis on which
              deadlock freedom of reconfiguration processes for arbitrary networks can be
              formally proved.  As part of the theoretical framework, a general methodology
              will be developed that will allow the power of the theory to be realized in the
              straightforward design of new and more efficient techniques.  The techniques
              derived from the theory and methodology will provide alternative ways of
              increasing network reliability, availability, and serviceability (RAS) in the
              presence of unconstrained fault patterns as well as in the presence of
              voluntary changes to a network configuration due to resource re-partitioning,
              communication-aware algorithm/process re-mapping, data migration, etc. 

 The
              techniques will not impede the injection, transmission, or delivery of user
              packets during discovery and reconfiguration processes but, rather, will remain
              relatively transparent to the user and/or system administrator.  Proof of
              concepts will be pursued by simulating the developed techniques and applying
              them to state-of-the-art switch-based system-area and storage-area networks
              amenable to their implementation.  This research ultimately could result in new
              opportunities for dependable network architectures to off-load some of the QoS
              handling to lower network layers while, at the same time, providing enriched
              RAS features and higher performance.

