Title       : Arabidopsis 2010: Genomics Approaches to Finding Transcriptional Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0209754

Award Number: 0209754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2212183            (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Benfey philip.benfey@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis E. Shasha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1684,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Transcription factor networks are the genetic blueprint by which plants and
              other organisms orchestrate the proper activation and timing of gene
              expression. A first step in deciphering transcriptional networks is to
              determine the expression pattern of all genes at cell-type resolution. To
              accomplish this goal, this research project will develop a new genomics
              approach, which involves sorting cells from transgenic lines in which a
              fluorescent protein is used as a cell-specific marker. The sorted cell
              populations will then be used as a source of RNA that is hybridized to
              microarrays. The project focuses on genes expressed in the Arabidopsis root,
              which is a tractable model because of its simple and highly organized
              structure. The gene networks in question will be primarily those that involve
              DNA-binding transcription factors. The regulatory regions of these genes will
              be fused to fluorescent proteins to determine the ability of these sequences to
              confer tissue-specific expression. In addition, translational fusions of the
              same DNA binding factors will be made, enabling an analysis of
              post-transcriptional events that affect protein localization. Bioinformatics
              tools will be developed that refine expression patterns based on multiple
              sources of data. These analysis tools will be made available through links at
              the Benfey lab website (http://www.biology.duke.edu/benfeylab/at2010.html) at
              Duke University. The list of all transcription factors with their root
              cell-type specific expression profiles will be made available in regular
              updates of this site. Thus, the research will determine the specific expression
              domains of a vast number of genes, which is an important first step in
              determining gene function. The research will also provide the input for
              emerging analysis tools that can decipher the controls of gene regulation based
              on detailed expression patterns. This will help establish the function of
              transcription factors in terms of how they affect the transcription of other
              genes. 
	To harness the power of gene function discoveries, it is critical to
              find ways to gain greater control over the expression of genes. Targeted
              modification of gene expression is likely to be one of the most important ways
              to improve plant performance. This research will identify a large number of
              genes with highly specific expression patterns whose specific regulatory "code"
              will be of significant use in many areas of plant research and improvement. The
              detailed information on where and when many genes are expressed and the
              proteins that control their expression will help advance the understanding of
              how all plants control their growth and development. Another important part of
              the project will be to train the next generation of scientists to integrate
              computational approaches into plant biology. Graduate and undergraduate
              students will participate actively in the research. Duke and NYU have very
              diverse student populations with excellent representation of minority and women
              students. The PIs also will participate actively in outreach efforts such as
              programs for local high school teachers.
