Title       : NER: Separtation of Nano-Sized Aquatic Particles by Electrically Assisted
               Tangential Flow Filtration: System Evaluation and Metal Speciation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0209246

Award Number: 0209246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chin-Pao Huang huang@ce.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1676,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
0209246
Huang 
This proposal was received in response to the Nanoscale
              Science and Engineering Initiative NSF 01-157, category NER.

Aquatic
              particulates, regardless of their chemical composition, have two very important
              properties that are closely related to water quality: particle size and surface
              charge.  Chemical species, e.g., metal ions, are readily accumulated at the
              solid-water interface, which can affect the assessment (or determination) of
              "soluble" concentrations of chemical species in waters.  Currently, the
              "insoluble" and "soluble" chemical species are determined by filtering water
              samples through 0.45-um filters; things that pass through the filter are
              "soluble" and things that are retained by the filter are considered
              insoluble".

 Accurate assessment of "soluble" or total chemical
              concentrations in waters requires an effective solid-water separation
              technique.  As water quality standard becomes increasingly stringent, demand
              for effective separation of nano-sized particles from waters or wastewaters
              will increase. This will over-burden the current filtration practice of
              filtration with 0.45-um filters and render it ineffective.  The proposed
              research project will test two hypotheses: (1) Electrically assisted tangential
              flow (EATF) filter can perform independently of membrane selection; (2) The
              distribution of metal ions in natural waters is affected not only by the
              particle size but also by the surface charge condition of naturally occurring
              particulates.  The following specific objectives are to be achieved with
              carefully designed laboratory experiments: (1) design and evaluation of the
              performance of an electrically assisted tangential flow filtration system; (2)
              separation of selected nano-sized aquatic particulates both naturally occurring
              particles and pathogenic microorganisms, exemplified by Cryptosporidium, by
              EATF filtration, and (3) elucidation of the effect of surface charge and
              particle size of naturally occurring particulates on the distribution and
              speciation of selected meal ions. 

Success of this project will (1)
              contribute to theoretical development of EATF filtration process, (2) lead to
              the development of an innovative process for the separation of aquatic
              particles according to their size and surface charge conditions, (3) gain
              insight into the effect of particle size and surface charge conditions on the
              speciation of metals in natural waters, and (4) train two doctoral students
              with a multi-disciplinary program. The  proposed research has the potential to
              eliminate or minimize membrane-fouling, promote reuse of electronic chip
              processing wastewater, and enable nano-scaled metal speciation.




