Title       : Atomistic Studies of Reactions on Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0209546

Award Number: 0209546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $540000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Madix rjm@chemeng.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,1972,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
              Program, addresses the question of the effect of the spatial and temporal
              organization of adsorbed reactants and reactive intermediates on the kinetics
              of surface reactions.  Using scanning tunneling microscopy, Professor Madix and
              his coworkers in the Department of Chemical Engineering at Stanford University,
              examine the spatial distribution of adsorbed species in static and time
              dependent measurements.  Studies of oxidation reactions on silver,
              auto-catalytic surface explosions on nickel and palladium, and poisoning and
              promotion by selected surface reaction modifiers are examined.  In addition,
              the steady state distribution of adsorbed intermediates in surface oxidation
              reactions are studied.  Information from this experimental project provides
              input into the development of detailed models of surface reaction kinetics, as
              well as fundamental insight into the nature of the dynamic catalytic surface.
              

Understanding the effect of the organization of reactive intermediates in
              two dimensions on the overall kinetics of surface reactions is the goal of this
              research project carried out by Professor Madix at Stanford University.  Using
              tools that allow the atomic level imaging of the reacting surface, detailed
              information about the role of adsorbate structure on the surface reaction
              kinetics is obtained.  This information is crucial to our detailed
              understanding of a range of important catalytic reaction systems, and extends
              to the understanding of surface reactions in a variety of technologically
              important contexts. 

