Title       : Coarsening Kinetics and Morphological Evolution of Ni-X \(Solid Solution\)
               Precipitates in Ordered Ni3X Alloys \(X = Al, Ge, Ga\)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0209260

Award Number: 0209260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Ardell aardell@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is aimed at a greater understanding of fundamental aspects of the
              coarsening kinetics and evolution of morphology of disordered precipitates in
              Ni-al, Ni-Ga and Ni-Ge alloys using extensive electron microscopy coupled with
              image-analysis software. The Curie temperatures of the solid-solution
              precipitate phase will also be investigated to determine whether the
              compositions of the precipitate phases change during aging. This will be the
              first time any attempts made to investigate the changes in the composition of
              precipitates themselves during a precipitation reaction. An ultimate objective
              of the proposed research is better understanding of the detailed factors
              affecting coarsening kinetics, morphology and spatial correlation in Ni-base
              alloys that find applications in varied technologies that require high
              temperature materials for the structures. An objective of the study is to
              obtain quantitative experimental evidence for the slower kinetics of coarseing
              of Ni-Al and Ni-Ge precipitates believed to arise from more complex diffusion
              of these atomic species. In addition to the interfacial energy and lattice
              mismatch that were considered so far, the possible role of antiphase boundary
              energy in the evolution of precipitate morphology will be explored. The funding
              for this research provides graduate researchers a continued exposure to
              research in the forefront of materials science.

This research develops new
              and better understanding of the underlying reasons and mechanisms of
              precipitate coarsening and morphologies. The research will make significant
              contribution to the development of Ni-base alloys with optimum properties.

