Title       : Arabidopsis2010: Determining Genome-wide Transcription Networks of TGA Factors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0209697

Award Number: 0209697
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1711935            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan A. Arias   (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher D. Town  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,1684,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The completed genome sequence of Arabidopsis thaliana codes for at least 1,533
              transcriptional regulators, of which the majority are predicted to bind DNA. 
              Interactions between these DNA-binding proteins and cognate promoter sequences
              are primary determinants in establishing spatial and temporal expression
              patterns of batteries of genes that effect homeostasis, development and
              adaptation.  However, our present knowledge of target genes and regulatory
              networks for all but a few plant transcription factors remains rudimentary at
              best.  Considering the challenge ahead, efforts to assign gene-regulatory
              functions to the relatively large number of uncharacterized transcription
              factors of this higher plant by 2010 will strongly benefit from more global and
              high-throughput approaches.  In this regard, this 2010 Project award will make
              use of a complementary and integrated strategy, involving high-throughput plant
              chromatin immunoprecipitation (pChIP) and gene expression analysis, for mapping
              transcriptional regulatory networks of Arabidopsis.  Additional parallel
              experiments are planned to assess the functional validity of findings.  The
              focus of study is the TGA family of basic/leucine-zipper proteins, which
              comprise a complex transcriptional system with important regulatory functions
              in development and defense.  A key question to be answered here is the identity
              of primary target genes and their associated networks.  Data from this project
              will be posted periodically under links to be established on TIGR
              (http://www.tigr.org/tdb/e2k1/ath1/) and CAB (http://www.umbi.umd.edu/~cab/)
              websites.  Methodologies and tools to be developed under this award will
              include a high-throughput pChIP technology and partial genome array of
              intergenic sequences, which will be made publicly available as they come on
              line during the 3 year time-line of this project.  In addition to developing a
              new paradigm for understanding transcriptional control mechanisms in
              Arabidopsis, this project will promote education and training missions that are
              encouraged by NSF.
The goal of this 2010 project award is to identify and
              categorize gene-regulatory interactions that occur between a subset of
              DNA-binding proteins and the genes that they govern in the living plant. 
              Expression of these genes is implicated in defense responses by plants to
              infection and toxins.  Thus, this work will not only provide important new
              information on the mechanistic basis of how genes are regulated, but also may
              benefit agriculture by leading to new environmentally-friendly strategies for
              genetically enhancing natural protective genes of crop plants.
