Title       : Access Control Management and Scurity in a Heterogeneous Multidomain Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0209111

Award Number: 0209111
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arif Ghafoor ghafoor@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene H. Spafford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop a comprehensive framework for security management
              using access control models for distributed applications in a heterogeneous
              multidomain environment. Such systems are expected to play a critical role in a
              broad range of Web-based applications. The proposed framework will be built
              upon role-based access control (RBAC) models. The use of roles for security
              management has several well-recognized advantages. Noted among them is their
              flexibility in representing key organizational functions while directly
              supporting the security policies of an organization. Due to the dynamic nature
              of distributed applications and the heterogeneity aspects of the underlying
              multidomain environment, development of the proposed framework poses several
              daunting challenges. The main challenges addressed in this proposal
              include:

-the development of a Petri-net based dynamic RBAC model that
              incorporates time constraints. This task also includes modeling a variety of
              security policies and developing efficient analytical techniques for evaluating
              the correctness criteria for this model.

-the development of an RBAC
              formalism that ensures secure interoperability in a heterogeneous multidomain
              environment for supporting distributed applications. This task also includes
              designing optimal mediation policies to manage conflicts among domain roles and
              tasks belonging to applications.




