Title       : CONFERENCE: 2002 Gordon Research Conference on Environmental Endocrine
               Disruptors, July 14 to July 19, 2002, South Hadley, Massachusetts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0209879

Award Number: 0209879
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ana M. Soto   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carlyle B. Storm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This award provides partial funding to support the 2002 Gordon Research
              Conference on Environmental Endocrine Disruptors to be held July 14 to July 19,
              2002, at Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Massachusetts. This conference,
              more than any other, will bring together a diverse group of scientists to share
              their approaches and progress in this most interdisciplinary of subjects
              spanning many levels of biological organization. Humans and wildlife are
              exposed to a large number of widely used environmental chemicals known or
              suspected to have hormonal activity or to interfere with hormone action.
              Wildlife studies strongly suggest that populations are severely affected by
              these environmental endocrine disruptors (EEDs) in a number of ways (altered
              endocrine and reproductive systems, altered behavior, reduced reproduction and
              population numbers). EEDs are also thought to cause malformations of the human
              genital tract as well as testicular and breast cancers. These findings have
              alerted the scientific community, governments worldwide and the general public
              to the harm likely to be caused by EEDs.  The objectives of the Environmental
              Endocrine Disruptors Gordon Conference are to: 1) present state-of-the-art
              research at all levels of complexity (molecular to population), 2) emphasize
              mechanistic approaches to the understanding of endocrine disruption, 3) work at
              integrating data emerging from these different fields of inquiry and levels of
              biological complexity, 4) identify gaps in knowledge and emerging areas of
              inquiry for exploration, and 5) enhance effective communication between
              scientists and foster new collaborative research efforts at national and
              international levels. The potential scientific impact of the conference will be
              to foster research in the area, prioritize common goals and generate new
              collaborative efforts to solve the identified gaps in knowledge, and to
              generate a synthesis of the problem across all the levels of complexity. In
              addition, by facilitating the interaction between established leaders in the
              field with young scientists, women and minorities, it will enable these young
              scientists to foster their education, training and career advancement. The
              conference will consist of nine formal sessions, each containing an
              introduction by a leading scientist, followed by 2-4 oral presentations, and
              two afternoon poster sessions. Speakers will be selected on the basis of their
              relevant expertise, while emphasizing a program with gender balance, minority
              representation and participation of young investigators that show promise as
              future scientific leaders. Funds from NSF will be used to reimburse the
              conference fees and travel expenses of some junior speakers (2 or 3), and to
              provide travel fellowships to allow the participation of young scientists
              (preference will be given to women and minorities who are graduate students and
              postdoctoral fellows).
