Title       : Multiscale Methods for Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0209497

Award Number: 0209497
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116567             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jinchao Xu xu@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor Nistor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ludmil Zikatanov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Constantin Bacuta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0209497
PI: 			Xu, Jinchao
Institution:
              		Pennsylvania State University 
Program: 		Computational Mathematics
Program
              Manager: 	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: Multiscale Methods for Partial
              Differential Equations

The focus of this work is on the development and
              applications of a two-scale discretization technique, namely the finite element
              method based on partition of unity.  One main application is on the design of
              efficient discretization for nonmatching (either overlapping or nonoverlapping)
              grids.  The main idea of nonmatching grids is to divide a physical domain into
              a set of overlapping or nonoverlapping subregions which can accommodate smooth,
              simple, easily generated grids.  In this approach, a grid generation for
              complex geometries can be made simple, refinement grids can be added or removed
              without changing other grids, different equations/numerical methods may be used
              on different grids, efficient structured grid solvers may be used. 
              Furthermore, overlapping grids are well suited for parallelization and
              vectorization.  The proposed generalized finite element method based on
              partition of unity provides a general and powerful discretization framework for
              this type of grids.  Another major task is the development of a multigrid
              iterative method for solving the resulting algebraic systems for these new
              discretization schemes. As divide and conquer techniques, the proposed
              multiscale algorithms are suitable for parallel and high-performance computers.
               

A class of new multiscale techniques are proposed to study for efficient
              numerical solution of partial differential equations. Multiscale methods in
              general are proven to be among the most powerful mathematical tools for the
              investigation of a broad range of models that are described by partial
              differential equations. Their pivotal role in the design of fast, reliable, and
              robust numerical methods for the solution of various problems places them among
              the most important research areas in the applied mathematics in the recent
              years. Since these methods are in some sense problem-independent, they are
              expected to have many important applications in science and engineering such as
              composite materials and subsurface flows in environmental
              applications.


Date: May 28, 2002

