Title       : RUI: Fourier Analysis of Learning Problems and Function Classes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0209064

Award Number: 0209064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200567             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey C. Jackson jackson@mathcs.duq.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duquesne University
	      Administration Bldg
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15282    412/434-6000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The general area within which this research is performed is known
              as
computational learning theory.  The starting point for research in
              this
area is typically the definition of mathematical models of what the
              term
``learning'' may mean in a variety of settings.  The concept of
              learning
captured by these models is then formally analyzed, frequently
              leading
to algorithms for solving learning problems within the models as well
              as
to proofs that certain problems cannot be solved. 
              These
learning-theoretic models and results lend support to more applied
              work
in machine learning, which in turn has demonstrated utility
              in
applications ranging from e-commerce to advanced research on vehicles
that
              drive themselves.

This project adds to the existing body of
              learning-theoretic knowledge
in a number of ways, including analysis of a
              relatively new model called
Probably Exactly Correct learning, development of
              an algorithm that
learns arguably the broadest class of functions yet shown to
              be
learnable (majority of AC0 functions), and work toward extending
hardness
              results for learnability of a fundamental class, the class of
parity
              functions.  The key tool used in these and other project tasks is
Fourier
              analysis of classes of functions.  While the primary purpose of
the Fourier
              analysis is to support research into learning questions, a
side benefit is the
              enhancement of our understanding of several
interesting classes of functions,
              such as majority of AC0.  Furthermore,
this project provides a stimulating
              research experience to undergraduate
and master's students at a university
              that, from an NSF perspective, is
largely an undergraduate institution.

