Title       : Integrating Security into Quality-of-Service Based Routing and Mobility
               Management in Ad Hoc Wireless Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0209049

Award Number: 0209049
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian L. Mark bmark@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Krzysztof Gaj  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 2802      Trusted Computing
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1667,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Ad hoc wireless networks have the potential of supporting seamless
              anytime-anywhere access to communications and computing resources on a very
              large scale.   Such networks, while extremely compelling for applications, pose
              profound problems of security and quality-of-service provisioning.  Ad hoc
              networks rely on cooperative mechanisms that adapt to the dynamic changes in
              network topology due to the mobility of the nodes, which are often constrained
              by energy limitations.  Consequently, these networks are difficult to secure
              and extremely vulnerable to attacks.

The overall objective of the research
              is to develop a scalable and adaptive framework for integrating security and
              quality-of-service (QoS) into the critical components of routing and mobility
              management in ad hoc wireless networks for both commercial and military
              applications.  A scalable computer simulation environment is developed to
              analyze the security strength of an ad hoc network with respect to its ability
              to maintain quality-of-service under a variety of attack scenarios, mobility
              patterns, and network traffic loadings.  The research investigates the security
              limitations of existing routing and mobility management schemes and extends
              these schemes to incorporate security-inclusive QoS attributes.  The focus of
              the research is on the critical tradeoffs among security and traditional QoS
              parameters such as performance, energy management, and availability. The
              research investigates security mechanisms that can prevent or mitigate the
              effects of hostile attacks without incurring excessive overhead.
