Title       : A Stochastic Approach for Parameterizing Collision-Induced Breakup of Raindrops:
               Implications for Raindrop Size Distributions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a0209765

Award Number: 0209765
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201548             (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg McFarquhar mcfarq@atmos.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Raindrops fall with speeds that depend on their size, and can collide with each
              other as the larger drops overtake smaller ones.  The collisions create still
              larger drops by coalescence but can also generate smaller droplets as a result
              of collision-induced breakup.  To understand the evolution of the sizes of a
              population of drops as they fall and interact requires knowing the numbers and
              sizes of the droplet fragments produced by every drop collision, as a function
              of the sizes of the colliding pair.  There is no theory that predicts the
              fragment sizes, and all such information is based on laboratory experiments. 
              The most comprehensive of these are the experiments of Thomas Low and Roland
              List, who investigated the fragment size distributions produced by ten
              drop-pair combinations over the diameter range from 0.395 to 4.6 mm.  For each
              of the ten combinations, the experiment was repeated many times (on the
              average, 140) and the fragments analyzed.  Low and List combined the results of
              the repeated trials to give the average fragment size distribution for each of
              the drop-pair combinations.  Other researchers have worked with these average
              distributions, seeking ways to use the results for modeling raindrop evolution
              by collisions and coalescence.  A challenging problem is to interpolate the
              results to drop pairs of arbitrary size.  This project reanalyzes the original
              Low and List data - the individual fragment distributions from all 1369
              experiments, not just the ten average distributions - in an attempt to provide
              a parameterization of drop breakup for use in numerical cloud microphysical
              models.  The approach is to create a much larger data set synthetically by
              sampling and resampling the data for each of the drop pairs.  This enables an
              estimate of not only the average fragment distribution but also the statistical
              confidence of the average - a quantity lacking in earlier studies.  The average
              distributions for each pair will be modeled as combinations of Gaussian,
              lognormal, and delta-function distributions.  The parameters of these
              distributions, and their uncertainty, will be quantified using the synthetic
              approach.  Numerical studies using the new information on fragment
              distributions will determine whether the Low and List data, with their
              attendant uncertainty, are capable of producing meaningful estimates of
              drop-spectrum evolution and, if so, the form of the equilibrium distribution
              that is eventually achieved by a balance between coalescence and breakup.  This
              work is important for understanding the development of rain and for
              interpreting remotely-sensed observations of rain.
