Title       : Profile Driven Architecture for Data Management in Pervasive Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0209001

Award Number: 0209001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anupam Joshi joshi@cs.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yelena Yesha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy W. Finin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The constant enhancements in capabilities of palmtop, embedded and
wearable
              devices, together with the advent of pervasive connectivity,
represents a new
              paradigm for interaction among devices.  A new vista
is open for research in
              the area of mobile data management where
mobile devices gather and exchange
              information from not just wired
sources, but also their environment and one
              another. Each device is
both a data source and a data consumer pursuing its
              individual and
collective tasks. New ideas are proposed for a research program
              aimed
at realizing ubiquitous computing systems based on the cooperation
              of
autonomous, dynamic and adaptive components (hardware as well as
software)
              which are located in vicinity of one another. This is
significantly different
              from ``infrastructure-based'' mobile
client/server computing between PDAs and
              network services. The
proposed research will enable a new class of
              applications that
effectively exploit mobility and pervasive computing. New
              prototypes
and applications will be built in the context of mobile
              information
management within dynamic communities of ad-hoc services
              and
devices. The research team is part of the eBiquity research group
located
              at The University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) and
will closely
              interact with collaborators from industry including IBM,
Fujitsu, and
              HP.



