Title       : Dynamics of Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0209256

Award Number: 0209256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Murugappan Muthukumar muthu@polysci.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports theoretical and computational research and education in
              polymer physics. The PI will investigate (a) polymer crystallization, and (b)
              translocation of DNA and other polymer molecules through protein channels and
              nanopores. Crystallization of polymers from solutions and melts is an
              intriguing and longstanding research problem in polymer science. The PI will
              model the shapes and sizes of lamellar crystals and their kinetics using
              simulation and theory. The basic parameters of the study are (a) torsional
              energy along chain backbone and chain stiffness, (b) van der Waals energy
              between nonbonded atoms and solvent quality, (c) chain length, (d) polymer
              concentration, (e) temperature, and (f) strength and rate of flow. These
              parameters will be systematically explored in simulations of the sizes, shapes
              and symmetries of formed crystals, and details of their growth fronts under
              different conditions. Coarse-grained models of kinetics of polymer
              crystallization will be built. These will incorporate the essential molecular
              features revealed in these simulations. An aim of this work is to understand
              the early stages of how polymer molecules organize into crystals in solution.
              The proposed research will go beyond the models of Lauritzen and Hoffmen, and
              of Sadler and Gilmer. 
How polymer molecules are transported from one location
              to another under physiochemically imposed fields is also not well understood,
              although the very existence of life depends on polymer translocation. Research
              will address conceptual challenges associated with a fundamental understanding
              of translocation of a single polyelectrolyte such as DNA/RNA through channels
              and nanopores. These challenges include: (a) how confinement free energy of a
              polymer is affected by interacting cavities and their connectivity, (b) how the
              polymer moves in this free energy landscape due to local free energy gradients
              and externally imposed fields, (c) role of hydrodynamics on polymer movement in
              confinement, (d) orientational coupling of the polymer backbone with the
              directionality of the pore, (e) interference from the secondary structures of
              the polymer on translocation, and (f) pattern-directed controlled release of
              polyelectrolyte molecules from confinement. 
This theoretical and
              computational work complements experimental investigations and may also be
              relevant to applied areas, such as polymer processing, fabrication of polymeric
              nanomaterials, separation techniques like chromatography and electrophoresis,
              signal transduction in biology, and high-speed sequencing of DNA and proteins.
              This award also has a broad impact on education at all levels.
%%%
This award
              supports theoretical and computational research and education in polymer
              physics. The PI will investigate (a) polymer crystallization, and (b)
              translocation of DNA and other polymer molecules through protein channels and
              nanopores. Crystallization of polymers from solutions and melts is a
              longstanding and intriguing research problem in polymer science. A fundamental
              understanding of how polymer chains organize into heirarchical structures
              remains elusive. Analogously, how polymer molecules are transported from one
              location to another under physiochemically imposed fields is not well
              understood, although the very existence of life depends on polymer
              translocation. The PI aims to build new conceptual models and discover new laws
              of polymer organization and motility. This theoretical and computational work
              complements experimental investigations and may also be relevant to applied
              areas such as polymer processing, fabrication of polymeric nanomaterials,
              separation techniques like chromatography and electrophoresis, signal
              transduction in biology, and high-speed sequencing of DNA and proteins. This
              award also has a broad impact on education at all levels.
***

