Title       : SunRISE - Application of Spectral Synthesis to the Study of Solar Visible, UV,
               EUV and Infrared Variability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  2002   
File        : a0209480

Award Number: 0209480
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Fox   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UCAR
	      PO Box 3000
	      Boulder, CO  803073000    303/497-1000

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will work to understand the physical origins of solar
              radiative variability. The main effort is to utilize semi-empirical models of
              the solar atmosphere to represent features on the solar surface and, where
              discrepancies are discovered, redefine the models. The investigators will then
              determine the effect of the distribution of surface features on irradiance and
              combine the information with spectral synthesis lines and broad spectral bands
              so as to compute spectral and total irradiance for a particular state of the
              Sun. Ultimately, the investigators seek to determine the most efficient
              measurements to make in the future in order to take advantage of the basic
              redundancy in the solar spectrum. The aim of the RISE program is to improve
              physical understanding of present, past, and future radiative output variations
              in the extreme ultraviolet (EUV), ultraviolet (UV), visible and infrared. In a
              practical sense, spectrum synthesis gives insight into the reliability of the
              use of surrogates (also known as proxies) to estimate total and spectral
              irradiance in the absence of direct measurements of appropriate accuracy. This
              exploitation of the natural redundancy and coherence in the solar spectrum can
              lead to more efficient measurement and analysis programs. Previous work of the
              investigators illustrated the importance of the evolution and spatial
              distribution of both plage and network (i.e. magnetic flux emergence) in
              determining the detailed time variability of irradiance. This work also
              revealed the sensitivity of the continuum intensity variation to structures
              deeper in the photosphere. The continuing speculation of a link between solar
              and climate variability on timescales longer than a decade raises the important
              issue of changes in the color of the solar spectrum due to variability of lines
              and continuum. An accurate theoretical estimate of the total solar irradiance
              and the shape of the solar radiation spectrum are essential to climate
              studies.

