Title       : The Effects of Antitrust Laws on Cartel Pricing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0209486

Award Number: 0209486
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216335             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Harrington joe.harrington@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project is designed to increase our understanding of when
              price-fixing cartels form and how cartels price. The primary modeling
              innovation is to take account of a key goal of any illegal cartel - to avoid
              the appearance that there is a cartel. Existing models of collusion will be
              adapted by introducing a detection technology - whereby the level of prices and
              the change in prices influence the likelihood of creating suspicions - and
              antitrust penalties in the form of damages and fines. The analysis is then
              substantively dynamic in that past prices influence detection and also the
              level of penalties (as damages are calculated using the prices set by the
              cartel). Deploying dynamic programming and using both analytical and numerical
              methods, the properties of cartel pricing dynamics will be characterized.
              Results will be developed showing how cartel formation and the cartel price
              path depend on the form of antitrust policy, the method of detection, and
              industry traits such as market structure, cost and demand variability, demand
              seasonality, and buyer concentration.
As recent cases such as lysine, graphite
              electrodes, fine arts auction houses, and vitamins exemplify, price-fixing
              remains a serious antitrust problem. The ultimate implications of this project
              are in providing the necessary knowledge to more effectively deter the
              formation of cartels and, in the event they do form, to better detect their
              presence. Thus far, the antitrust authorities have been largely reactive with
              respect to price-fixing; responding to customer complaints, internal
              whistleblowers, and the like. By identifying the properties of cartel pricing
              dynamics - what to look for - this project will help lay the foundation for a
              more pro-active antitrust policy that seeks to investigate industries which may
              be colluding. Furthermore, a more developed understanding of how antitrust
              policy influences the profitability of collusion will provide the basis for new
              innovative policies that are more effective at deterring the formation of
              cartels.

