Title       : Structure and Reactivity of Short-Lived Organic Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0209350

Award Number: 0209350
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410197             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Toscano jtoscano@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              John Toscano, of the Department of Chemistry at Johns Hopkins University, is
              studying the structure and reactivity of short-lived organic intermediates.
              Professor Toscano will use the technique of time-resolved infrared
              spectroscopy, combined with experimental and calculational studies, to examine
              the chemistry of arylnitrenium ions, oxynitrenes, and oxynitrenium ions. The
              biologically important reaction of arylnitrenium ions with guanine will be
              examined to clarify mechanistic details. New photochemical precursors to
              oxynitrenes and oxynitrenium ions will be developed, and the chemistry and
              spectroscopy of these reactive intermediates will be elucidated.

Organic
              chemical reactions frequently proceed via the formation of relatively unstable
              intermediate compounds of only fleeting existence. Such intermediates are also
              involved in many biochemical reactions and play key roles in numerous
              processes, including chemical carcinogenesis. By studying the formation,
              structure, and reaction chemistry of reactive intermediates, one may obtain
              fundamental information about the nature of chemical reactivity and potential
              leads for the prevention of chemically-induced hazards such as carcinogenicity.
              Professor John Toscano, of the Department of Chemistry at Johns Hopkins
              University, carries out studies of chemical reactions using the tool of
              time-resolved infrared spectroscopy, in which the powerful technique of
              infrared spectroscopy, which can provide key information about the structure of
              organic compounds, is used to follow the formation and disappearance of
              reactive intermediates during the course of a chemical reaction.
