Title       : Specialized Algorithms for Tomographic Reconstruction of Electron Density
               Distributions in the Ionosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1993   
File        : a9211708

Award Number: 9211708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen Na hna@icaen.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              Ionospheric tomography is a new and innovative method for two-                 
              dimensional reconstruction of distribution in the ionosphere.                  
              Reconstructing high resolution images of electron density                      
              distributions would allow communication systems to compensate for              
              the irregularities in these distributions which cause significant              
              interference.  Accurate images of these irregularities would also              
              assist in the determination of their origins.  Previously, remote              
              sensing techniques were limited to measuring these distributions               
              integrated over a path, or at individual locations.                            
              Current reconstruction techniques are based upon x-ray tomography              
              algorithms which are not well-suited for ionospheric tomography                
              due to the geometry of the data acquisition system.  The                       
              differences between these systems cause considerable resolution                
              degradation in the reconstructed images.  This proposal is for                 
              preliminary studies in the development of specialized algorithms               
              for ionospheric tomography.  Substantial a priori information on               
              the formation of these distributions is available and ionosonde                
              measurements provide accurate values at specific locations.  This              
              a priori information can be used in specialized algorithms to                  
              compensate for the geometric limitations of the data acquisition               
              system.                                                                        
              The program of research would be for 18 months from the start of               
              the project.  Upon completion of preliminary investigations, a                 
              full-scale research proposal would be developed.
