Title       : An Investigation into the Effects of Feedback, Attributions,and Expertise on
               Overconfidence in Marketing Management Prediction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1992      
File        : a9211215

Award Number: 9211215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: N. John Castellan                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17223              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jayashree Mahajan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Estimating the likelihood of future events is a critical aspect of             
              making a variety of managerial decisions.  A predominant finding in            
              prior research is that individuals are overconfident.  This                    
              Research Planning grant is to develop a research plan seeks to                 
              theoretically investigate why overconfidence occurs by drawing upon            
              prior work on how cognitions are used in decisions.  The focus of              
              this research is on comparing the effects of evaluative and outcome            
              feedback, the underlying attributional process that is invoked and             
              the moderating effect of expertise.                                            
                                                                                             
              Four separate experiments will be designed.  Each experiment will              
              be comprise three stages and data will be gathered using an                    
              interactive computer program.  The manipulated experimental                    
              variables will consist of evaluative feedback, nonevaluative                   
              feedback, attributions, and expertise; while there will be repeated            
              measures on item domain.  Subjects will perform the judgment task              
              in the context of making a strategic plan.                                     
                                                                                             
              The research requires planning activities such as theory                       
              development, development of experimental stimulus,                             
              operationalization of independent factors, and identification of               
              experimental procedures.  The proposed research will contribute to             
              existing knowledge on the overconfidence bias and isolate                      
              conditions when it can be reduced.  It will foster research on                 
              overconfidence in an application context (i.e., marketing and                  
              strategic planning) where there are likely to be tangible benefits.
