Title       : Urban System Evolution in Frontier Settings: The Ecuador Amazon and General
               Frameworks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1995      
File        : a9211531

Award Number: 9211531
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137171             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Although Third World frontiers have received considerable                 
              attention in recent years, their urban segment has been                        
              neglected.  Urban frontier studies are few in number, rarely do                
              they reference the experience of other Third World locales or                  
              North America, and they fail to formulate a conceptual framework               
              of frontier urbanization and integration into a national urban                 
              system.  Existing frameworks of frontier urbanization derive                   
              largely from research on 18th and 19th century North America,                  
              which tends to reflect more developed portions of that frontier                
              experience.  This research project will provide an understanding               
              of urban place evolution in Third World frontiers.  It will                    
              compare the evolution of frontier towns cross-nationally to                    
              understand better similarities in the urban process from place to              
              place.  It will also build a conceptual framework to account for               
              the transition of urban places from their formative phase in a                 
              rudimentary frontier setting to an emerging urban sub-system in a              
              mature, but evolving, economy.  This will be accomplished by a                 
              detailed study of the frontier urbanization process in Ecuador                 
              for the period 1960 to 1990.  Data will come from census and                   
              other secondary sources, surveys, and informant interviews.  Five              
              major urban centers will be examined in terms of economic                      
              activity, human resource profile, transformation in patterns of                
              interaction with local hinterlands and other portions of Ecuador,              
              shifts in the type of interaction, and the explanatory factors                 
              influencing these trends.                                                      
                   This research will provide a bridge to existing frameworks                
              of frontier urbanization, which largely derive from research on                
              North America during its own frontier development.  It will                    
              address the function of frontier towns and their integration into              
              a national urban system in a Third World context.  Population                  
              growth and national settlement policies in these nations are                   
              promoting an acceleration or urban development in heretofore                   
              sparsely populated regions.  rates on irregular surfaces.  New                 
              knowledge about how urban places develop and become integrated                 
              into a national urban system will provide both scientists and                  
              policy makers with a basis for evaluating the impact of this                   
              phenomenon on economic, social, and environmental systems.
