Title       : Development of Immunological and Cytochemical Techniques for Study of Metabolic
               Partitioning in a New Tripartite Endosymbiosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1992       
File        : a9211746

Award Number: 9211746
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29545              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary B. Saffo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              I have been studying an apparently mutualistic endosymbiosis,                  
              between a widely distributed family of marine invertebrate animals             
              (molgulid ascidian tunicates) and a funguslike protist,                        
              Nephromyces.  Nephromyces inhabits the ductless "renal sac",                   
              surrounding the urate-containing concretions conspicuously                     
              accumulated in this molgulid organ.  Nephromyces cells possess high            
              levels of urate oxidase activity, and are thus metabolizing the                
              renal sac urate.  The intracellular site of this activity in                   
              Nephromyces is unknown; paradoxically, peroxisomes, the usual site             
              of urate oxidase in eukaryotes, are not obvious in Nephromyces.                
                                                                                             
              I have unexpectedly discovered a third partner in this                         
              endosymbiosis: intracellular bacteria in the cytoplasm of                      
              Nephromyuces.  I hypothesize that the activities of these bacteria             
              are of profound consequence to the biology of the symbiosis as a               
              whole.  By adapting techniques developed to study compartmentation             
              of ureide metabolism in legume-rhizobial symbioses, I plan to                  
              develop cytochemical and immunological techniques to study the                 
              activities of these bacteria in my system.  I well test the                    
              hypothesis that the bacteria are the site of urate oxidase activity            
              in Nephromyces, and, more generally, that the bacteria are serving             
              as Nephromyces' peroxisomes.  I will also test for the presence of             
              allantoinase activity (the next step in the uricolytic pathway)                
              among all three partners of the symbiosis.  The general technical              
              approaches developed in this work should be applicable to eventual             
              elucidation of other steps in urate synthesis and degradation in               
              the symbiosis, and of other possible metabolic activities of the               
              bacteria; data gathered through these techniques will also be                  
              relevant to elucidation of the physiological dynamics of he several            
              other, less studied, urate-associated endosymbioses found in both              
              marine and terrestrial ecosystems.
