Title       : Identification of the Inhibitor of A-kinase in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1992      
File        : a9211011

Award Number: 9211011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Whitehouse-Hills   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is to identify and purify the inhibitor protein (PKI)            
              of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase A in fruit flies. A                       
              purification scheme similar to that used for mammalian PKI will be             
              employed. Fruit flies have a relatively simple genome and many                 
              mutants have been described, making them useful experimental                   
              organisms. After the PKI is purified, primers will be prepared in              
              order to obtain and sequence the gene. Gene expression in various              
              tissues and at various stages of development will be determined.               
              The PKI gene will be mutated to determine the resulting phenotype.             
              Potential roles of this gene in embryonic development, especially              
              in the nervous system and in pattern formation, will be examined.              
              Previously described mutants have been shown to have abnormal                  
              levels of cAMP. The proposed experiments will help elucidate the               
              role of PKI in regulating cAMP-dependent processes in fruit flies.             
              %%%                                                                            
              Mutants of fruit flies have been described which have altered cAMP             
              levels. cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) activity is involved in            
              many cellular processes, changing the behavior of target proteins.             
              This proposal is to isolate and study the properties of a protein              
              (PKI) which inhibits PKA activity. The gene for PKI will then be               
              isolated, mutations will be made, and the phenotype of the flies               
              will be determined. Gene expression in various tissues and at                  
              various times in development will be measured. The information                 
              obtained should increase understanding of what roles PKA and PKI               
              play in development and pattern formation, and why regulation of               
              cAMP levels seems to be critical for many processes in fruit flies.
