Title       : Robust Control of Systems under Mixed Time/Frequency-Domain Performance
               Specifications and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1992    
File        : a9211169

Award Number: 9211169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98716              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mario Sznaier   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A successful controller design paradigm must take                              
              into account both model uncertainty and                                        
              performance specifications.  Model uncertainty can                             
              be used successfully addressed using the Hoo robust                            
              control framework.  However, this framework                                    
              cannot accommodate the realistic case where in                                 
              addition to robustness considerations, the system is                           
              subject to both time and frequency domain                                      
              performance specifications.  In this research we                               
              propose to develop a robust control framework that                             
              takes explicitly into account these specifications.                            
              Specifically, the objectives of the proposed research                          
              are:  1) Development of a set of simple measures                               
              to describe how well a given set of performance                                
              specifications is satisfied in the presence of                                 
              uncertainty.  2) Development of a controller                                   
              synthesis procedure that uses extra degrees of                                 
              freedom available in the problem to maximize an                                
              appropriate performance measure over the set of                                
              controllers that achieve a desired robustness level.                           
              This research will use the Youla parametrization to                            
              cast the problem into constrained optimization                                 
              form.  This research effort will result in an                                  
              expanded Hoo framework, capable of addressing                                  
              realistic problems without necessitating                                       
              approximations nor multiple trial and error type                               
              iterations, thus leading to improved and less costly                           
              designs.  The resulting framework will be used to                              
              design controllers for thermal power plants and                                
              flexible structures.  As part of the research effort,                          
              these controllers will be tested both using                                    
              simulations and prototype structure.
