Title       : High-Resolution Seismic Reflection Surveys at the Manson Crater, Iowa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1993     
File        : a9211602

Award Number: 9211602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135307             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross A. Black   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald W. Steeples  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                  The major objective of this project is to delineate the                   
              shallow (upper 300 m) subsurface structural configuration within               
              the Manson Impact Structure (MIS), Iowa, using state-of-the-art                
              high resolution seismic imaging techniques.  The MIS is a bollide              
              impact feature 65.7 Ma in age, and is an important candidate for               
              a source of the Cretaceous/Tertiary-boundary iridium anomaly.  The             
              feature may thus have played a central role in one of the best                 
              documented examples of mass extinction due to global change in                 
              geological history.                                                            
                                                                                             
                   A detailed knowledge of the structure, stratigraphy, and                  
              petrology of the MIS is needed as basic data for the construction              
              of a model of the impact dynamics.  However, the exact geometry                
              within the structure is poorly known due to a 30-90 m thick                    
              Pleistocene till cover.  Seismic reflection lines will provide a               
              direct image of the structure and gross stratigraphy of the impact             
              feature, and will constrain stratigraphic and petrological                     
              interpretations inferred from drilling transects, at least in the              
              vicinity beneath the seismic lines.                                            
                                                                                             
                   The major seismic line is along an east-west radius of the                
              crater, from the central peak structure to the undisturbed                     
              stratigraphic section outside the crater.  In addition to                      
              delineating the general structure of the central uplift, moat and              
              ring graben, specific objectives include locating the presence (or             
              absence) of faults, defining the depth and extent of the peak pit,             
              and resolving the internal geometry of the impact breccia and melt             
              zones at the edge of the central uplift.                                       
                                                                                             
                   This study will provide fundamental geologic knowledge to                 
              contribute to an understanding of the global change in the                     
              biosphere that may have occurred, at least in part, as a direct                
              result of the bollide impact at Manson.  The seismic data will                 
              greatly enhance the interpretation of all data sets acquired as a              
              result of the Manson drilling program, and will constrain the                  
              shallow subsurface structure and stratigraphy, allowing more                   
              accurate models of impact dynamics to be constructed.  The seismic             
              reflection data will help to identify targets for future drilling              
              and for subsequent detailed surface geophysical studies such as                
              electromagnetic, magnetic, and microgravity surveys by others.
