Title       : RUI: Regulation of Bacillus subtilis Inducible DNA Repair response.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1995       
File        : a9211306

Award Number: 9211306
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Lovett clovett@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1112      GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,9251,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of this research is to elucidate the                     
              mechanisms involved in the regulation of B. subtilis SOS genes                 
              following DNA damage and during competence development.  During the            
              previous granting period we purified the B. subtilis SOS repressor,            
              cloned the corresponding gene, and characterized four SOS                      
              operators.  We showed that repressor inactivation in vitro requires            
              RecA, activated with single-stranded DNA and NTP, and we have                  
              evidence suggesting that repressor is phosphorylated, but cleaved,             
              under these conditions.  We will dissect the molecular details of              
              repressor inactivation in vitro and confirm its role in vivo by:               
              (1) conducting kinetic studies in vitro and in vivo; (2) isolating             
              and characterizing mutants defective in the inactivation mechanism;            
              (3) identifying nucleotide binding and operator binding domains by             
              cross-linking analysis ; and (4) studying repressor conformation               
              changes upon inactivation in vitro and in vivo. We previously                  
              showed that during competence development B. subtilis RecA is                  
              induced by a mechanisms that is distinct from SOS regulation,                  
              whereas other SOS genes are induced by an SOS-like mechanism                   
              (Lovett, et al., 1989).  During the last granting period we showed             
              that competence-specific RecA induction is not accompanied by SOS              
              repressor inactivation indicating the RecA induction in competent              
              cells is due to repressor displacement. We will systematically test            
              three possible ways in which displacement could occur.  Our recent             
              discovery that E. coli Lex A blocks competence-specific RecA                   
              induction, but not SOS-like induction will be exploited as a means             
              to separate the two induction pathways during competence                       
              development.                                                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              This research will provide insight into an important mechanism by              
              which cells repair damage to their DNA.  In addition, it will                  
              provide valuable research training to undergraduate students at                
              Williams College.
