Title       : International Macroeconometric Model- the Indian Model, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9211763

Award Number: 9211763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1856000            (Estimated)
Investigator: K Krishnamurthy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delhi
	      
	      New Delhi, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 5919,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project supports cooperative research in                                  
              the area of macro-econometric modeling between                                 
              Drs. K. Krishnamurthy, Institute of Economic                                   
              Growth, University of Delhi and Lawrence Klein,                                
              Department of Economics, University of                                         
              Pennsylvania.  India has a long and respectable                                
              record in research work related to empirical                                   
              modeling and is currently working on the                                       
              construction of an econometric model that is                                   
              both comprehensive and flexible, capable of                                    
              reflecting the existing complexities of the                                    
              Indian economy and of anticipating developments                                
              that may emerge in future years.  The model                                    
              will be maintained, revised and updated                                        
              continuously and used in forecasting and policy                                
              analysis. It will consist of a core                                            
              macroeconometric model having components                                       
              reflective of the most vital growth factors in                                 
              the economy, as well as four mutually                                          
              interactive submodels for: 1) agriculture, 2)                                  
              industry, 3) public sector, 4) foreign trade.                                  
              These satellite models will be integrated into                                 
              the core model but capable of use in a stand                                   
              alone mode.  The major thrust areas will be: --                                
              the strengthening of the segment dealing with                                  
              external economic relations, development of a                                  
              more efficient public sector capable of greater                                
              surplus generation, and growth in agriculture                                  
              which is critical for satisfactory growth of                                   
              the whole economy.  The model will use time-                                   
              series data compiled by the Central Statistical                                
              Organization, the Reserve Bank of India, and                                   
              other reliable data sources in India.                                          
              The proposed project will collaborate the                                      
              efforts of Indian econometricians with                                         
              researchers  at project LINK, University of                                    
              Pennsylvania.  Project LINK is an international                                
              research  group that does statistical studies                                  
              of world trade and payments.  National                                         
              econometric models from many countries and                                     
              regions throughout the world are installed at                                  
              LINK as components of a total international                                    
              trading system.  The models are used for                                       
              studying world economic trends and                                             
              international economic policy.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Scope: This project will support research among                                
              world class econometricians and contribute                                     
              to the development of a long overdue economic                                  
              growth model for India.  As a major economic                                   
              power, India ranks high as a candidate for                                     
              explicit modeling in the LINK context.  This                                   
              research will provide an international                                         
              perspective on economic tendencies and a means                                 
              for assessing their impact on India.  In                                       
              addition, a significant and well maintained                                    
              model for India will provide a useful tool in                                  
              domestic economic development planning.  The                                   
              proposed programme will be relevant for the                                    
              training of young researchers in model                                         
              building, macro-enonometric policy analysis,                                   
              data compilation, and specialized computer                                     
              work.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              The project is being funded under two grants:                                  
              University of Delhi, INT9211763                                                
              University of Pennsylvania, INT9119327
