Title       : Dynamic Optimization in the Presence of Liquidity and Other Constraints: A
               Theoretical Framework and Semiparametric Simulation Estimation Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1994     
File        : a9211913

Award Number: 9211913
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172872             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yannis M. Ioannides   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vassilis A. Hajivassiliou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In this project innovative computational econometric approaches                
              that employ simulation are adapted in order to handle parametric               
              estimation of joint discrete/continuous decisions with long                    
              panels.  The methods are then applied to a family of long-                     
              standing econometric estimation problems.  The underlying                      
              econometric models follow from dynamic optimization by economic                
              units (such as individuals or firms) in the presence of liquidity              
              and other similar quantity constraints.  The proposed research                 
              makes these simulation estimation methods a flexible and powerful              
              tool for the estimation of dynamic optimization problems that                  
              involve discrete/continuous decisions with switching among                     
              several regimes.                                                               
                                                                                             
              Stringent parametric specification assumptions are relaxed by                  
              means of semiparametric estimation techniques.  Starting from                  
              recent developments in the field of parametric simulation                      
              estimation, estimation techniques are investigated that combine                
              semiparametric methods with simulation.  Such methods are                      
              particularly important for the discrete/continuous econometric                 
              models naturally arising from the theoretical framework.                       
                                                                                             
              The methods developed are applied to several important dynamic                 
              constrained problems.  The firms application involves the problem              
              of consumption and labor supply decisions augmented with a study               
              of housing decision, using data from the Panel Study of Income                 
              Dynamics, and cross-checking the results with data from the                    
              Survey of Consumer Finances.  The second major application uses                
              data from COMPUSTAT and studies firms' decisions, where modes of               
              investment finance define distinct qualitative regimes and where               
              attrition may be due to bankruptcy and other types of exit.
