Title       : Managing Dynamic Policy Systems: Mental Models and Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1992    
File        : a9211521

Award Number: 9211521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: N. John Castellan                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77215              (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Andersen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Successful management of dynamic decision making tasks is                      
              widely thought to depend on the adequacy of the decision makers'               
              "mental models" of the dynamic environment.  A mental model is                 
              usually taken to be some representation of the decision maker's                
              knowledge and understanding of the dynamic task.  This project                 
              will explore mental models -- their measurement, their                         
              correctness, and their relation to performance.                                
                                                                                             
              The central question to be addressed is:  To what degree                       
              does the ability of humans to perform in dynamic environments                  
              depend on their understanding of the system to be managed?                     
              Understanding of the task is indicated by the correspondence                   
              between the mental model and the system model.                                 
                                                                                             
              This question has not been addressed in previous research on                   
              dynamic decision making because a) the dynamic systems used were               
              simple and were described in a way that would maximize                         
              understanding of the systems, and b) system understanding, i.e.,               
              correspondence between mental models and system models, was not                
              assessed.  Therefore, it has not been possible to determine                    
              whether suboptimal performance was due to lack of understanding                
              of the system (an inadequate mental model), lack of an ability to              
              manage the system even though it is understood (inability to use               
              the model as an effective guide to action), or both.                           
                                                                                             
              This project is the result of collaboration between judgment                   
              researchers and system dynamicists.  A dynamic policy simulation               
              model of the JOBS program (a social services program intended to               
              get people off of welfare and into the workforce) has been                     
              developed and validated.  A user interface for the model has also              
              been developed and it has been found to be a feasible basis for                
              decision making simulations.  In this project, the JOBS model                  
              will provide a platform for realistic simulation of dynamic                    
              decision making in a public policy context.  Subjects will                     
              include policy experts (county social services commissioners and               
              staff) and novices (graduate students in public administration).               
              Three distinct but interrelated types of mental models ("ends"                 
              models, "means" models, and models of system functioning) will be              
              assessed before and after the policy simulation using two                      
              different methods.  Model coherence and correctness, and the                   
              relation between performance and quality of each of the three                  
              types of models will be evaluated.
