Title       : Acquisition of Plant Growth Equipment for the Proposed "C.A. Ryan Plant Growth
               Fac. Complex"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1992   
File        : a9211247

Award Number: 9211247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349444             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney Croteau croteau@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Kahn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Norman G. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas W. Okita  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clarence A. Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1108,
Abstract    :
              We are requesting that the Instrumentation Facilities                          
              Program of the National Science Foundation match funds made                    
              available by Washington State University for construction of                   
              a modern greenhouse and acquisition of  two environment                        
              controlled growth chambers.  These plant growth facilities                     
              are essential to alleviate the critical shortage of plant                      
              growth space available to the faculty of  the faculty of the                   
              Institute of  Biological Chemistry, a limitation which will                    
              be compounded by the addition of  two new faculty in the                       
              next three years.  Of the 6,240 sq. ft. of greenhouse space                    
              presently available to the 7 Institute researchers, more                       
              than 80% is on loan from other departments.  As discussed in                   
              detail in the proposal, research at the Institute includes                     
              studies on the regulation of terpeniod and  phenylpropanoid                    
              metabolism, regulation of carbon and nitrogen metabolism,                      
              structural elucidation and role of novel carbohydrates and                     
              peptides involved in plant signaling processes, structure-                     
              function relationships of stress induced and developmentally                   
              regulated genes that encode proteins involved in plant                         
              defense or of storage function, and the regulatory role of                     
              carbohydrates and lipids involved in cellular metabolism.                      
              These research programs, which are currently or have been                      
              supported by NSF, employ a diverse assortment of plants that                   
              demand specific environmental conditions for optimal growth                    
              and often require large amounts of these plant materials to                    
              be grown under controlled conditions.
