Title       : Transition to Agriculture in Prehistoric Denmark
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1993      
File        : a9211605

Award Number: 9211605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173210             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Douglas Price tdprice@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne B. Gebauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. T. Douglas Price, with a team of American and Danish                       
              collaborators, will conduct two years of archaeological                        
              research, which will constitute the second stage of                            
              a major, long term project.  The team will undertake                           
              archaeological excavation in the Saltbaek Vig region of                        
              eastern Denmark.  This area, typical of southern Scandinavia, is               
              known to contain sites from the "Mesolithic" (terminal hunting                 
              and gathering) and "Neolithic" (early farming) periods.  It has                
              excellent preservation of archaeological remains.  During two                  
              field seasons, the team will excavate approximately 40 sites to                
              distinguish those which date in the 3500 to 2500 B.C. range.  It is            
              during this time that the transition to agriculture took place.They            
              will also conduct paleoenvironmental studies in the area.  These               
              investigations will constitute the first systematic survey for                 
              Stone Age sites in Denmark, and help document changes in sea level,            
              temperature, and vegetation.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Approximately 5,000 years ago, Neolithic farmers appear suddenly in            
              southern Denmark, and they rapidly replace the Mesolithic hunter-              
              gatherer occupants.  While this fact is clear, the mechanisms                  
              involved in this transition are little understood.  It is not known            
              to what extent resident hunters and gatherers were replaced by new             
              populations or whether these groups rapidly changed their                      
              subsistence practices when new techniques, plants, and animals were            
              made available to them.  It seems that domestic plants and animals             
              were slow in coming to Denmark, but once they appeared, a rapid                
              transition ensued.  Dr. Price and his colleagues will examine this             
              change and try to understand the mechanisms involved.                          
                                                                                             
              The transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture                       
              constitutes perhaps the single most important advance in human                 
              prehistory.  Within very short periods of time, many populations               
              were exposed to a new mode of subsistence and underwent rapid                  
              social transformation.  By understanding this process,                         
              anthropologists can gain new insight into the plasticity of human              
              social organization and the mechanisms involved in rapid social                
              change.  This research will provide insight into societies in                  
              isolated parts of the world who today are undergoing this same                 
              transformation.
