Title       : Geometric Complexity Problems in Arrangements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1996       
File        : a9211541

Award Number: 9211541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72468              (Estimated)
Investigator: Boris Aronov aronov@ziggy.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2865,9264,
Abstract    :
              Computational Geometry is primarily the study of geometric                     
              algorithms.  Thus the geometric aspect of problems considered                  
              by computational geometers is as important as the algorithm                    
              and data structuring aspect.  Sometimes the connection is                      
              explicit, e.g, when the number of features of a geometric                      
              object provides a worst-case lower bound on the running time                   
              to compute it.  Other times the relation is less obvious, but                  
              just as crucial.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This project is concerned with geometric arrangements from a                   
              primarily combinatorial rather than computational point of                     
              view, with investigation of algorithmic issues as a secondary                  
              goal.  The focus is on the geometric complexity problems,                      
              which involve estimating the number of features in certain                     
              portions of an arrangement.  Such combinatorial bounds lead to                 
              construction of efficient geometric algorithms and to                          
              establishing sharp lower bounds on their performance.                          
                                                                                             
              Planar arrangements of various classes of objects and general                  
              hyperplane arrangements have been studied extensively, but                     
              until recently rather little was known about arrangements of                   
              such simple objects as flat triangles in three-dimensional                     
              space.  Building on some recent work, the investigation of                     
              this subject will be continued, initially concentrating on                     
              triangle arrangements.  The study of simplex arrangements is                   
              expected to lead to new techniques applicable to more general                  
              families of objects in three and higher dimensions, which will                 
              in turn yield better tools for the design and analysis of                      
              geometric algorithms.
