Title       : Neuroanatomical Basis of Endocrine-Mediated Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1994       
File        : a9211386

Award Number: 9211386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92654              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene E. Robinson generobi@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan E. Fahrbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              As individuals age and pass through different stages of life, their            
              responses to the world around them change in both predictable and              
              unpredictable ways.  These changes often involve how well, how                 
              rapidly, and what an individual learns.  One of the most                       
              challenging problems in biology is to understand how changes in                
              brain structure relate to development of behavior in adults; of                
              particular interest are age-related changes in behavior involving              
              learning and memory.  Dr. Robinson and Dr. Fahrbach will capitalize            
              on exciting data that indicate changes in circulating juvenile                 
              hormone (JH) influence both the behavioral development of worker               
              bees and the determination of caste.  It is known that worker bees             
              perform a complex series of behaviors during their short (20-42)               
              days of life.  Younger bees rear the next generation; middle-aged              
              bees maintain the hive and guard the colony; the most mature bees              
              forage outside of the hive for nectar and pollen.  Foraging is an              
              extremely demanding task involving learning and memory, and                    
              advanced forms of communication.  These striking changes in                    
              behavior are mediated by changes in juvenile hormone.  Juvenile                
              hormone also causes the permanent differentiation of females into              
              either queens or workers.  Drs Robinson and Fahrbach are using                 
              these systems to define the neural pathway through which hormone               
              action on the brain causes transient or permanent changes in                   
              behavior.  They will investigate how juvenile hormone influences               
              neurogenesis or neural circuitry during periods in which behaviors             
              are changing.  In the long term, the goal to use this excellent                
              model system to provide information on how learning and memory are             
              affected by hormones.  In addition, the honey bee is an important              
              insect for agriculture.  Therefore, greater understanding of the               
              plasticity of behavior may contribute its continual role as an                 
              important agricultural pollinator.
