Title       : Role of Law in Shaping Ethnic Identity and Conflict
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1992     
File        : a9211952

Award Number: 9211952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16082              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Rogers   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sugata Bose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the historical role of law in the formation            
              of peoples' political and social identities (e.g., citizens of a               
              given nation-state; members of an ethnic group) in a multi-ethnic              
              society, particularly Sri Lanka.  It posits that such identities               
              cannot be taken for granted.  Rather, they are constructed in the              
              course of a historical process and in that process, law and legal              
              systems play a part.  Also, the project focuses on how law, as a               
              crucial force in shaping identities, influences ethnic conflict in             
              this multi-ethnic state.                                                       
                                                                                             
              Drawing on archival records related to customary law and the                   
              complexity of legal systems experienced by the people of Sri Lanka,            
              the study provides a unique historical perspective of the                      
              combination of local and transnational forces triggering ethnic                
              conflict in this nation-state.  Further, this historical analysis              
              provides the basis for introducing a general theoretical                       
              perspective for advancing understanding ethnic conflict, focusing              
              on the indirect role played by changing legal orders.  Finally,                
              the study shows that the influence of global sociolegal phenomena              
              on nation building has historical antecedents and therefore, is not            
              unique to contemporary events in Eastern Europe and elsewhere.
