Title       : Use of Interval Arithmetic in Symbolic Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1992      
File        : a9211016

Award Number: 9211016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44111              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy R. Johnson jjohnson@mcs.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2865,9264,
Abstract    :
              This project explores the use of interval arithmetic in symbolic               
              computation.  Interval arithmetic provides an efficient and error              
              free method of combining floating point arithmetic with exact                  
              computation.  The primary goal of this project is to develop and               
              analyze hybrid interval/symbolic algorithms that provide a practical           
              efficiency gain to time consuming algebraic algorithms such as                 
              Collins' Cylindrical Algebraic Decomposition based Quantifier                  
              Elimination.  Reduced execution times will allow more complicated and          
              interesting problems to be solved.                                             
                                                                                             
              Example hybrid algorithms include Lehmer's multiprecision integer GCD          
              algorithm, real algebraic number sign computation, algebraic number            
              inequality tests, polynomial root bound computation, polynomial real           
              root isolation, and potentially approximate algebraic polynomial GCD           
              calcuation.  Preliminary study of some of these algorithms show the            
              potential merits of this approach.                                             
                                                                                             
              An interval arithmetic package will be implemented for the SAC2-C              
              computer algebra library.  Using this package all algorithms will be           
              implemented and carefully analyzed empirically and theoretically.  The         
              empirical study will be used to investigate the performance gain               
              achieveable through the use of the proposed methods.  Furthermore,             
              empirical results will provide useful information on the effectiveness         
              and limitations of interval methods in exact compuation.  Programs             
              with detailed documentation and analysis will be made available to the         
              research community.
