Title       : Optional Forward Contracts: Security Applications And Theoretical Extensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1992 
File        : a9211182

Award Number: 9211182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur R. Bergen                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Gedra gedra@master.ceat.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Optional forward contracts for electric power were                             
              developed by considering the use of financial                                  
              options for electric power markets.  They play the                             
              role of interruptible load and dispatchable supply.                            
              Optional forward contracts may be used in                                      
              conjunction with, or in place of, "spot" or "real-time"                        
              pricing to help create and electric power market in                            
              which participants are given incentives to make                                
              them more responsive to changing system                                        
              conditions, thus increasing the overall benefit of the                         
              power system to society.  Their operational role in                            
              maintaining system security will be investigated,                              
              including the effect of their use on spinning and                              
              operating reserve requirements.  How the                                       
              information revealed by the contract selections of                             
              market participants can be used in security and                                
              system planning will be explored.  The                                         
              mathematical framework for determining socially                                
              optimal levels of system security   will be extended                           
              to incorporate the use of optional forwards.  The                              
              basic theory of contract selection by market                                   
              participants will be generalized and extended.  The                            
              long-term (planning and investment) incentives and                             
              effects will be analyzed.  The model of participant                            
              behavior will be extended to include the effects of                            
              inflexibility.  The effect of transaction costs and                            
              imperfect information on contract selection and                                
              market efficiency will be investigated.
