Title       : Effects of a Target Muscle on the Development of a Spinal Neuromuscular System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9211368

Award Number: 9211368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140325             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce W. Newton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas Med Science
	      4301 West Markham
	      Little Rock, AR  722057101    501/661-5454

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Over the past 20 years, sex differences in the central nervous                 
              system have moved from being a subject of speculation to being a               
              focus of intense research and widespread interest.  This is because            
              the study of sex differences enhances our understanding of the                 
              nervous system in at least two different ways.  First, detailed                
              examination of sex differences in a neural circuit of a known                  
              behavioral or physiological function may provide insights regarding            
              those aspects of the neural circuit that are critically involved               
              in the display of the function under question.  Secondly, sexual               
              differentiation is a fundamental process of development.  Thus,                
              knowledge of the mechanisms underlying sex differences may lead to             
              deeper insights into the general processes involved in                         
              differentiation specialization of nerve cells and their pattern of             
              connectivity.  Dr. Newton has identified a neuromuscular system                
              that can be used as model to examine questions that may lead to a              
              better understanding of both function and development.  The                    
              cremaster nucleus is a group of motoneurons located in the ventral             
              gray horn of the lumbar spinal cord that project through only one              
              nerve to innervate only one muscle.  This nucleus is sexually                  
              dimorphic and controls exclusively masculine functions related to              
              testicular physiology.  Using state-of-the-art anatomical                      
              methodology, Dr. Newton will tease apart the hormonally and non-               
              hormonally mediated events in the development of this system.  He              
              will examine how these cremaster motoneurons normally develop and              
              then determine how they are altered by changing the size of the                
              muscle that they innervate and/or by changing the hormonal milieu.             
              The results will provide new insights into how spinal cord neurons             
              respond when their environment is altered.  Besides leading to                 
              significant advances in concepts regarding developmental                       
              interactions between motoneurons, their afferents, their target                
              muscles and control by gonadal hormones, these studies may provide             
              information on which hormonal conditions are best for neuron                   
              survival when the muscles which neurons innervate are damaged or               
              if the spinal cord itself is damaged.
