Title       : Dissertation Research: Molecular Phylogenetic Study of Apiales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1992   
File        : a9211400

Award Number: 9211400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9052               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory M. Plunkett  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Phylogenetic relationships among higher taxa of plants                    
              (subclasses, orders, families) often are widely disputed,                      
              particularly within a number of troublesome tropical-temperate                 
              sister-family pairs.  A classic example of the tropical-temperate              
              sister-family problem is exemplified by two families usually placed            
              within Apiales: the tropical, woody Araliaceae and the temperate,              
              herbaceous Apiaceae.  Further disputed is the relationship of                  
              Apiales to other order (Cornales, Pittosporales, Asterales), as                
              well as the relationships within each family, especially Apiaceae,             
              in which there are three subfamilies (Apioideae, Saniculoideae, and            
              Hydrocotyloideae).  Phylogenetic relationships at the ordinal and              
              interfamilial levels will be examined using comparative gene                   
              sequencing of the chloroplast gene rbcL.  Comparative sequencing of            
              the much more rapidly-changing ORFK will be used to elucidate                  
              infrafamilial relationships.  Preliminary studies to date indicate             
              that a contracted Inverted Repeat characterizes some, but not all,             
              species of Apioideae.  The taxonomic distribution of this                      
              chloroplast genome rearrangement will therefore be examined in                 
              detail to help resolve relationships in Apiaceae.  The character               
              state changes of certain morphological traits will also be examined            
              in light of the molecular phylogeny.  Preliminary data indicate                
              that many of the traditional concepts of relationships in Apiales              
              are inaccurate and that further sampling of representative taxa                
              will greatly increase our understanding of this order.  This study             
              will, therefore, provide an important model for the examination of             
              other tropical-temperate sister families.
