Title       : McMurdo Dry Valleys: A Cold Desert Ecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1998   
File        : a9211773

Award Number: 9211773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roberta Marinelli                       
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3515071            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Wharton wharton@maxey.dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      P.O.Box 60220
	      Reno, NV  895060220    702/673-7311

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1577,9169,9178,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The extreme environment of the McMurdo Dry Valleys  will be the                
              focus of a Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) project located                
              approximately 100 km west of McMurdo Station, Antarctica.  The                 
              dry valleys are among the most extreme deserts in the world.  The              
              perennially ice-covered lakes, ephemeral streams, and extensive                
              areas of soil within the valleys are subject to low temperatures,              
              very limited precipitation, and salt accumulation.  The                        
              biological systems in the valleys are relatively simple, with no               
              vascular plants or vertebrates and very few insects.  Trophic                  
              interactions and biogeochemical nutrient cycles are largely                    
              limited to microbial populations and micro-invertebrates.                      
              Species diversity and abundance are low as would be predicted for              
              such extreme environments.  Despite this simplicity, complex                   
              interactions among species and between the biological and                      
              physico-chemical environment exist in the lakes, streams and                   
              soils.  Furthermore, interactions between various components of                
              the ecosystem enhance the overall productivity of the dry valley               
              landscapes.  All ecosystems are shaped to varying degrees by                   
              climate and material transport, but nowhere is this more apparent              
              than in the dry valleys.  The obvious effects of an extreme                    
              environment coupled with the general simplicity of ecosystem                   
              structure makes the dry valleys an ideal location to study these               
              basic relationships.  Two central hypotheses will be the focus of              
              this research:  1) The structure and function of dry valley                    
              ecosystems are primarily controlled by physical constraints, and               
              2) The structure and function of dry valley ecosystems are                     
              modified by material transport.  The dry valley LTER will address              
              these hypotheses and the five core areas of LTER research                      
              emphasis through a program of systematic environmental data                    
              collection, long-term experiments, and model development.                      
              Efforts will focus on the integration of the biological processes              
              within and material transport between the lakes, streams and                   
              terrestrial ecosystems comprising the McMurdo Dry Valley                       
              landscape.
