Title       : Numerical Methods for Climate Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1992      
File        : a9211108

Award Number: 9211108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert G. Voigt                         
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39736              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Cane   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 4083      POST DOC RESRCH ASSOC COMP S&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9218,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The numerical simulations of the global climate will be feasible               
              only with a combined effort in developing appropriate                          
              parameterizations and filtering techniques for the physical                    
              equations and in developing scalable parallel algorithms suitable              
              for future high performance computers.  Parameterizations, which               
              simplify the model, and filtering, which allows larger explicit                
              time steps, have reduced the computational requirements by orders              
              of magnitudes.  However, even a crude three dimensional global                 
              resolution of the atmosphere and ocean requires a number of grid               
              points which swamps all existing computer architectures, even                  
              with these simplifications.  A brute force approach of using                   
              larger machines to solve higher resolution problems is not                     
              sufficient.  The models need further simplification before state-              
              of-the-art computing will be sufficient to allow reasonable                    
              predictions of the climate.                                                    
                                                                                             
              This research will focus on the simultaneous development process               
              of both the models and solution methods.  The first goal is to                 
              identify the computational bottlenecks of existing general                     
              circulation model implementations on parallel architectures.  By               
              analyzing the computation and communication complexities of the                
              various components of the models, it will be possible to identify              
              the areas in which there is the greatest need for simplifications              
              in the model and/or more efficient parallel numerical algorithms.              
              Next, appropriate data structures must be designed which allow                 
              for the evolution of the model equations.   Finally, it is                     
              anticipated that many of the modern numerical methods, such as                 
              multigrid, GMRES with various parallel preconditioners and domain              
              decomposition will prove particularly useful.
