Title       : The Sevilleta Field Station: Construction of a Desert-Plant Lath House and a
               Shop/Storage Building
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1992  
File        : a9211588

Award Number: 9211588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74820              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford S. Crawford ccbosque@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann S. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diane L. Marshall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy K. Lowrey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Parmenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The newly constructed Sevilleta Field Station serves a large                   
              number of scientists who study the extensive and                               
              ecologically diverse region of central New Mexico.  The                        
              region  incorporates transition zones among numerous biomes,                   
              including Great Plains Grassland, Chihuahuan Desert, Great                     
              Basin Shrub-Steppe, Interior Chaparral, Mogollon (Pinon-                       
              Juniper) Woodland, and Montane Forests.  Additional biotic                     
              assemblages within these biomes include Rio Grande "Bosque"                    
              (Riparian  Cottonwood  Forest ) and Wetlands, Subalpine                        
              Forests, and Subalpine Grasslands.  Much of the current                        
              scientific  research in the region focuses on biotic                           
              responses to climate change at various spatial and  temporal                   
              time scales (seasonal , annual, and long-term), biodiversity                   
              issues, and ecosystem restoration  following natural and                       
              anthropogenic disturbance.                                                     
                                                                                             
              Funding levels for the current year's research activities                      
              exceeds $7.25 million, and continues to increase.  At                          
              present, there are 70 scientists and graduate students                         
              working on 49 active research projects in the Sevilleta                        
              region.  The Sevilleta Field Research Station provides                         
              logistical support to a large proportion of these projects.                    
              The Sevilleta Field Research Station has expanded with the                     
              construction of new residences and laboratory facilities to                    
              meet the growing demand for field logistical support.                          
                                                                                             
              This project will increase the research support capability                     
              of the Sevilletta Field Research Station.  The construction                    
              of a lath house and experimental garden, that will be used                     
              in germinating and establishing native plants for a variety                    
              of research and educational projects will add significantly                    
              to station research capability.  In addition, the station                      
              will provide an indoor storage facility for field equipment,                   
              and a workshop area for equipment construction and                             
              maintenance.   This addition to the station will                               
              significantly expand the botanical and genetics research                       
              opportunities on the Sevillets, and provide greater                            
              logistical support for virtually all ongoing ecological                        
              field research activities in central New Mexico.
