Title       : Summer Training Workshop in Law and Social Science; Denver, Colorado; July 1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9211969

Award Number: 9211969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryant G. Garth   (Principal Investigator current)
              Austin Sarat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Felice J. Levine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Law & Society Assoc
	      University of Massachusetts
	      Amherst, MA  010030001    413/545-4617

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This is a workshop conducted by the Committee on Education of the              
              Law and Society Association, the major professional organization               
              for sociolegal scientists in the United States.  It is designed to             
              extend and intensify previous training efforts for approximately               
              30 new entrants into sociolegal science. In addition to providing              
              social scientific training to faculty with and students                        
              anticipating professional degrees from law schools, the summer                 
              workshop stresses the interdisciplinary character of the field of              
              law and social science by counteracting disciplinary perspectivism.            
              Attention is given to core debates and questions which serve to                
              integrate the field.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Specifically, participants are recruited through advertisements in             
              the relevant scholarly newsletters and a special mailing to 700                
              individuals to seek applications from minority scholars.  Twelve               
              distinguished faculty persons join the thirty participants for the             
              three day workshop.  Through sessions which feature small group                
              exchange, hands-on mentoring, and follow-up after the workshop, the            
              workshop enables participants to work through specific research                
              ideas and plans.  In addition, the workshop sessions expose                    
              participants to the core subfields of law and social science, the              
              relationships and settings for law and social science, and the full            
              range of research orientations associated with sociolegal science.             
              The workshop is significant in providing advanced interdisciplinary            
              training to individuals who are or soon will be teaching law and               
              social science in law schools and social science departments in                
              colleges and universities across the United States.  Also, the                 
              workshop encourages more minority faculty and graduate students to             
              enter into this interdisciplinary field of teaching and research.
