Title       : Antiinsectan Natural Products from Fungal Sclerotia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1996     
File        : a9211252

Award Number: 9211252
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Gloer james-gloer@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9109,9146,9156,BIOT,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Chemical studies of secondary metabollities from fungal                        
              sclerotia will be studied.  Sclerotia are key physiological                    
              structures vital to the survival and propagation of many fungal                
              species.  Ecological considerations and circumstantial evidence                
              suggest that sclerotia may contain new antiinsectan metabolites                
              not found in other fungal tissues.  The occurrence of                          
              sclerotial metabolites that deter feeding by fungivorous                       
              insects would be very significant to fungal chemical ecology.                  
              Sclerotial extracts will be tested for effects against both                    
              ecologically relevant and agriculturally important insects.  A                 
              pool of antiinsectan extracts is already available.  Active                    
              metabolites will be isolated by chromatographic methods, and                   
              identified using modern spectroscopic techniques.  Experiments                 
              will be performed to determine whether these compounds are                     
              concentrated in the sclerotia.  Investigations will also be                    
              extended to include related fungal bodies (i.e., ascostromata).                
              These studies will provide insight into fundamentally                          
              significant, rarely-studied aspects of fungal secondary                        
              metabolism, and will permit further exploration of this unique                 
              source of new antiinsectan natural products.                                   
              %%                                                                             
              With this award, the Organic Synthesis Program will support the                
              research of Dr. James B. Gloer at the University of Iowa.  Dr.                 
              Gloer will focus his research on a specialized tissue structure                
              of fungi, the sclerotia, as a source of new natural products                   
              that may have antiinsectan activity.  This has the potential to                
              benefit research in biochemistry and agriculture as well as in                 
              the chemical industry.
