Title       : Behavioral Adaptation to a Desert Environment: An Experimental Comparative Study
               of Food Hoarding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1995       
File        : a9211752

Award Number: 9211752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George W. Uetz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92904              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen H. Jenkins jenkins@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Many animals store food in times of plenty for use later when                  
              resources are scarce.  Two general types of food hoarding occur:               
              storing large amounts of food in a centralized location such as a              
              burrow (larder-hoarding), and scattering many small caches of                  
              food throughout an individual's home range (scatter-hoarding).                 
              Kangaroo rats are desert rodents that use food hoarding as a                   
              strategy for dealing with the unpredictability of desert                       
              environments.  Coexisting kangaroo rats differ in their food-                  
              hoarding patterns:  some species are larder-hoarders, others are               
              primarily scatter-hoarders.  This study will use laboratory and                
              field experiments to test three hypotheses about differences in                
              food-hoarding patterns of kangaroo rats.  Specifically, because                
              larger kangaroo rats are aggressively dominant to smaller ones,                
              smaller animals such as Merriam's and Ord's kangaroo rats should               
              larder-hoard fewer seeds, make more widely-spaced scatter-hoards               
              and move caches more often in response to theft than larger                    
              animals such as Panamint and desert kangaroo rats.  Dr. Jenkins                
              will also compare different populations of the same species from               
              sites with different suites of competitors, to test the                        
              prediction that hoarding behavior is adapted to the competitive                
              environment encountered by members of a particular population.                 
                                                                                             
              This study is important for several reasons.  First, desert                    
              rodents have been model systems for studies of the role of                     
              competition in ecosystem structure and function.  Although the                 
              pervasive influence of competition among desert rodents has been               
              well established, specific behavioral mechanisms that mediate                  
              competition have received little attention.  As a key behavioral               
              adaptation of kangaroo rats to desert environments, food hoarding              
              is likely to be closely connected to competition among species.                
              Second, optimal foraging has been one of the most fruitful areas               
              of study in behavioral ecology in recent years because of the                  
              productive interplay between development of theory and empirical               
              tests of predictions derived from theoretical models.  As an                   
              aspect of foraging behavior, work on food hoarding has been                    
              mainly descriptive to date.  This experimental study of food                   
              hoarding by kangaroo rats will contribute to a broader                         
              perspective on food hoarding by placing it in the context of                   
              optimal foraging ecology.  Third, scatter-hoarding animals are                 
              important agents of dispersal for the seeds of many plant                      
              species.  This study of factors that cause kangaroo rats to                    
              scatter-hoard vs. larder-hoard will lead to greater understanding              
              of interactions between these animals and desert plant                         
              populations, with consequent benefits for conservation of desert               
              environments.
