Title       : In Situ Measurement of Submicron Particles During Synthesis from Gaseous
               Precursors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1993  
File        : a9211764

Award Number: 9211764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249908             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Solomon  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip W. Morrison   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Fuel Research Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  06138    860/528-9806

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1407,5373,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Characterizing the particle size distribution, concentration,                  
              and temperature within an aerosol reactor is essential to the                  
              proper understanding and control of the process.  Phase I                      
              research has demonstrated a novel Fourier transform infrared                   
              (FT-IR) emission/transmission (E/T) techniques to address the                  
              above problems for the synthesis of TiO  particles.  TiO                       
              particles strongly absorb at wavenumbers less than 1000/cm,                    
              and thus the measured extinction is directly proportional to                   
              the particle mass.  In contrast, extinction above 1000/cm is                   
              due to scattering and is a strong function of the particle                     
              size distribution.  Using Mie theory, one can deconvolute                      
              extinction spectra to estimate the geometric mean diameter                     
              within 10% of its actual value.  In addition to particle mass                  
              and size, E/T FT-IR can also simultaneously measure particle                   
              temperature as well as gas concentrations and temperature.                     
                                                                                             
              This Phase II project will develop an instrument for on-line                   
              in- situ analysis of submicron sized particles.  This research                 
              will (1) develop improvements to the FT-IR and procedures to                   
              optimize the acquisition of transmission and emission data,                    
              (2) improve and extend the theory relating measured                            
              transmission spectra to particle size, (3) evaluate the                        
              instrument and analysis software by comparing the IR                           
              deconvolution to other particle sizing techniques, and (4)                     
              field test the instrument and software on a commercial TiO2                    
              production facility.  This proposal combines the expertise of                  
              three key organizations:  (1) Advanced Fuel Research provides                  
              its extensive knowledge of FT-IR technology; (2) Prof. Hemant                  
              Pendse (University of Maine) is an expert in the deconvolution                 
              of particle size distributions from attenuation spectra; and                   
              (3) Prof. Sotiris Pratsinis (University of Cincinnati) will                    
              evaluate the FT-IR results and compare them to conventional                    
              particle sizing techniques.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The above instrument will perform size measurements of                         
              aerosols as well as measuring particle mass, particle                          
              temperature, gas composition, and gas temperature.  The                        
              instrument will be rugged, user friendly, portable, and                        
              relatively inexpensive.  The applications for such an                          
              instrument include the synthesis of catalyst supports,                         
              sinterable ceramics, metal particles, optical materials, and                   
              electronic materials.
