Title       : Cell Cycle Regulation of Microtubule Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1998   
File        : a9315700

Award Number: 9315700
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $572958             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathy A. Suprenant ksupre@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9161,9181,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9315700  Suprenant    The proposed research is an investigation of how 
              microtubule assembly and function is regulated during the  cell cycle.  A
              multidisciplinary approach will be used to  test the hypothesis that a 77 kD
              echinoderm MT-associated  protein (EMAP) is part of a multi-subunit G-protein
              complex  whose function is regulated by phosphorylation and GTP-  binding. 
              Biochemical methods will be used to identify EMAP-  binding proteins and direct
              photoaffinity labeling will  determine whether any of these proteins are
              GTP-binding  proteins.  Immunological techniques will be used to  characterize
              EMAP-dynamin interactions in vitro by  immunoprecipitation and in vivo by
              immunogold labeling for  electron microscopy.  In vivo phosphorylation of EMAP
              and  dynamin will be accomplished by 32-P labeling followed by 
              immunoprecipitation.  Microtubule assembly dynamics will be  examined in
              immunodepleted interphase and mitotic extracts  by video-enhanced differential
              contrast light microscopy.  Affinity-purified anti-dynamin and anti-EMAP
              antibodies will  be microinjected into sea urchin blastomeres to determine 
              their effects on cell division.  Genetically engineered EMAP  constructs in
              baculovirus will be transfected into insect  cells and examined for their
              effects on endogenous  microtubule and organelle arrays.  The completion of the
               proposed study will provide insight into the regulation of  cellular
              morphogenesis during mitosis.  %%%  Microtubules are essential and dynamic
              components of the  eukaryotic cytoskeleton, and are the mediators of such 
              critically important cellular and intracellular motility  phenomena as
              flagellar and ciliary beating (necessary for  such phenomena as spermatozoan or
              protozoan swimming,  movement of bronchial mucus, etc.), movement of particles 
              and vesicles from one end of the cell to another (e.g.,  movement of
              synaptosomes containing neurotransmitters from  the cell body of a nerve cell,
              where the synaptosomes are  packaged, down to the tip of the axon, where t he
              contents  are released by exocytosis) and separation of daughter  chromosomes
              during cell division.  The regulation of  microtubules, in terms of their
              spatial organization,  functional capabilities, and length and stability is not
              yet  well understood, yet obviously is critical to the proper  functioning of
              the cell.  Certain proteins are known to be  associated with microtubules, and
              are termed MAPs  (microtubule-associated proteins); these are presumed to be 
              involved in the regulation or mediation of microtubule-  associated functions. 
              Working with invertebrate cells as  models, a novel MAP (termed EMAP) was found
              in sea urchins  which, upon analysis, was shown to be similar to known 
              regulatory subunits of G-proteins (a class of regulatory  proteins in cells
              which are involved in a wide variety of  signal transduction phenomena) and
              which was also shown to  bind to dynamin, a GTP-ase implicated in certain
              microtubule-  mediated vesicle movement phenomena.  Based on these  findings, a
              testable model has been developed in which  dynamin and EMAP are postulated to
              be microtubule linker  proteins that associate with each other, with
              microtubules,  and with vesicles.  These associations may in turn be  regulated
              by GTP binding and phosphorylation. The  experiments proposed in this project
              will test key parts of  the model.  The research promises to shed light on how
              the  microtubule system works in cells.  ***
