Title       : Gordon Research Conference on "Oxygen Radicals in Biology", to be held February
               6-11, 1994, Ventura, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1993  
File        : a9315902

Award Number: 9315902
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Uffen                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Reed   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kelvin Davies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Reed  9315902  The Gordon Research Conference on "Oxygen Radicals in Biology" is
              designed to provide chemists,  biophysicist, biochemists, cell biologists,
              clinicians, radiologists and other biomedical scientists with  "cutting edge"
              science on oxygen radicals in chemical and biological systems. This research
              conference  is held every two years; the next meeting will be held February
              6-11, 1994, at the Doubletree Hotel,  Ventura, California. Seven conferences
              have been held since 1981 and they have proven to be extremely  productive
              based on the large number of applicants and the post-meeting evaluations. Funds
              are requested  to partially support travel, subsistence and registration costs
              for speakers and session chairs from the  United States and one individual from
              Canada. All attendees at the past two conferences were invited to  submit
              suggestions for the prograrn to be presented in 1994. Nearly one half replied,
              and their suggestions  were used along with those from some principal advisors
              to select and invite the speakers listed in the  1994 program. All speakers
              have accepted the invitation to describe their frontier research on oxygen 
              radicals in biology. Topics to be covered include: (i) superoxide radical,
              superoxide dismutase, familial  amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS), SOD
              mimics; (ii) nitric oxide and peroxynitrite chemistry and  pathology, nitric
              oxide synthesis, nitric oxide progenitors and toxicology, nitric oxide and cell
              signaling,  (iii) oxidants and gene regulation, antioxidants and gene
              regulation, free radical base damage and DNA  replication, reclox regulation of
              gene expression and DNA repair, (iv) in vivo sources of iron and  generation of
              oxidative stress, iron regulatory element and ferritin gene expression, (v) in
              vivo radical  detection methods, (vi) antioxidants and peroxidation of
              lipoproteins, radical damage and disease. In  addition there will be a plenary
              evening lecture on the biological consequences of oxidative stress. Two 
              separate poster session of two  days each are scheduled for an anticipated
              75-80 posters. Total attendance  is limited to 135 by Gordon Conference rules.
              The Gordon Research Conference provides an excellent  and needed forum for the
              diversity of both participants and research areas. The main strength of this 
              Gordon Research Conference is the opportunities offered for scientists in
              different disciplines to interact  in an extended and uninterrupted fashion.
              Cross fertilization of cognate fields occurs and attendees  frequently
              establish new collaborative research initiatives. The Gordon Research
              Conference on Oxygen  Radicals in Biology plays a crucial role in establishing
              frontier research in an increasingly important and  clinically relevant field. 
              %%%  The Gordon Research Conference on "Oxygen Radicals in Biology" is designed
              to provide chemists,  biophysicist, biochemists, cell biologists, clinicians,
              radiologists and other biomedical scientists with  "cutting edge" science on
              oxygen radicals in chemical and biological systems. This research conference 
              is held every two years; the next meeting will be held February 6-11, 1994, at
              the Doubletree Hotel,  Ventura, California. Frontier research on oxygen
              radicals in biology will be presented and discussed in  detail in an informal
              setting. Topics to be covered include: (i) key aspects of diseases that appear
              to be  related to failure to protect against the toxic effects of oxygen. Thus
              the Conference will learn the latest  information of the active forms oxygen,
              the superoxide radical, and the enzyme, superoxide dismutase,  recently found
              to be associated with Lou Gehrigs disease. This disease of the motor functions
              of the  central nervous system is also known as familial amyotrophic lateral
              sclerosis (FALS). New agents and  possible drugs for the disease, superoxide
              dismutase (SOD) mimics will be described including how they  may in the future
              substitute for the damaged SOD that appears to have undergone mutation in some
              of  the patients with FALS. A most exciting aspect o f the Conference will be
              the sessions on the cell  signaling system based on a toxic gas, nitric oxide,
              (NO). This compound is also important in the killing  of foreign bacteria by
              its reaction with active oxygen, superoxide radical, to form an even more toxic
               compound. peroxynitrite. The chemistry and pathology of this compound should
              provide very important  information about various systems in the body that are
              important for our protection by the white cells or  leukocytes of the blood
              against infections. We now know that oxygen-based stress can cause gene 
              regulation, thus the need for antioxidants such as vitamin E to protect against
              gene damage can be related  to free radical base damage and repair. In vivo
              sources of iron generate oxidative stress by activation of  oxygen. Thus, iron
              regulatory element and ferritin (an iron carrying protein) gene expression are
              essential  for the control of iron in the body. These will be discussed in some
              detail. In vivo radical detection  methods, antioxidants and peroxidation of
              lipoproteins, radical damage and related diseases are also topics  for the
              Conference. In addition there will be a plenary evening lecture on the
              biological consequences of  oxidative stress and relationships to human
              diseases and aging. Two separate poster session of two days  each are scheduled
              for an anticipated 75-80 posters. Total attendance is limited to 135 by Gordon 
              Conference rules. The Gordon Research Conference provides an excellent and
              needed forum for the  diversity of both participants and research areas. The
              main strength of this Gordon Research Conference  is the opportunities offered
              for scientists in different disciplines to interact in an extended and 
              uninterrupted fashion. Cross fertilization of cognate fields occurs and
              attendees frequently establish new  collaborative research initiatives. The
              Gordon Research Conference on Oxygen Radicals in Biology plays  a crucial role
              in establishing frontier research in an increasingly important and clinically
              releva nt field.  ***
