Title       : Growth of Phosphides and Arsenide Phosphides by Solid SourceMolecular Beam
               Epitaxy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1996       
File        : a9315998

Award Number: 9315998
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277715             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary W. Wicks wicks@optics.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9315998  Wicks  This proposal concerns an advance in the technology of molecular
              beam epitaxy (MBE) that the solves the earlier difficulties with the use of
              solid phosphorus sources and enables the phosphine-free (and arsine-free)
              growth of phosphorus containing materials of quality at least equal to those of
              the gas source techniques.  Specifically, it is proposed to further preliminary
              results obtained on the use of solid charges of phosphorus in valved effusion
              cells for the growth of phosphides, and to extend this approach to the use of
              solid phosphorus and arsenic valved effusion for the growth of
              arsenide/phosphide alloys and arsenide/phosphide heterojunctions.    The
              project will be a comprehensive study of the influence of solid source MBE
              growth parameters (growth temperature, beam fluxes, duration of growth
              interruptions at interfaces, group V dimer vs. tetramer species, different
              vendors of phosphorus, etc.) on materials characteristics.  Materials
              characteristics will be evaluated with a variety of electrical and optical
              measurements.  The ultimate characterization of materials will be the
              performance of the materials in devices, such as diode lasers (AlGaInP/GaAs and
              GaInAsP/InP) and heterojunction bipolar transistors.  Most of these materials
              and device characterizations will be done in-house, however a significant
              amount of collaboration will occur with researchers from other universities and
              industrial research laboratories.  A second aspect of the project is concerned
              with MBE hardware issues such as pumping; dealing with flammable deposits in
              the MBE machine; and beam control, stability, and switching.  Iterations on
              hardware configurations and designs will be required to optimize the operation
              of the system with solid phosphorous sources.    Success in this proposed
              program would establish that valved, solid source MBE has equivalent (or
              perhaps even superior) capabilities to those of gas source MBE (GSMBE) and
              organometallic vapor phase epitaxy (OMPVE), thereby eliminating th e need to
              use arsine and phosphine.  The resulting improvements in safety and cost would
              benefit those already in the important field of phosphorous-containing
              semiconductors, and open up the field to those who are not presently willing or
              able to use toxic gases.  ***
