Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some Analytical Aspects of the Theory of the Integrable
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1993  
File        : a9315964

Award Number: 9315964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42212              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander R. Its   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Its  9300638       The research supported by this award falls into three 
              related areas in the mathematical theory of nonlinear integrable    equations,
              that is equations which admit a Lax-pair  representation. The work derives from
              the first use of inverse  scattering methods in solving nonlinear equations and
              has evolved   into an important branch of mathematical physics. The analytic 
              aspects of inverse scattering include a wide range of problems      arising in
              the study of the solutions of integrable equations.  For example, a large class
              of explicit quasiperiodical  finite-gap solutions, as well as the comprehensive
              description of  the long-time behavior of the solution of the Cauchy problem
              for  an integrable system, can be obtained by inverse scattering.   This
              project focuses on the application of the Riemann-Hilbert  problem technique to
              the asymptotic analysis of the correlation  functions of the quantum exactly
              solvable models.  Continuing  work will also be done on the development of the
              isomonodromy  technique for the investigation of the Painleve-type ordinary 
              differential equations and their application to the matrix model  of 2D quantum
              gravity. A third line of investigation will be  concerned with boundary value
              problems of integrable equations  within the framework of the finite-gap
              integration and  Riemann-Hilbert problem approach.       Differential equations
              form a basis for mathematical  modeling of the physical world.  The role of
              mathematical  analysis is not so much to create the equations as it is to 
              provide qualitative and quantitative information about the  solutions.  This
              may include answers to questions about  uniqueness, smoothness and growth.  In
              addition, analysis often  develops methods for approximation of solutions and
              estimates on  the accuracy of these approximations. The work represented in 
              this project has close relationships with theoretical physics as  well as the
              traditional synergisms with studies of wave phenomena  ***
