Title       : Neutron and X-Ray Scattering Studies of Disordered Magnets, Especially Lamellar
               Copper Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1996      
File        : a9315715

Award Number: 9315715
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Birgeneau robertjb@MIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9315715  Birgeneau  This  experimental condensed matter physics project 
              investigates  (1)  lamellar  copper  oxides,  which  form  the  basis  of  high
               temperature superconductors, and (2) model crystalline insulating  magnets
              which are extremely disordered at the microscopic  level.  These interrelated
              materials represent problems which are at  the  frontiers   of   materials 
              physics.  For  the   copper   oxides,  understanding  of both the normal and
              superconducting  states  is  still  remarkably  primitive; while in  the  case 
              of  disordered  magnets,  sample  history  and  irreproducibility  of 
              properties  require  an  extension of existing understanding  of  equilibrium 
              properties  of  materials.  Neutron and  x-ray  diffraction  will  provide  an
              atomic level picture of the magnetic properties,  and  how  this picture
              changes as the structural length scale that  is  studied  is  increased. This
              research is of both fundamental  and  technical importance and may lead to
              production of new and higher  quality superconducting and magnetic materials. 
              %%%  This  experimental condensed matter physics project  investigates  (1) 
              lamellar  copper  oxides,  which  form  the  basis  of  high  temperature
              superconductors, and (2) model crystalline insulating  magnets which are
              extremely disordered at the microscopic  level.  These interrelated materials
              represent problems which are at  the  frontiers   of   materials  physics.  For
               the   copper   oxides,  understanding  of both the normal and superconducting 
              states  is  still  remarkably  primitive; while in  the  case  of  disordered 
              magnets,  sample  history  and  irreproducibility  of  properties  require  an 
              extension of existing understanding  of  equilibrium  properties  of 
              materials.  Neutron and  x-ray  diffraction  will  provide  an atomic level
              picture of the magnetic properties,  and  how  this picture changes as the
              structural length scale that  is  studied  is  increased. This research is of
              both fundamental  and  technical imp ortance and may lead to production of new
              and higher  quality superconducting and magnetic materials.  ***
