Title       : Studies of the Mechanism of Pyridine Nucleotide Dependent Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1996        
File        : a9315654

Award Number: 9315654
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce M. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9315654  Anderson  The objective of this project are to gain further
              understanding of  the functioning of pyridine nucleotides as coenzymes for
              oxidation-  reduction reactions and as substrates for NADases, NMNases, 
              nucleotide pyrophosphatases, and ADP-ribosylases  Structural  analogs of NAD,
              NADP, NMN, and nicotinamide mononucleotide will be  synthesized, chemically
              characterized, and applied in studies of  selective interactions with pyridine
              nucleotide dependent enzymes.   Included will be derivatives designed as
              alternate substrates,  reversible inhibitors, fluorescent probes, and
              site-labeling  reagents.  The project will involve the purification of pyridine
               nucleotide dependent enzymes followed by characterization with  respect to
              chemical, physical and kinetic properties, and  identification of functional
              groups involved in catalysis, binding  and regulatory processes.  Enzymes
              chosen for study include the  NMN:ATP adenylytransferase, NAD kinase, and
              selected dehydrogenases  of Haemophilus influenzae, enzymes involved in the
              unique NAD  metabolism of this organism, and essential for meeting the unique 
              NAD growth requirement of this organism, and the glucose 6-  phosphate
              dehydrogenase of Azotobacter vinelandii, an enzyme of  importance for producing
              reduced pyridine nucleotides as primary  electron donors for nitrogen fixation.
               These studies will employ  spectrophotometry, fluorimetry, titrimetry, HPLC,
              electrophoresis,  affinity chromatography, and a number of general biochemical
              and  chemical techniques.%%%       The energy requirement for the maintenance
              and support of growth of   living cells can be met through reactions involving
              the oxidation  of various cell nutrients.  These oxidative reactions are
              enzyme-  catalyzed and in most cases, involve enzymes (catalytic proteins) 
              that function in conjunction with one of two common second reaction 
              components, namely, the pyridine nucleotide coenzymes.  These  coenzymes are
              organic compounds that are essential for the  oxidative proce sses to occur and
              therefore, are of prime importance  for cell metabolism.  the objective of this
              project is to gain  further understanding of the way in which these coenzymes 
              participate in the oxidative reactions.  In these studies, several  enzymes
              that catalyze this type of reaction will be purified  through various
              fractionation techniques.  As pure proteins, these  enzymes will be studied
              with respect to specific interactions with  the pyridine nucleotide coenzymes. 
              To facilitate these studies,  the chemical properties of the coenzymes will be
              altered by  preparing structural analogs of the natural coenzymes.  The 
              structural analogs will include derivatives designed to accelerate  or inhibit
              the enzymes involved.  Attention will be paid to  specific enzyme-coenzyme
              interactions that could be impotant for  metabolic control of the enzymes in
              their intracellular  environment.  Enzymes will be chosen for study due to
              their  involvement in important biological processes.  One such enzyme  will be
              obtained from Azotobacter vinelandii, a microorganism  currently  under study
              because of is importance in nitrogen  fixation.  Other enzymes will be obtained
              from Haemophilus  iinfluenzae, the causative agent of bacterial meningitis in
              infants   ***
