Title       : Maximal Use of Information from Macromolecular X-Ray Diffractions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1995  
File        : a9315840

Award Number: 9315840
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George N. Phillips   (Principal Investigator current)
              James B. Clarage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9315840  Phillips  Dr. Phillips proposes to develop a strategy for the complete 
              refinement of macromolecular structure and dynamics in crystals  by utilizing
              all of the available X-ray scattering data, namely,  the low and high
              resolution Bragg reflections, but more  importantly the diffuse scattering
              between Bragg peaks.  In  addition to the average structure then, the result of
              this  expanded refinement will be a picture of the conformational  states
              available to a macromolecule, knowledge indispensable for  correlating
              molecular structure and dynamics with biochemical  function.  Although
              generally applicable to any macromolecular  crystal, the methods will initially
              be applied to the oxygen  binding protein myoglobin, the nucleic acid transfer
              RNA, as well  as the enzyme aspartate aminotransferase where disorder in the 
              molecule's ligand binding domain can be controlled in crystallum.   X-ray
              diffraction data will be collected on imaging plates, which  afford the dynamic
              range necessary for collecting the weak  diffuse scattering signal, and for
              placing this signal on the  same absolute scale as the much more intense Bragg
              data.   Molecular dynamics calculations will play in integral role in the 
              extended refinement of the Bragg and diffuse intensities; thus  high
              performance computing technologies will prove a useful tool.  %%%  The
              microscope has always played a role in science, particularly  biology.  The
              more detail visible, the deeper our understanding  of the mechanics of life. 
              Even the most powerful glass lenses  cannot image atoms however.  To see what
              life looks like down at  the level of atoms and molecules, X-ray
              crystallography is used.   In this technique, high intensity X-rays are
              scattered off a  sample; then sophisticated computer algorithms are employed to
               analyze the results, acting as 'mathematical lenses' to form  pictures of the
              arrangement of atoms in the biological structure.   X-ray crystallography has
              had an enormous impact on our  understanding of the atomic stru cture of the
              biological world,  from the earliest structure of the genetic code DNA to the 
              structure of enzymes involved in the replication of the AIDS  virus. 
              Nevertheless, until now X-ray crystallographic  researchers have only analyzed
              part of the signal from their  scattering experiments, namely, the data
              corresponding to the  average, static picture of a biological molecule.  Our
              atomic  views of life are consequently motionless at present.  Watching a 
              butterfly or a ballerina, however, we all know that what makes  living
              organisms special are their movements.  Thus, we propose  developing methods to
              analyze all of the X-ray data, the  traditional part due to the average atomic
              structure as well as  the part due to atomic movements.  This will lead to
              dynamic  pictures of living processes down at the atomic level.  The  proposed
              study, though primarily motivated by questions in  biology, will require new
              understanding in the physics of X-ray  scattering as well as substantial high
              performance computing  technologies.  The result promise an increased
              understanding of  life at its most fundamental level.   ***
