Title       : Identification of Encephalic Photoreceptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1993    
File        : a9315307

Award Number: 9315307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14651              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pierre Deviche   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              9315307  Deviche    It is well established that a wide variety of organisms have
               internal biological clocks that are instrumental in allowing them  to maintain
              synchrony to both daily (i.e., circadian) and annual  cycles of environmental
              change.  Plants and animals routinely  experience small adjustments in these
              rhythms, often triggered by  intensity of light, to synchronize their internal
              clocks with the  passing seasons or changes in the environment.  Indeed,
              precisely  timed bursts of bright light can stop the daily cycle of the human 
              biological clock.  A major question is how photic signals are  transduced into
              physiological responses.  Two structures in the  brain that have been
              identified as playing a role in this response  are the suprachiasmatic nuclei
              of the hypothalamus and the pineal  gland.  These structures receive neural
              input from the retina of  the eye when it is stimulated by light.  It has been
              proposed that  some vertebrates also may possess extra-pineal, extra-retinal 
              photoreceptors, referred to as deep brain photoreceptors, which are  capable of
              entraining circadian rhythms.  At this time we do not  know the location,
              sensitivity, or most importantly the neural  connections of these putative
              receptors.  This project awards Dr.  Deviche a small grant for exploratory
              resesarch to address this  important problem.  He has found a model system in a
              species of  highly photoperiodic arctic bird that possibly could provide the 
              answers. Using an antibody that identifies rhodopsin-like  photopigments in the
              retina and the pineal, he will locate cell  bodies and terminals in the brain. 
              Light conditions will be  manipulated to determine whether light exposure
              stimulates the  expression of these photopigments in these brain cells.  If 
              successful, this will be the first demonstration that some cells  deep within
              the central nervous system are photosensitive.  These  results would open new
              avenues towards understanding the mechanisms  by which light stimulation
              reaches and alters th e nervous system to  influence biological timing, and
              will have impact also beyond  neuroscience to arctic biology and ornithology.
              Understanding the  basic neural mechanisms for timing could lead to treatment
              of  problems such as impaired attentiveness that affect human  performance
              during work shifts from day to night, or jet lag, or  other factors that make
              the internal clock out of sync with the  environment.  ***
