Title       : Geochemical Integrity, Geochronology, and Paleoclimatology of Late Pleistocene
               Molluscan Specimens, U.S. Middle and Southeastern Atlantic Coastal Plain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9315052

Award Number: 9315052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272856             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Wehmiller   (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Krantz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9315052  Wehmiller       Assessing the geochemical integrity of fossil specimens
              is a  critical step in resolving several long-standing conflicts in  Coastal
              Plain geochronology that may stem from the subtle overprint  of diagenetic
              alteration on the existing data.  An integrated  approach will be adopted that
              will utilize standard methods in  addition to newly developed techniques to
              identify and quantify  possible alteration with a precision previously
              unobtainable.   Advanced quantitative HPLC and GC techniques will be used to
              screen  mollusk samples used in aminostratigraphy for significant  hydrolysis
              and/or loss of amino acids from the shells.  Gas  chromatography-isotope ratio
              mass spectrometry (GC-IRMS) will be  used to assess the influence of extraneous
              amino acids on the  indigenous amino acid population.  Recently developed mass 
              spectrometric methods will be used for study of the U-series  isotopic system
              in coral samples.  Between 10 and 20 paired  specimens of corals attached to
              mollusks will provide a direct  intercalibration of U-series and amino acid
              chronologies.         The carbon and oxygen isotopic composition of the mollusk
               shells will be used for paleoenvironmental interpretation and  further
              assessment of potential diagenetic alteration of mollusks  used for
              aminostratigraphy.  Seasonal temperature ranges can be  calculated from shell 
              18O profiles and the mode of seasonal carbon  cycling may be inferred from the 
              13C records.  Two experimental  tests of models used to interpret shell isotope
              profiles are  included in the project.  The first will develop and improve
              means  of distinguishing salinity from temperature effects on the isotopic 
              composition.  The second is an in situ experiment relating the  13C  of the
              seawater and sediment porewater bicarbonate reservoir to the    13C of the
              shell.  Both tests address fundamental problems in using  stable isotopes for
              high-resolution paleoenvironmental  reconstruction.       The major scientific
              goals are 1) to test correla tions between  the Atlantic Coastal Plain
              stratigraphic record and global records  of Pleistocene sea levels, and 2) to
              document the geographic  temperature gradient along the Atlantic Coast during
              interglacial  episodes.  The project will involve collaboration with the US 
              Geological Survey as part of a new initiative to study continental  and coastal
              records of climate during the last interglacial.
