Title       : Collaborative Research: Bloom Dynamics and Food Web Structure in the Ross Sea:
               Role of Microzooplankton in Controlling Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9315027

Award Number: 9315027
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Evelyn J. Lessard elessard@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9315027  Lessard  The growing season for phytoplankton in polar oceans is short,
               but intense.  There is an increasing body of evidence that in  many Antarctic
              habitats, the most active period may be very early  in the season, a period
              that has not been emphasized in previous  investigations.  This project is part
              of an interdisciplinary  program that focuses on the dynamics of the spring
              phytoplankton  bloom in a highly productive subsystem of the Antarctic, the
              Ross  Sea.  The overall program will test hypotheses related to the  initiation
              of the phytoplankton bloom shortly after the onset of  ice melt, the mechanisms
              controlling phytoplankton growth and  productivity in spring, the implications
              and short-term fate of  high productivity in spring, and the transition from
              spring to  midsummer conditions.  The focus of this proposal is the role of 
              microzooplankton in controlling the production and fate of carbon  during the
              two types of blooms.  Objectives are: 1) to determine  biomass, abundance, size
              and selected species composition of  primary producer assemblages, 2) to
              determine similar features of  nano- and microplanktonic heterotrophic
              assemblages, 3) to  measure total community grazing on heterotrophic bacteria
              and  phytoplankton, 4) to examine which grazers are the major  herbivores and
              bacterivores, and 5) to measure the contribution  of microzooplankton and
              mesozooplankton egesta, sinking of algal  cells and colonies, and sinking of
              protozoan assemblages  associated with detritus to the total carbon flux from
              the  euphotic zone through 250 m depth.  Water samples for abundance  and
              biomass determinations will be taken and samples will be  examined with
              epifluorescence microscopy.  Grazing rates will be  measured using the dilution
              grazing technique and the dual-  isotope radiolabeling single cell method. 
              Carbon fluxes will be  determined on sinking material collected with particle 
              interceptor traps at the base of the euphotic zone and two deeper  depths,
              using microscopical analys is.  An understanding of these  processes and other
              fundamental processes studied by  collaborating investigators will contribute
              to the understanding  of the role of the Southern Ocean in present, past and
              predicted  future sequestration of carbon, as well as in other global 
              elemental cycles.
