Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Immigration and Settlementof Paralichthid
               Flounders; a Potential Source of RecruitmentVariation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1994      
File        : a9315541

Award Number: 9315541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald E. Hoss   (Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Burke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : National Marine Fisheries
	      
	      Beaufort, NC  28516    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5921,9189,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9315541  Hoss    This award supports a two-year cooperative  research project
              between Dr. Donald Hoss, Chief  of the Coastal and Estuarine Ecology Division, 
              National Marine Fisheries Service, and Professor  Masaru Tanaka, Department of
              Fisheries, Kyoto  University, Kyoto, Japan.  The project combines  field
              observations and laboratory experiments on  paralicthid founders in Japan.  In
              addition to  Dr. Hoss, Dr. John Selden Burke, a fisheries  biologist at NMFS,
              will participate in the  research in Japan.     The project involves field
              sampling to determine  vertical distribution of flounder larvae  immigrating to
              nursery areas in Wakasa Bay, Japan  (Japan Sea) and Onslow Bay, North Carolina
              in  relation to tidal stage.  Benthic sampling will  be conducted to determine
              age and relative growth  rates (otolith analysis) of settled flounders  among
              shelf, beach, and estuarine nursery  habitats in the two study areas. 
              Laboratory  experiments will be conducted to compare (1)  activity patterns of
              larvae relative to tidal  stage, (2) developmental patterns of levels and 
              production activity of hormones associated with  migration and adaptation to
              low salinity  (thyroxine and prolactin), and (3) development  rates and size at
              metamorphosis.  Although the  study areas are similar in climate, they differ 
              in tidal range, coastal salinity, and  availability of estuarine habitat,
              allowing  comparison of paralichthids from different  physical environments. 
              Similarities and  differences between the species in relation to  physical
              factors should provide insight to  processes of recruitment to nurseries.  ***
