Title       : The Role of Alternative Respiration in Marine Phytoplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1996   
File        : a9315663

Award Number: 9315663
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Lewitus lewitus@belle.baruch.sc  (Principal Investigator current)
              Todd M. Kana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lewitus  9315663    The recognition that light can stimulate respiration has 
              cast uncertainties in  primary productivity measurements for  years. 
              Resolution of this often pronounced effect is  complicated by the existence of
              several respiratory pathways  in phytoplankton (e.g. "dark" respiration,
              photorespiration,  mealier reaction), all driven by the cell in different ways.
               It was recently discovered in the laboratory that several  estuarine
              phytoplankton contain another such pathway,  "alternative   respiration", that
              previously had been  reported in few species and whose function in
              phytoplankton  is poorly understood.  The potential for expression of this 
              pathway can be very high (up to 99% of the total light-  stimulated
              respiration), and glucose enrichment in the light  can this potential.  Based
              on this preliminary findings and  higher plant research, it is hypothesized
              that the  alternative pathway has energy dissipating role in  phytoplankton --
              the pathway is engaged when the cellular  energy supply exceeds the demands for
              growth, maintenance,  and storage.  This hypothesis will be tested by examining
               the effects of light, dissolved organic substrate, and  nutrient supplies on
              the capacity and activity of  alternative reparation in recently isolated
              phytoplankton  clones and in field populations.  This will be accomplished,  in
              part, by the use of membrane inlet mass spectrometry and  a newly developed
              antibody to the main enzyme of the  alternative pathway.  Understanding how
              alternative  respiration works impacts our understanding of how primary 
              productivity is controlled --  this process may be a rapid  and efficient means
              by which phytoplankton can dissipate  excess carbon and energy in the upper
              euphotic zone.    ***
