Title       : Fluxes of Dissolved Organic Matter from Marine Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1995       
File        : a9315529

Award Number: 9315529
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger W. Baier                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69454              (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Berelson berelson@earth.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,9189,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9315529 Berelson  Subject: Fluxes of Dissolved Organic Matter From Marine
              Sediments   Previous work as begun to illustrate the important role that
              dissolved organic carbon (DOC) fluxes from marine sediments play in oceanic and
              sedimentary carbon cycling. At the same time, benthic fluxes of dissolved
              organic nitrogen (DON) represent a poorly quantified component of sedimentary
              nitrogen remineralization that may be similarly important in oceanic and
              sedimentary nitrogen cycling. The goals of this proposal are therefore to
              continue studies of benthic DOC fluxes, and to begin studies examining benthic
              DON fluxes.  Pore water DOC an DON studies will also be carried out in
              conjunction with these flux studies.  In part, this work will examine the
              characteristics of pore water DOC and DON as they relate to the controls on
              benthic fluxes of DOC and DON. Our proposed work will be carried out at sites
              in the Chesapeake Bay on the California continental margin.  Studies in
              continental margin sediments are of particular interest since several lines of
              evidence suggest that carbon and nitrogen cycling in margin sediments (and
              benthic fluxes of DOC and DON from margin sediments) may play important roles
              in oceanic carbon and nitrogen cycling.  Given the range of characteristics
              among the sites chosen, the data will provide further insights into the factors
              controlling benthic fluxes of DOC and DON.  These results will be used to
              improve estimates of the glo bal DOC flux from marine sediments and to initiate
              a similar examination of the role of benthic DON fluxes in oceanic and
              sedimentary nitrogen cycling. Finally, these new results will be used to
              critically examine a model which may describe the relationship between benthic
              DOC fluxes and overall rates of benthic carbon remineralizations. ***          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
