Title       : The Relationship Between Embryonic and Adult Pattern Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1996      
File        : a9315653

Award Number: 9315653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199971             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Q. Martindale   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9315653  Martindale    Ctenophores are the first extant phylum of metazoan 
              organisms whose body plan displays bilateral symmetry and  evolved prior to the
              divergence of the protostomes and  deuterostomes. Abundant evidence now exists
              which indicates  that the major pattern forming mechanisms were in place  prior
              to the protostome-deuterostome radiation. Ctenophores  undergo a highly
              stereotyped mode of development in which  the normal fate of individual
              blastomeres can be precisely  predicted. Adult structures derived from deleted
              blasotmeres  are not replaced by surviving blastomeres during subsequent 
              embryogenesis. Adult ctenophores on the other hand are  capable of regenerating
              vast regions of their body,  including all pattern elements and cell types. Dr.
               Martindale's prior work has shown that ctenophore embryos  are not mosaics of
              individual parts but that they have  "organizing centers" analogous in their
              function to the  dorsal lip in vertebrate embryos and the D quadrant in 
              spiralian embryos. The deletion of this organizing center in  ctenophore
              embryos results in abnormal development of  several different structures to
              which these deleted cells  themselves make no direct contribution. This implies
              that,  as in adult regeneration, the embryo requires intercellular  signaling.
              The experiments proposed here will advance our  understanding of the
              mechanistic basis of  this pattern  regulation both in the ctenophore embryo
              and adult. The  specific aims are: 1) To generate an accurate fate map of  the
              ctenophore embryo to identify the origins of all known  cell types, with
              special reference to the origins of nerve  cells, mesenchymal cells, muscle
              cells, components of  tentacle sheathes, and the pluripotent stem cells
              involved  in adult regenerative ability, 2) to identify the spatial  and
              temporal characteristics of inductive interactions which  operate to establish
              global symmetry properties and cell  type determination in the ctenophore
              embryo, 3) To finish a  systematic study of the r ole of  individual cell types
              on  the ability of ctenophores to regenerate, and 4) To  determine the role of
              cell division in the ability to  regenerate adult pattern elements. 
              Additionally, tools will  be developed for the study of homeodomain
              transcription  factor genes expressed in ctenophore embryos.  ***
