Title       : Synaptic Interactions Among Neurons of the Hypothalamic Paraventricular Nucleus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1993    
File        : a9315308

Award Number: 9315308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35146              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey G. Tasker tasker@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9111,9237,
Abstract    :
              93015308  Tasker    The hypothalamus is the brain structure that through its
              link  with the pituitary gland, is responsible for controlling most of  the
              organism's basic reproductive and homeostatic functions.   Pituitary hormones
              are released into the blood circulation on  command from the hypothalamus and
              are carried to endocrine and  muscle targets, where they cause steroid
              secretion or muscle  contraction.  As might be expected from the wide range of 
              functions of pituitary hormones, there is a diversity of hormone-  secreting
              systems in the hypothalamus, each activated under  different conditions and
              with different release profiles.  Dr.  Tasker is interested in determining
              whether the distinct  hypothalamic secretory systems interact to alter one
              another's  secretion.  For example, the hormone systems responsible for 
              lactation and for the body's stress response are both located in  the
              paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus.   Empirical  evidence points to an
              interaction between these two systems since  emotional stress can suppress a
              mother's ability to provide milk  to her young, and breast feeding provided the
              mother with a  temporary feeling of calm and well being.  Dr. Tasker will
              employ  electrophysiological and neuroanatomical technique to examine 
              integrative interactions among two subpopulations of neurons  located within
              the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus.  By  combining the simultaneous
              intracellular and whole-cell patch-  clamp recordings, intracellular dye
              injection and  immunohistochemical, he will detect synaptic intercommunication 
              between neurons that synthesize and release different hormones.   These
              findings will provide new insights about the basic  functioning of the
              hypothalamus.  In addition, knowledge about  the interdependence of
              neurosecretory functions and behavior will  increase our understanding of how
              seemingly disparate  physiological responses of the body influence one another.
                   ***
