Title       : Materials Synthesis and Processing in Carbon Dioxide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1996        
File        : a9315429

Award Number: 9315429
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. DeSimone desimone@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9187,9223,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award is made in the Environmentally Benign Chemical Synthesis and 
              Processing Program  and is jointly funded by the Division of Chemistry and the 
              Division of Chemical and Transport  Systems Engineering.  Additional support is
               provided by the Office of Pollution Prevention and  Toxics of the
              Environmental  Protection Agency, and the industrial collaborators are from 
              DuPont, 3M, and  Unilever Research.  Joseph M. DeSimone of the Chemistry
              Department,   University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, will develop
              chemical synthesis and  processing  technologies using carbon dioxide-based
              solvent systems for both  homogeneous and  heterogeneous manufacturing
              processing, and Keith P. Johnston  of the Chemical Engineering  at the
              University of Texas at Austin will perform  studies of phase behavior and
              structures of  microemulsions.  Carbon dioxide is  an environmentally sound
              dispersing medium for chemical  reactions, and has been  shown to be useful for
              polymerization reactions.  In carbon dioxide  solvent, this  research will
              study: (1) synthesis of materials under homogeneous conditions; (2)   phase
              behavior and structure of microemulsions and emulsions; (3) synthesis of 
              materials  utilizing dispersions and emulsion techniques; and (4) processing of
               materials concentrating on  product isolation with desired morphologies.      
               Chemical industry uses large volumes of organic and chlorinated solvents which
               present serious  disposal or recycling problems.  The utility of carbon
              dioxide as  a replacement solvent for the  manufacture of polymers, including
              reforming and  extrusion steps, will be examined in this  project.  Fundamental
              properties of  supercritical fluids and reaction chemistry in this medium  will
              be investigated.   Representative synthetic routes will be tested, so that
              positive results could  be  extended to many systems.
