Title       : Clearinghouse for Networked Information Discovery and Retrieval (CNIDR)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  1996    
File        : a9315306

Award Number: 9315306
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Steven N. Goldstein                     
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1979796            (Estimated)
Investigator: George H. Brett   (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : MCNC
	      P.O. Box 12889
	      Research Triangle Park, NC  277092889    919/248-1800

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,
Abstract    :
              9315306  Brett  A three-year award in the form of a Cooperative Agreement
              between  the National Science Foundation and the Microelectronics Center of 
              North Carolina (MCNC)  will establish the Clearinghouse for  Networked
              Information Discovery and Retrieval (CNIDR).  In the past  year several
              user-friendly client-server tools have been developed  for locating and
              retrieving information contained in platforms  reachable over the Internet. 
              Among them, Wide Area Information  Server (WAIS), Gopher and Archie have become
              very popular,  globally, and World-Wide-Web (WWW) is poised for popularity once
               suitable client software is developed and distributed.  WAIS,  Archie and
              Gopher present overviews of where information of  interest is lilely to reside,
              and then they assist the user in  locating specific information objects.  WWW
              permits a user to  thread a path through the network by opening up network
              connections  to referenced information by mouse-clicking on  active  hypertext.
                While focused on the particulars of WAIS evolution, MCNC will work  closely
              with the developers of other tools toward providing  compatibility and
              consistency, and, to the extent possible,  convergence of the tools. The
              WAIS-specific activity will provide  a central focus and forum for WAIS
              evolution and will minimize the  divergence of individual WAIS-based
              implementations.  In addition,  the CNIDR will conduct a workshop, under the
              auspices of the  Education and Human Resource (EHR) Applications of Advanced 
              Technology Program.  The purpose of the workshop will be to  evaluate the state
              of the art in networked information retrieval as  applied to the EHR materials
              development, teacher enhancement,  network testbed, and dissemination projects,
              and to educate and  support the NSF project investigators in the uses of
              networked  information retrieval tools.
