Title       : Molecular Studies of Homologous Recombination in Xenopus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9315959

Award Number: 9315959
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dana Carroll   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9315959  Carroll  DNA molecules injected into Xenopus oocytes are
              subject to very  efficient homologous recombination, providing that they are
              linear  and have appropriately placed homologous sequences.  This process  has
              been demonstrated in nuclear extracts from oocytes, and it is  known to depend
              on the action of a 5' - 3' exonuclease.  It is  proposed to purify this
              exonuclease from oocyte nuclei and to  characterize its properties,
              particularly with respect to  recombination.  Partial amino acid sequences of
              the purified enzyme  will be determined and antibodies that recognize the
              protein will  be raised.  cDNA clones representing the exonuclease mRNA will be
               isolated and sequenced, allowing comparisons with nuclease  sequences from
              other organisms.  Expression of the exonuclease from  a cDNA clone will be
              engineered in bacteria (or in yeast) to allow  isolation of larger quantities
              of the enzyme for enzymatic and  immunological studies.  Anti-nuclease
              antibodies will be used to  determine where and when during development the
              enzyme is present.   Particular attention will be paid to stages of oogenesis
              and early  embryogenesis in which a role for the exonuclease in DNA metabolism 
              has been hypothesized.  Functions of the exonuclease will be  examined directly
              by using antibodies that block its activity.  The  consequences of injecting
              such antibodies into fertilized eggs will  be determined, with the expectation
              that defects in DNA replication  and chromosome integrity may be found.  Some
              effort will also be  expended in identifying other activities that are
              necessary for  recombination in oocytes.  They will be sought by fractionation
              of  nuclear extracts and assayed by reconstitution of recombination  activity. 
              Anticipated activities include DNA ligase, DNA  polymerase, and a catalyst of
              the annealing of complementary single  strands.  ***  Recombination events very
              like those demonstrated in Xenopus  oocytes have been documented in cells of
              other organisms, including  mammal ian cells. Thus, information of the oocyte
              exonuclease and  other recombination proteins which should result from this
              work  will have wide applicability, perhaps even in approaches to  targeted
              gene manipulation.  In any case, we will be more informed  as to the critical
              parameters of homologous recombination in  Xenopus oocytes.  %%%
