Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Optoelectronic Circuit Design and Fabrication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1994      
File        : a9315335

Award Number: 9315335
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randall Soderquist                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus J. Bachmann k_bachmann@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald Lucovsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zbigniew J. Radzimski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              10        Physical Sciences                       
Program Ref : 5921,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9315335  Bachmann    This award supports a two-year collaborative  research
              project between Professor Klaus  Bachmann, Department of Materials Science and 
              Engineering, North Carolina State University,  and Dr. Mitsumasa Koyanagi,
              Research Center for  Integrated Systems, Hiroshima University,  Japan.  The
              joint research will focus on the  development of new technologies for vertical 
              optical interconnection of silicon (Si) devices  by III-V compound
              semiconductor optoelectronic  devices using active and passive optical 
              components.  The following research issues will  be addressed:  (1)
              heteroepitaxy of III-V  optoelectronic materials on Si chips; (2) 
              heteroepitaxy of Si on III-V optoelectronic  heterostructures devices; (3)
              low-damage dry-  etching of Si and III-V's; (4) metal contacts  to Si and
              III-V's; and (5) passive optical  components including waveguides and
              dielectric  mirrors.    The U.S. and Japanese research groups are  already
              working on projects closely related to  the broader goals of the integrated
              program,  and the interactions will build on and enhance  the value of these
              programs.  The expertise and  facilities at Hiroshima University are in 
              nanofabrication and optical integration, while  the North Carolina State
              University group is  strong in fundamental knowledge of materials  growth,
              device processing, and materials  characterization.  These complementary 
              attributes will permit the researchers to  address advanced topics in both
              scientific and  technological research areas that could not be  pursued by
              either institution separately.  This  research is important for the successful 
              development of new parallel processing computer  system concepts such as
              optically coupled three  dimensional common memory structures.  ***
