Title       : GLOBEC 2000: Nested Interdisciplinary Models for the Gulf of Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a0113461

Award Number: 0113461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $571564             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale B. Haidvogel dale@imcs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              As part of an ongoing GLOBEC-funded interdisciplinary modeling effort for the
              Coastal Gulf of Alaska, this study includes the following technical objectives:
              higher spatial resolution and nested grid capabilities for regional circulation
              modeling, nested mesoscale atmospheric modeling and regional wind and buoyancy
              forcing, and a deep-ocean NPZ model to provide boundary conditions for an
              existing coastal NPZ model. Present single-year simulations of these models
              will be expanded to continuous multi-decadal integrations, designed to provide
              circulation and prey fields to an individual-based model of juvenile salmon.
              Together, these coupled models will be used to explore the mechanisms by which
              interannual/interdecadal variability of physical fields affect the production
              of GLOBEC target zooplankton species and the feeding of juvenile salmon in the
              CGOA. The ecosystem dynamics of these models will be compared with those
              developed under GLOBEC for the California Current System. Central scientific
              issues include: 1) The "optimal stability window" hypothesis where Gargett has
              suggested that variations in the Aleutian Low affect salmon through their
              impact on water column stability in the CGOA and CCS systems. Typically, high
              nutrient but low light conditions are observed in the subarctic gyre adjacent
              to the CGOA, in contrast to low nutrient but high light conditions in the
              subtropical gyre adjacent to the CCS.  And 2) The source of nutrients of the
              CGOA, i.e., the Coastal Gulf Alaska is a downwelling system for nearly all of
              the year. The adverse pressure gradient so produced should work against the
              supply of deep nutrients to the shelf, whether that shelf is smooth and
              straight or (as is the case in the CGOA) punctuated by submarine canyons. These
              comparison will help elucidate the observed (inverse) covariance of salmon in
              the two systems on decadal time scales.
