Title       : Start-up Grant for Continued Research in Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a0113108

Award Number: 0113108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Ortega                            
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49981              (Estimated)
Investigator: Celia A. Evans evansc@paulsmiths.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Paul Smith's College
	      
	      Paul Smiths, NY  12970    518/327-6223

NSF Program : 7174      POSTDOC FELLOW IN SCI, MATH EN
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Improving the publics" understanding of the scientific enterprise and improving
              scientific
literacy have been identified as critical goals in the United
              States. Science learning
occurs in formal (i.e. classroom) as well as in
              informal (i.e. backyards) settings and there
are likely to be, at least,
              qualitative differences in outcomes between these learning
environments. It is
              critical that scientists collaborate with professional science educators
not
              only to identify the components of scientific literacy, but also to understand
              how
learning occurs in these different settings and to help provide this
              information to other
scientists and educators who will be ultimately
              responsible for the education of the
population in both formal and informal
              settings. This proposal seeks funding to continue
and complete the important
              research that I began as a National Science Foundation
PFSMETE Fellow and to
              support the preliminary research and development of two other
projects that
              have resulted directly from my post-doctoral position. For the former, I
              am
proposing to analyze, present and publish my ongoing work on understanding
              the factors
that most affect student attitudes and motivation in an
              established Student/Scientist
Partnership, Forest Watch. The new projects
              include a study of the effects of a
community data collection program called
              Neighborhood Nestwatch on scientific literacy
in participants, and the
              development and implementation of two environmental education
courses at Paul
              Smith's College that will be the cornerstones for the creation of
              an
environmental science education emphasis within the Natural Resource
              Bachelor of
Science degree.

