Title       : ITR/AP: Auction Mechanisms for Complex Resource Allocation Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0113881

Award Number: 0113881
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pinar Keskinocak pinar@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sven Koenig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul M. Griffin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anton J. Kleywegt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wedad Elmaghraby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 1660,1686,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              In this Information Technology Research (ITR) research project, a study of the
              design and use of auction mechanisms for the allocation of scarce resources in
              complex settings will be performed.  The research includes four specific goals:
              (1) the design and development of appropriate bidding environments, (2) the
              identification of participants bidding strategies under well defined bidding
              environments, (3) the development of an understanding of the tradeoffs between
              computational complexity and "goodness" of solution under various bidding
              environments, and (4) the development of an educational program and educational
              tools for teaching the theory and practice of auctions.  Amid the wide range of
              settings where bidding mechanisms are utilized, attention will be focused on
              four important applications spanning the range of issues that can arise in a
              bidding environment: (1) simple multi-unit auctions in e-commerce, (2)
              combinatorial auctions in industrial procurement,  (3) coordination and control
              of multiple robots in uncertain environments, and (4) task allocation on a
              logistics network for ocean carriers.  In essence, an auction is a mechanism by
              which a set of participants communicates information so as to result in a set
              of allocations taking place.  Information that is communicated by a participant
              is called a bid.  The auction designer strives to design a mechanism that has
              desirable characteristics, appropriate for the situation at hand.  Auctions can
              particularly benefit environments with the following two characteristics:  (1)
              the absence of complete information about the participants and (2) problems
              which cannot be solved centrally due to their high computational complexity. 
              While the use of auctions has been applied in numerous market settings, the
              research in auction theory has severely lagged behind. There is little in the
              literature to guide bidders on how to "optimally" bid or to aid auctioneers in
              evaluating the performance of various auction formats.  Even the auction
              consultants will admit that much of their advice is based on logic and past
              experiences, rather than rooted in analytical findings.  It is the goal of this
              research to close the gap between practice and theory by advancing the state of
              the knowledge in the design of auction mechanisms for the allocation of scarce
              resources in complex settings.  

The successful completion of this research
              will broaden the understanding and use of multi-unit auctions as a transaction
              medium and increase the efficacy of such transactions.  Since the researchers
              will be working closely with industry partners including IBM, Home Depot,
              Schneider Logistics, and Orient Overseas Container Line (OOCL), the research
              will be focused on realistic applications.  There will also be a significant
              educational impact in terms of case study development, new course offerings,
              and the development of classroom bidding games.

