Title       : ITR/AP(MPS): Non-Equilibrium Surface Growth and the Scalability of Parallel
               Discrete-Event Simulations for Large Asynchronous Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0113049

Award Number: 0113049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gyorgy Korniss korniss@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Novotny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This award is the result of a proposal submitted to the Information Technology
              Research initiative.  Modeling and simulation of the evolution of natural and
              artificial complex systems are of fundamental importance in both sciences and
              engineering.  In a large class of systems, the underlying dynamic is
              asynchronous, the "updates" in the local "configurations" of the system are
              discrete events in continuous time.  Examples of such systems include
              magnetization dynamics in condensed matter, the evolution of financial markets,
              call arrivals in cellular communication networks, and the spread of emerging
              diseases and epidemics.

To design and develop faithful and scalable parallel
              algorithms to simulate the evolution of large asynchronous systems is one of
              the most challenging areas in parallel computing.  The ultimate goal of this
              proposal is to better understand how the scalability of Parallel Discrete-Event
              Simulation (PDES) algorithms can be enhanced, to program and run PDES
              simulations for a few chosen applications in science and engineering, and to
              educate junior researchers to allow them to prepare for careers at the
              interface between basic sciences and information technology.  These types of
              PDES can be applied to an extremely wide spectrum of computational problems in
              science, engineering, manufacturing, biology, and economics.

PDES use the
              concept of local random simulated time as well as a synchronization scheme. 
              The parallel algorithm must concurrently advance the local simulated times of
              each subsystem carried by a processing element (PE), without violating
              causality.  In a "conservative" PDES scheme, only those PE's which are
              guaranteed not to violate causality attempt the updates and increment their
              local time.  The rest of the PE's must idle.  In the "optimistic" approach the
              PE's do not have to idle, but since causality is not guaranteed at every
              update, the simulated history on certain PE's can become corrupted.  This
              requires a complex "rollback" protocol to correct erroneous computation.  Both
              simulation approaches lead to an evolving and fluctuating time horizon during
              algorithm execution.

The research will exploit a novel connection recently
              discovered by the PI's and collaborators between non-equilibrium surface growth
              phenomena and the evolution of the fluctuating time horizon of conservative
              schemes.  As the number of computer nodes available to a computational science
              and engineering problem increases to many thousands, questions of scalability
              of the underlying algorithms must be answered.  These questions include both
              how well the algorithms scale asymptotically (in the limit of an infinite
              number of processors) and how they approach the asymptotic limit.  Recently the
              PI's studied the case where each PE is connected to its nearest-neighbor PE's
              on regular lattice topologies, and each PE has no additional computation to
              perform if it is not advancing time.  This is close to a "worst-case" scenario
              for scalability of the algorithm.  Nevertheless, it was shown that the fraction
              of non-idling PE's is finite and bounded away from zero in the asymptotic limit
              of infinitely many PE's.  Hence the algorithm is scalable as the problem size
              and number of PE's increase.

The methodology of the PI's and collaborators
              used to obtain these results for PDES is the powerful machinery of
              non-equilibrium interface/surface physics, notably finite-size scaling and
              universality, applied to the fluctuating time horizon.  This research aims to
              extend this type of investigation.  In particular, the methods of finite-size
              scaling, universality, renormalization group, coarse-graining, and mean-field
              approaches that are commonly applied to physical surfaces will be applied to
              both simple model time surfaces and realistic time surfaces that arise during
              PDES simulations in science and engineering.  Based on the "morphological"
              properties of the time horizon, the PI's will design and develop algorithms
              that optimize simulation speed and data management at the same time.  

The
              research is interdisciplinary at the border between computer science,
              non-equilibrium surface physics, and the study of complex systems.  It will
              contribute to the engineering and fine-tuning of scalable massively parallel
              algorithms, while actual implementations will help to understand cooperative
              behavior in large asynchronous systems.  This grant also puts special emphasis
              on the education and training of young scientists.
%%%
***


 


