Title       : ITR/SI(SPS)+AP+SY: High Resolution Video and Still Reconstruction with
               Applications to Visual Communications and Image Enhancement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a0113681

Award Number: 0113681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yucel Altunbasak yucel@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1656,9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Proposal 0113681
Altunbasak, Yucel
GA Tech Res Corp -
              GIT

ITR/SI(SPS)+AP+SY: High-Resolution High-Precision Video
              Reconstruction
with Applications to Visual Communications and Image
              Enhancement

The problem of resolution and bit-depth enhancement from
              compressed data will become increasingly important for applications in the
              emerging, error-prone, restricted bandwidth, wireless and heterogeneous
              computing environments. This research involves enhancing the  spatial, temporal
              and bit-depth resolution of video signals by means of multi-frame and
              multi-channel processing. The system that is developed as part of this work is
              applicable to various areas of video communications and multi-media
              processing.

The number of bits assigned to represent the intensity or color
              information at points in an image is usually referred as the bit depth. When
              the bit depth is not sufficient, images suffer from ridge-like structures known
              as false contours. Bit-depth limitations become important when low-contrast
              details are required, as in medical imaging, aerial/satellite photography, and
              high-quality scanning applications. Noting the similarity between the bit-depth
              and spatial resolution enhancement, this research examines a method for
              increasing the bit depth.  Specifically, when a sequence of video frames is
              available, it is possible to achieve a higher bit depth and higher spatial
              resolution through a projections-onto-convex-sets (POCS) based data fusion
              method.

The multiple-frame video processing algorithms and their multimedia
              and communication applications form an integral part of the signal processing
              education agenda at Georgia Tech.  Motivated and encouraged by the level of
              interest in multi-frame processing (by the students), the project constructs a
              web-centric demo of image resolution and precision enhancement for the benefit
              of the undergraduates as well as the research community.

