Title       : Conference: Microbial Cell-Cell Signalling, to be held in Snowbird, Utah, July
               6-9, 2001.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2001      
File        : a0113022

Award Number: 0113022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Winans   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Soc For Microbiology
	      1752 N Street
	      Washington, DC  200362804    202/737-3600

NSF Program : 1114      CELLULAR SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1136,1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Only a few years ago, the exchange of chemical signals, or pheromones, between
              bacteria was considered the exception rather than the rule. A small number of
              examples of cell-cell signaling had been well described, including the
              bioluminescence regulatory systems of Vibrio fischeri and Vibrio harveyi, the
              conjugal transfer system of Enterococcus faecalis, the production of
              antibiotics by Streptomyces spp., and the development of multicellular fruiting
              bodies of Myxococcus xanthus. It was assumed that cell-cell communication was
              not used by most bacteria. Cell-cell signaling in bacteria was considered an
              interesting subject of research, but not one of fundamental importance. In the
              past ten years, an enormous number of new examples of inter-bacterial signaling
              have been reported. These systems regulate a number of processes as diverse as
              virulence, sporulation, antibiotic production, DNA exchange, and development of
              multicellular structures. It is now understood that, in fact, most bacteria
              communicate with one another using secreted chemical molecules. Inter-cellular
              communication systems are fascinating because they allow bacteria to
              coordinately control the gene expression of the entire community. This ability
              fundamentally blurs the distinction between unicellular and multicellular forms
              of life. Several of these signaling systems are also extremely important to
              human health and the health of plants and animals in our environment, because
              they regulate the virulence determinants of bacterial pathogens.  Because of
              the recent explosion in research in the area of bacterial communication, the
              ASM decided to provide an opportunity for scientists in the field to meet and
              discuss their research, by sponsoring a scientific conference on this topic.
              The conference will be held at Snowbird, Utah, in July of 2001. The NSF has
              generously supported many of the investigators that study cell-cell
              communication in bacteria, and now joins ASM in providing financial assistance
              for this conference.
