Title       : ITR/SY(CISE): Cryptography: Examining the Assumptions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0113941

Award Number: 0113941
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374899             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Wagner daw@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,1686,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Cryptography is a fundamental building block for building information systems,
              and as we enter the so-called "information age" of global networks, ubiquitous
              computing devices, and eletronic commerce, we can expert that cryptography will
              become only more import with time.

This proposal is designed to advance the
              state of the art in cryptography by examining some of the implicit assumptions
              that underlie the field.  The birth of provable security has contributed
              significantly to the advances of the field over the past two decades, allowing
              us to amass strong evidence that-as long as the attacker plays by the rules
              specified in our formal threat model-the cryptosystem under consideration is
              likely to be secure.  However, one problem is that, in practice, attackers
              don't always play by the rules:  given the opportunity, they will gladly
              "cheat".  Recent research has shown that there are a surprising number of ways
              to violate the designer's assumptions, for instance by observing timing
              measurements which the model does not allow for. 

The goals of practical
              cryptographic design, then, ought to include finding ways to reduce the
              opportunity for attackers to "cheat", preferably by relaxing our assumptions
              and broadening our models enough so that the attacker's behavior cannot help
              but be covered by the model.  This is the research agenda that we take up in
              this project.  We propose first to study real systems and case studies of how
              these assumptions can be violated in practice.  A next step is to build a set
              of practical countermeasures that can be used to strengthen future
              cryptosystems against these attacks.  Finally, we will seek new theoretical
              tools, techniques, and models for extending the provable security methodology
              to take into account these failure modes.  If we succeed, these results will
              make a positive contribution not only to the practice of cryptography but also
              to the theoretical foundations of the field.
