Title       : The influence of West African languages on two Surinamese creoles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0113826

Award Number: 0113826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116486             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Winford dwinford@ling.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Donald Winford and his colleague
              Bettina Migge will conduct two years of linguistic research on the role of West
              African languages in the creation of Sranan Tongo and Paamaka, two creole
              languages of Suriname. The focus of this investigation is how time (e.g., past
              and future tense) and aspect (e.g., 'habitual' and 'completed') are expressed
              in the creoles. The hypothesis is that the West African languages of the Gbe
              family exerted the primary influence on tense and aspect in the creoles, with
              some influence from Kikongo and Akan. Other factors (e.g., internal changes in
              the creoles themselves) were also relevant. If the hypothesis is supported, the
              project will show that the creole languages were created by African slaves who
              selectively adapted and restructured materials from English and their own
              native languages. The data for the project will emphasize conversational speech
              and native speaker judgements. These will be tape recorded in Benin with
              speakers of five Gbe languages and in Suriname with speakers of the two creole
              languages. Data from Kikongo and Akan will be drawn from published studies of
              their tense and aspect systems. The tense and aspect systems of the languages
              will be compared, using methods of analysis that can reveal degrees of
              similarity between the West African languages and the creoles. 

The blending
              of different linguistic traditions into a new language is one of the most
              intriguing manifestations of the human language faculty. The processes by which
              elements from distinct languages can be restructured and the principles that
              regulate the processes challenge linguistic theory, especially theories of
              language mixture and contact-induced change. Creole languages represent an
              extreme case of such mixture, and the study of their origins can contribute
              much to our understanding of the cognitive and social factors that regulate
              this kind of language restructuring. Research on creole genesis provides
              insight into both language acquisition and language change, since similar
              processes and principles are involved. Such research can help us better
              understand the universal principles that regulate the structure of human
              language. This project will also contribute to greater recognition of creole
              languages as valid instruments of communication for the communities they serve.
              The creole communities of Suriname have traditionally suffered the same 
              neglect and disparagement as their languages. This research can help legitimize
              these neglected languages. Objective analysis and description can provide a
              basis for their acceptance and instrumentalization in education and other
              public 

