Title       : ITR/AP: Expressive software for multiscale ab initio investigation of surface
               reactions in dielectric environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0113670

Award Number: 0113670
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499881             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomas A. Arias muchomas@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Angeliki A. Rigos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1686,1954,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Thomas Arias of Cornell University and Angeliki Rigos of Merrimack College are
              supported by the Division of Chemistry under the Information Technology
              Research (ITR) program to use expressive software to bring quantum
              computational techniques to the study of surface reactions in dielectric
              environments.  This research is inherently interdisciplinary in nature,
              utilizing both surface physics and solution chemistry, and will be the first
              effort to include not only the surface but also reactants and solvents to
              enable a realistic description of experimental systems.  Specific aims of this
              project are to: (1) develop a framework for an ab initio capability for
              extended systems in solution, (2) implement the dielectric continuum
              description with ultrasoft pseudopotential capability within the density
              functional theory (DFT++) framework, (3) apply the resulting software to study
              correction initiation reactions at the surface of chromium (III) oxide, (4)
              teach workshops on using the new methods and software to the research,
              industrial, and educational communities, and (5) expose high school and
              undergraduate students to quantum computing capabilities.  The research
              outcomes are expected to enable new insights into corrosion of high-performance
              stainless steel alloys in high-temperature aqueous-salinated environments.
              

Most high performance stainless steels contain chromium, which forms an
              oxide layer on the surface that protects the metal under ordinary conditions. 
              However, stainless steel is often used at high temperatures and in salt
              solutions where damaging corrosion to the metal can occur rapidly, causing
              expensive industrial equipment failures.  The outcomes from this project may
              lead to new insights into chemical corrosion processes, and help to enable
              technological developments that can improve the industrial utility of stainless
              steel under a variety of extreme environmental conditions. Free internet
              distribution of new computational software, workshops, and student exposure to
              computational quantum mechanics will enhance the broader research community.
