Title       : Web-Based Archive of the Indigenous Languages of Latin America (AILLA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0113962

Award Number: 0113962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218975             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel Sherzer jsherzer@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark McFarland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony C. Woodbury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1311,1655,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Archive of the Indigenous Languages of Latin America (AILLA) will be a
              web-accessible database of audio and textual data from the indigenous languages
              of Latin America, focusing on naturally-occurring discourse. Scholars,
              students, and indigenous people will be able to access the AILLA database using
              their web browsers, search and browse the contents of the database, and
              download audio and text files from the database onto their own computers, which
              they can then listen to or read immediately, using free, downloadable software.
              AILLA will archive primarily unpublished and previously unavailable audio
              recordings and texts, and both preserve them and make them easily accessible by
              creating a centralized and organized repository of digitized copies of these
              materials. In developing and implementing the database and web-browser
              interface, AILLA will create a robust information infrastructure for use by
              researchers, students, and indigenous peoples. It will also develop: search
              tools for comparative, typological, and historical research on language;
              language data related protocols including a metadata scheme, data structures,
              and applications; and standards and tools to address ethical issues of privacy
              and intellectual property rights for language materials on the web. The
              fundamental goal is to create an infrastructure for distributed scholarship in
              language-related disciplines concerned with indigenous Latin America.

In
              addition to making data available for basic research, AILLA will provide a wide
              range of data for use in teaching courses in anthropology, linguistics, and
              other language-related fields. It will facilitate the interchange of data
              between Latin American, North American, and European scholars and between
              scholars and indigenous communities, and will form an important new link in the
              network of people working with the indigenous languages of Latin America. AILLA
              will also be a resource for indigenous communities working to preserve,
              maintain, and revitalize their languages.

