Title       : ITR/SY(MPS): Molecular-Based Optical Detection of Weak Magnetic Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0113112

Award Number: 0113112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498598             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Michael Elliott elliott@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1686,1968,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              C. Michael Elliott of Colorado State University is supported by the Division of
              Chemistry under the Information Technology Research (ITR) program to study
              molecular systems that have potential application in developing fundamentally
              new ways of reading stored magnetic information.  New molecules and molecular
              ensembles that exhibit significant chemical responses to magnetic fields in the
              form of changed decay kinetics of the transient, photogenerated
              charge-separated state will be explored to optimize the systems for magnetic
              field responses.  Project goals are: (1)  to develop an understanding of how
              structural features of these new systems are related to the magnetic field
              dependences of their electron-transfer kinetics, specifically the kinetics of
              photoinduced charge-separated state formation and recombination, (2) to learn
              if molecular designs not necessarily closely related in structure to previously
              discovered assemblies will give similar field dependence kinetic responses, and
              (3) to investigate whether reverse micelles can serve as satisfactory hosts for
              these systems.  Characterization and analysis of the dyes and materials under
              study will be carried out using pulsed laser spectroscopy, magnetic field
              effect experiments, and other standard analytical and materials analysis
              methods.

This research project has clear technological underpinnings,
              motivated by the potential for the research outcomes to enable development of
              optically based, magnetic field sensors.  Significant practical and economic
              benefits will result if this work leads to fundamentally new ways of detecting
              magnetic fields that could be used to read magnetic data.
