Title       : ITR/Comp Bio: The Computer Science of Biologically Embedded Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0113679

Award Number: 0113679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $446970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Black black@cs.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Donoghue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lucien E. Bienenstock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA- 0113679
 Black, Michael
Brown University
 
ITR/SY: The Computer Science
              of Biologically-Embedded Systems

Biologically-embedded systems that directly
              couple artificial computational devices with neural systems are emerging as a
              new area of information technology research.  The physical structure and
              adaptability of the human brain make these biologically-embedded systems quite
              different from computational systems typically studied in Computer
              Science.

Fundamentally, biologically-embedded systems must make inferences
              about the behavior of a biological system based on measurements of neural
              activity that are indirect, ambiguous, and uncertain.  Moreover these systems
              must adapt to short- and long-term changes in neural activity of the brain. 
              These problems are addressed by a multi-disciplinary team in the context of
              developing a robot arm that is controlled by simultaneous recordings from
              neurons in the motor cortex of awake behaving monkeys.  The goal is to
              probabilistically model the behavior of these neurons as a function of arm
              motion and then reconstruct continuous arm trajectories based on the neural
              activity.  To do so, the project will exploit mathematical and computational
              techniques from computer vision, image processing, and machine
              learning.

This work will enhance scientific knowledge about how to design
              and build new types of hybrid human/computer systems, will explore new devices
              to assist the severely disabled, will address the information technology
              questions raised by these biologically-embedded systems, and will contribute to
              the understanding of neural coding.



