Title       : ITR/SI: Data Retrieval and Instrument Control for Remote Locations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0113422

Award Number: 0113422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd A. Valentic todd.valentic@sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,1655,4202,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is Information Technology Research award to develop an innovative approach
              by which scientists and engineers can gain access to remote instruments and
              data sources.  This capability enables more general access to remote
              instrumentation that can be used for training and education without the
              unnecessary burden of placing students or researchers in the field.  The need
              for such a mechanism is fundamental as each instrument deployed to a remote
              field site contends with similar issues of remote data storage, retrieval,
              transport, and control.  The investigators will develop an integrated set of IT
              tools that will move data to and from the remote field site, irrespective of
              the communications link, in a reliable and robust manner.  It will also quickly
              facilitate the exchange of data among researchers, provide data storage, and
              publish web-based displays.  The approach is founded on an Internet-based
              system call Network New Transport Protocol (NNTP) that noninvasively retrieves
              data from instruments over a variety of communication links.  The system
              delivers data from the remote instrument to the end user's home institution
              while transparently handling network outages and low-bandwidth situations. 
              These capabilities enhance the science by notifying researchers of unique and
              interesting events, allowing the researcher to modify their instruments to
              record data optimally, providing more ready access to other instrument users,
              and working quickly with other researchers during real-time events.  For
              engineering activities, the data transport service would serve to check the
              health and status of the instruments continuously and enable instrument
              control.  This enabling technology would then facilitate student training and
              education within classroom and laboratory environments.
