Title       : RUI: Mechanisms of Aging in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0113937

Award Number: 0113937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322942             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura L. Hoopes lhoopes@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexander Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8328

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1112,1154,1156,1158,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In research funded by an NSF POWRE grant awarded to the investigator, the yeast
              DNA2 gene was found to be essential for normal life span.  DNA2 encodes a
              replicative and post replication repair helicase distantly related to SGS1 and
              Werner syndrome helicases.  Four dna2 mutants have average life spans from 4.9
              to 8.9 generations, while wild type is 23.8 generations.  The sgs1 and dna2
              mutants do not appear to be epistatic.  Other replication mutants also have
              short life spans.  Two strains with all rDNA deleted and rDNA supplied by
              plasmids have shortened life spans.  These results led to the replication block
              model of DNA aging in yeast, suggesting that replicative senescence can result
              from accumulation of blocked replication forks.  In addition, Y55 diploids were
              recently found to reset their aging clocks in meiosis.  This project tests the
              model of replicative aging resulting from blocked replication forks and will
              begin a search for genes involved in resetting the yeast aging clock.  The
              replication fork block hypothesis is being tested by observing the aging
              phenotypes of size increases, sterility, nucleolar fragmentation, and rDNA
              amplification in replication and post replication repair mutants other than
              dna2 and in ribosomal deletion strains, to see whether or not aspects of normal
              aging are accelerated in these mutants.  If so, the particular process may be
              related to aging pacesetting.  If the rDNA deletions appear to age faster, then
              epistasis with mutants of the silent information regulators and helicases will
              be tested.  The structures of the DNA, with particular emphasis on structures
              that would result from stalled replication forks, will be examined using
              fiber-FISH, 2D gels, and pulsed field and normal electrophoresis combined with
              nuclease digestion.  In addition, resetting of the aging clock is being
              examined in mutants affecting budding asymmetry.  Whether meiosis affects clock
              resetting in a different meiosis strain, BR3604, will be determined.  If the
              clock is reset in meiosis, sporulation mutants will be used to test the
              involvement of specific steps in meiosis in the resetting.

This novel
              research promises to further our understanding at the molecular level of the
              process of aging.  The use of the yeast system enhances the promise of the
              project because of the many molecular tools  available for yeast and the
              extensive existing body of knowledge about the system.  This research will be
              carried out at Pomona College, an undergraduate institution.  The active
              involvement of  students there in this research is an especially attractive
              feature of the project. 




