Title       : Molecular Dynamics of Protein Phosphatase 2A in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0113355

Award Number: 0113355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Hallberg hallberg@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT 

The project is to study the dynamics of the changes in cellular
              location of the major serine/threonine protein phosphatase, PP2A, in
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  From studies mainly in higher organisms, it appears
              that this heterotrimeric enzyme, shown to be involved in the regulation of DNA
              replication, cell cycle control, RNA transcription, as well as signal
              transduction pathways, achieves specificity through the action of its so-called
              "regulatory" subunits.  One proposed activity of these regulatory subunits is
              to facilitate the targeting of different forms of the PP2A trimer to specific
              cellular locations in order to achieve enzymatic specificity.  As higher
              organisms express a large number of different regulatory subunits, S.
              cerevisisae is particularly well suited to testing the notion of selective
              targeting by regulatory subunits because its array of regulatory subunits is
              far smaller.  In addition, all the genes encoding PP2A subunits have been
              cloned and genes expressing either GFP, YFP, or CFP-tagged forms of each
              protein subunit have been created.  Using fluorescence microscopy, the cellular
              locations of one or more PP2A subunits throughout the cell cycle or growth
              phase will be followed in real time.  Preliminary data generated in the
              laboratory has identified certain cellular locations, such as the spindle pole
              body, the emerging bud tip, the bud neck, and the periphery of the vacuole, as
              sites at which certain PP2A subunits transiently accumulate.  Using genetic and
              microscopic tests, other putative proteins that co-localize with PP2A will be
              identified.  Furthermore, using strains in which one or more PP2A subunit genes
              are either mutated or inactivated completely, the effects of such mutations on
              the abilities of the other PP2A subunits to be correctly localized will be
              assessed.  These studies should directly test the notion of whether and how
              PP2A regulatory subunits control the specific localization of functioning PP2A
              enzymes. 

