Title       : CyberSecurity Education and Research Center for Western Pennsylvania, West
               Virginia, and Ohio
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a0113533

Award Number: 0113533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250768             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Oblitey oblitey@grove.iup.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Micco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis Giever  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Indiana, PA  15705    412/357-2100

NSF Program : 1668      FED CYBER SERV: SCHLAR FOR SER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1668,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project is taking a four pronged approach to helping Indiana University of
              Pennsylvania achieve Academic Excellence in Information Assurance Education at
              the undergraduate level.

1. Faculty Development through faculty workshops
              conducted by Center of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance Education
              James Madison University in which faculty develop and deliver computer security
              modules that can be readily included in core courses in Computer Science,
              Management Information Systems, Criminology, Educational Technology and IT as
              well as forming part of an Interdisciplinary Security minor.

2. Curriculum
              Development to increase the security content in computing and criminology
              courses via addition of security modules in core courses, as well as through an
              interdisciplinary minor in Information Assurance and an upper level security
              track for computer science students who wish to specialize.

3. Strengthening
              Research and Internship opportunities in Information Assurance through creation
              of the Center for Applied Security involving a strategic partnership with the
              Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC), which has as its goal to
              develop and deliver information protection/assurance (IPA)
services in our
              region.

4. Providing the Technology for research in Information Assurance
              through a state of the art lab used for hands on labs, and for experimentation
              with new threats and vulnerabilities. 


