Title       : RSEC: Polymer Chemistry Research in Western Massachusetts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0113643

Award Number: 0113643
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert L. Kuczkowski                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : October 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1967042            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. McCarthy tmccarthy@polysci.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1363,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Polymer Science and Engineering Department of the University of
              Massachusetts-Amherst (Umass) is supported by the Chemistry Division, the
              Division of Undergraduate Education, and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities under the "Research Sites for Educators in Chemistry" (RSEC)
              program.  The Prinicipal Investigator,. Thomas McCarthy is joined by Sandra
              Burkett of Amherst College, Wei Chen of Mount Holyoke College, and Kate Queeney
              of Smith College.  This Western Massachusetts RSEC will integrate their
              research efforts.  The planned research themes are (1) rational heterogenation
              of homogeneous catalyst, (2) molecular imprinting of polymeric materials, (3)
              surface modification to control wettability and biocompatibility, and (4)
              control of protein adsorption through chemistry and topography.  To expand the
              RSEC, the program will focus its attention on nine other two- and four-year
              institutions in the local area.  One of the goals of this RSEC is to increase
              the number of undergraduate chemistry majors at the participating institutions
              by injecting polymer and materials chemistry into existing courses at all
              levels, and by developing a one-semester course in polymer chemistry complete
              with notes and instructor's guide.  Central to the formation of these
              collaborations is a series sabbaticals, and summer research appointments for
              faculty and undergraduate students at the four core institutions.  This RSEC
              will be managed by a Director and an Advisory Board made up of representatives
              from each participating institution.  There will also be an Executive Advisory
              Board made up of administrators from the institutions and outside experts in
              polymer research.

Research Sites for Educators in Chemistry bring together
              the faculty of participating two-year colleges, baccalaureate colleges, and
              master's universities with faculty at research universities within a geographic
              region, for the purpose of enhancing the research and educational opportunities
              for all participants.  Academic and research institutions provide abundant
              opportunities where individuals may concurrently assume responsibilities as
              researchers, educators, and students, and where all can engage in joint efforts
              that infuse education with the excitement of discovery and enrich research
              through the diversity of learning perspectives.  RSECs such as this one at the
              University of Massachusetts-Amherst provide mechanisms for disseminating the
              knowledge, skill, practices and ethics of research to a broader community,
              including those from underrepresented groups; assist in developing viable,
              sustainable research programs at participating institutions; and involve
              faculty and students at the participating institutions with a broader
              cross-section of faculty and students.


