Title       : Constraints on Performance and Pelagic Periods of Larvae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0113603

Award Number: 0113603
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard R. Strathmann rrstrath@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Constraints on Performance and Pelagic Periods of Larvae

Richard R.
              Strathmann

    Many marine animals live on the sea bed as sedentary adults
              but swim and
are carried by ocean currents as planktonic larvae.  Many of
              these larvae
feed and grow for weeks or months before they can settle on the
              bottom.
Larval feeding supports growth from a small egg to a larger size
              at
metamorphosis.  There are costs to this means of supporting early growth
              and
development, however.  The longer the period of larval growth, the
              more
larvae are eaten by predators or carried by currents away from areas of
              good
habitat on the sea bed.
    Many larvae feed by concentrating algal
              cells and other small particles
of food  This food can be scarce, and
              food-limited growth has been
demonstrated.  Maximum rates of concentrating
              scarce food from suspension
depend on traits of larvae that differ among major
              groups (phyla) of marine
animals.  Because food is often in limiting supply,
              one might expect larvae
in the same waters, whatever their other differences,
              to increase their
capacity  to concentrate scarce planktonic food as they
              increase in weight
and energy requirements and in order to achieve greater
              growth rates as they
develop.  Surprisingly, some animals' larvae appear to be
              poorly adapted to
low concentrations of food.  They have a very limited
              capacity to
concentrate scarce planktonic food, even though they grow from
              tiny eggs to
much larger juveniles at metamorphosis.  Moreover, these larval
              forms have
remained unchanged during much of animal evolution.
    The
              proposed research tests the hypothesis that food-limited growth
rates depend
              on highly conserved traits of larvae.  The prediction is that
some forms are
              particularly constrained to slower growth when food is
scarce.  Some of these
              larvae feed with short ciliary bands throughout their
development.  These
              include the larval forms of bryozoans, which are
colonial animals that live on
              rocks and seaweeds, and nemerteans (ribbon
worms), which are common predators
              on other small marine animals. The
bryozoan and nemertean larvae do not seem
              to fit predictions based on the
more extensively studied larvae of molluscs
              and sea urchins and thus
challenge biologists' understanding of the ecology
              and evolution of
planktonic larvae.  The growth of bryozoan and nemertean
              larvae at limiting
and satiating concentrations of food will be compared to
              growth of sea
urchin larvae, whose maximum rates of clearing food from
              suspension are
greater and increase more nearly in proportion to body mass. 
              If the
hypothesis is correct, then major groups of animals differ
              in
food-limitation for their larvae, with consequences for death rates
              and
dispersal of their larvae.
    Another case of an apparently ill-equipped
              feeding larva is the planula
larva of sea anemones.  These larvae lack ciliary
              bands entirely and are
anatomically the simplest feeding larval forms, yet
              some of them grow
substantially before metamorphosis.  In other groups of
              animals, larvae that
are this simple do not catch particulate food.  Analyses
              of feeding capacity
and growth rates of larval sea anemones will indicate the
              capabilities of
the simplest feeding larvae. The results will indicate
              constraints on the
origination of ciliated feeding larvae in other groups of
              animals.
