Title       : Adaptive Identification and Control of Dynamical Systems Using Neural Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0113239

Award Number: 0113239
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399866             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kumpati S. Narendra kumpati.narendra@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0113239
Narendra

The mathematical difficulties encountered in designing
              controllers for dynamical systems can be broadly classified under four
              headings:  (i) uncertainty (ii) nonlinearity (iii) complexity, and (iv)
              time-variations.  Adaptive control is the discipline which deals with
              uncertainty in systems, and the adaptive control of linear systems is currently
              well understood.  The problem of control becomes substantially more complex
              when the plant characteristics are known but nonlinear, and becomes truly
              formidable when they are unknown and/or vary with time.  All four classes of
              problems are encountered when neural networks are used to control nonlinear
              plants.

During the past ten years considerable progress has been made in
              understanding the problems that arise in neurocontrol [1]- [18].  Mathematical
              modeling, system identification, and synthesis of controllers to track desired
              output signals have all been extensively studied.  The effect of different
              classes of disturbances have also been investigated, and the methods developed
              have been applied to a wide class of practical problems.  In spite of this,
              many important questions remain unanswered, and the design of neural
              controllers remains in many cases more an art than a science.

The proposal
              addresses three fundamental and closely related questions in the adaptive
              control of nonlinear dynamical systems.  The first concerns questions of
              stability and convergence of neural network based control and deals with both
              the structure of the controllers and the tools used for proving stability.  The
              second question deals with the important problem of generating optimal control
              inputs for general classes of nonlinear systems.  Such problems are arising
              with increasing frequency in both well established areas such as process
              control and aircraft control, as well as new areas such as robotics and space
              technology.  Finally, the third problem deals with the use of multiple models
              for controlling efficiently nonlinear systems in rapidly varying environments. 
              In all three cases the principal questions are stated, the mathematical
              difficulties are discussed in detail, and potentially fruitful avenues for
              research are proposed.  It is the opinion of the PI that, in the present state
              of development of neurocontrol, the three parts of the proposal represent three
              closely related and important aspects of nonlinear adaptive control using
              neural networks.

