Title       : Fine Tuning the Timing in the Sequential Reaction Time Task
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0113025

Award Number: 0113025
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286888             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur S. Reber areber@gc.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Brooklyn College
	      Office of Research & Program Dev
	      Brooklyn, NY  112102889    718/951-5622

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the essential characteristics of human action is that people constantly
              carry on two or more overlapping behavioral sequences simultaneously.  For most
              the part, such actions are based on well-learned and smoothly run behavioral
              repertoires.  We drive a car, carry on conversations, and manage not to collide
              with others who are doing the same thing.  However, when attentional resources
              are diverted to one of these tasks, perhaps the conversation becomes deeply
              personal or highly emotional or a pelting storm makes driving hazardous, the
              other behavioral actions become error prone, slow down dramatically, or even
              cease altogether.  Exactly what takes place during these periods where
              processing resources must be diverted is complex and only partly understood. 
              This research will explore the impact that introducing a secondary task has on
              performance of the primary task and will examine the temporal relations between
              the two.  The primary task will be one in which individuals must learn the
              order of a complex sequence of events, such as a series of lights appearing in
              any of several physically separate locations on a computer monitor.  The
              secondary task will consist of a series of tones of varying pitch, where the
              participants will be required to keep a running count of how many tones of a
              particular pitch occurred.  Recent experimental results have shown a surprising
              but critical relationship between exactly when an individual responds to the
              primary stimulus and when the secondary event occurs.  Specifically, the closer
              together in time the two occur, the less disruptive the secondary stimulus is,
              provided that a successful response has already been made to the primary
              stimulus.  The implication of this finding is that the secondary task doesn't
              disrupt performance simply because it is a "secondary" task.  The degree to
              which performance is compromised is directly related to the difficulty of each
              task, to the amount of time it takes to process each stimulus and respond to
              it, and critically related to the temporal relationships between the two.  The
              experiments will explore in detail these temporal relationships and use the
              results to test a variety of theoretical models of human performance.  As is
              clear from a moment's reflection on just what takes place in a wide variety of
              work place settings, from assembly-line workers to airline pilots, these
              seemingly mundane issues are of critical importance.  Understanding and
              learning how to fine-tune the timing between tasks in these multiple-tasking
              settings will go a long way toward increases in safety and performance.
