Title       : Acquisition of a Measurement System for Research and Education in Magnetic
               Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a0113917

Award Number: 0113917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Crowell crowell@physics.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen M. Goldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              E. Dan Dahlberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Leighton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is an award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program in DMR
              to the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities. The award supports the acquisition
              of a measurement system for research and education in magnetic
              heterostructures.  The instrument will support research in four areas of
              physics and materials science:  a)  new materials for spin transport in
              magnetic/semiconductor structures, b) novel magnetic oxide materials and
              heterostructures, c) exchange bias in ferromagnet/antiferromagnet multilayers
              and d)  two-dimensional conduction in organic crystals.  The instrument, which
              incorporates DC and AC magnetometry and transport over a temperature range of
              0.4 to 300 K and in magnetic fields up to 9 T, will be used by students
              involved in both growth and measurements.  In particular, new materials for
              spin transport, including ferromagnetic semiconductors and half-metallic
              ferromagnets, will be developed.  A variety of new magnetic oxide materials,
              including cobaltates such as La1-x-SrxCoO3, will be explored, and current work
              on oxides used as spin injectors will be continued.  Microscopic mechanisms for
              controlling coercivity in multilayers using exchange-induced anisotropy and
              exchange spring magnetism will be investigated.  Finally, low-dimensional
              transport in organic crystals, with emphasis on superconductivity, will be
              studied.   
%%%
This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research
              program in DMR to the University of Minnesota-Twin Cities supports the
              acquisition of a measurement system for research and education in magnetic
              heterostructures at the University of Minnesota.   Magnetic heterostructures
              are "sandwiches" formed by growing thin layers of a magnetic material, such as
              iron, in combination with other metals, insulators, or even semiconductors. 
              Depending on the particular application in mind,  the magnetic material can be
              either the "meat" or the "bread" in the sandwich.  These types of
              heterostructures are already in use in the latest generation of hard disk
              drives, and some of the research the new instrument will be dedicated to
              understanding the microscopic mechanism that is ultimately responsible for the
              way in which these new drives work.  Furthermore, entirely new types of
              structures, based on magnetic oxides, will be investigated. A new generation of
              structures, combining the functionality of magnets with those of semiconductors
              used in transistors, will also be explored.    The instrument will be used by
              graduate students and undergraduates in order to enhance their training in the
              rapidly evolving field of materials physics.



   

