Title       : ITR/SY: Algorithms for Data Storage and Movement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0113192

Award Number: 0113192
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samir Khuller samir@cs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leana Golubchik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The central focus of this proposal is the development of efficient algorithms
              for the storage and movement of data.  Specifically, we are interested in
              algorithms that impact the performance of large multimedia data storage
              systems.  In algorithmic terms, some of the principal challenges that arise in
              the context of multimedia data storage are:  (a) deciding how many copies of
              each data item need to be stored, (b) determining the exact layout of data on a
              set of servers, (c) dealing with changing workloads and dynamic data access
              patterns.  These related challenges require the development of efficient
              algorithms for optimizing data layout to maximize client satisfaction,
              monitoring the performance of data storage systems and scheduling the movement
              of large amounts of data.

Futhermore, what makes the issues that we consider
              even more significant is the fact that data storage and movement issues also
              arise within publicly share networks such as the Internet where the bandwidth
              can be dynamic and highly variable, and can result in a poor choice of paths
              chosen to transfer data in the network.  One way to address this issue is to
              route data through specific holding points.  By doing this we are able to
              increase throughput and decrease completion times by an order of magnitude to
              transfer data from several sources to a single destination.  Algorithms related
              to this problem have been developed by us and are being tested with the Bistro
              framework, which is a framework for providing a data upload service such as one
              required by IRS for tax submission purposes.  Our data movement algorithms are
              being used to schedule the transfer of data from many different locations to a
              final destination server.

While some specific instances of the individual
              problems have been considered earlier, there is no work dealing comprehensively
              with the range of issues that we focus on.

