Title       : ITR/AP: Realistic Uncertainty Bounds for Complex Dynamic Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0113985

Award Number: 0113985
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $444950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Packard pack@me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Y. Frenklach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1271,1407,1632,1652,1686,9139,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The present problems facing society-such as global warming, earthquake
              preparedness, safety of transport of nuclear waste, and pollutant emission from
              automobile engines-call for integration of a variety of computer programs, each
              solving numerical problems in a different discipline.  The overriding concern
              for such complex models is their reliability: predictability, authenticity, and
              uncertainty.  The focus of the present effort is modeling realistic uncertainty
              in predictions from multi-response, large-scale, nonlinear dynamic models,
              using a new strategy to attack this problem.
This work re-examines the concept
              of a mathematical model associated with complex physical systems, considering
              experiment and theory to be an integral part of the model and treating
              uncertain parameters of the model as internal, "state" variables.  In this way,
              the uncertainties of the experimental and theoretical foundation are
              transferred "directly" into uncertainties of model predictions.  Establishing
              this direct relationship allows one also to address the reverse problem: to
              identify which specific data contribute the most to the prediction uncertainty;
              to determine the required accuracy of an experiment to bring the prediction
              uncertainty to a given level; or to assess whether a planned experiment will be
              able to improve the prediction uncertainty.
This is accomplished by merging
              convex relaxations from control theory with the technique of solution mapping
              developed and applied to numerical modeling of chemical kinetics typical of
              fossil-fuel combustion.  The solution mapping technique uses statistical design
              of computer experiments to replace complex ODE models with surrogate polynomial
              models.  These simpler, though accurate, algebraic models are more suited to
              numerical optimization.  The convex relaxations allow for optimization problems
              described by a polynomial objective and polynomial constraints (generally
              nonconvex) to be attacked by convex optimization, namely linear objectives with
              linear-matrix-inequality constraints.  Nearly twenty years of use in robust
              control has shown these relaxations to be remarkably useful in a wide variety
              of physically motivated problems and applications.
In this approach, surrogate
              models are developed for all responses, both from the training set and from the
              prediction set.  Each surrogate model is expressed as a quadratic form in terms
              of internal model parameters, developed in a series of direct ODE integrations
              performed according to a factorial design covering a subspace of parameter
              uncertainties.  The quadratic form of the surrogate response models is then
              explored by an optimization algorithm.  In the initial effort, the problem of
              propagation of uncertainties in a natural-gas-combustion model is cast in the
              form amenable for the S-procedure, a method of convex optimization widely used
              in control theory.  
Even more sophisticated convex relaxations have recently
              been developed, centering on the observation that determining if a given
              polynomial is a sum-of-squares (and hence globally nonnegative), can be cast as
              a convex feasibility problem, and verified in polynomial-time (in the order of
              the polynomial).  This work will investigate such possibilities for exploring
              novel avenues for numerically economical assessment of realistic error bounds
              of complex dynamic models.

