Title       : ITR/API: Collaborative Research: Cancer Treatment Plan Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0113051

Award Number: 0113051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310433             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Ferris ferris@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
This project will use new techniques from computational optimization to design
              radiation therapy planning for cancer treatment. 

Radiation therapy applies
              ionizing radiation to cancerous tissue, damaging the DNA and interfering with
              the ability of the cancerous cells to grow and divide. This also damages
              healthy cells, but they are more able to repair the damage and return to normal
              function. The therapy planning problem is to specify the shapes of the applied
              radiation beams, times of exposure, etc., to deliver a specified dose to the
              tumor but not an excessive dose to the surrounding healthy tissue. New medical
              devices allow much control over the characteristics of the radiation, thus
              allowing much scope for the therapy planning. However, the full potential of
              these devices to deliver optimal treatment plans has yet to be realized due to
              the complexity of the treatment design process. By using advanced modeling
              techniques, state-of-the-art optimization algorithms, and implementations on
              parallel computing platforms this project will provide radiation oncologists
              with important new computational tools for treatment planning. These tools will
              be flexible enough to adapt to the varying priorities of different planners and
              different patients and robust enough to give good solutions to the most
              difficult planning problems. The project involves collaboration between three
              researchers whose collective expertise encompasses radiation oncology modeling,
              optimization algorithms, and parallel implementations. It builds on previous
              collaborations of these researchers on treatment planning and on NSF-funded
              work on algorithms for solving large optimization problems.

The institutions
              involved in the project are the University of Wisconsin and the University
              of
Maryland School of Medicine.


