Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Migration Agency and Social Change
               during the Early Horizon in Nasca, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a0113252

Award Number: 0113252
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharina J. Schreiber kschreiber@anth.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Katharina Schreiber, Mr. Hendrik Van Gijseghem will
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation.  He will undertake archaeological
              excavations at the site of La Puntilla in the Nasca drainage of the South Coast
              of Peru. This site, dated to the latter part of the Early Horizon (ca. 400 B.C
              - 1 AD), is part of what may be the earliest known permanent occupation of the
              Nasca drainage by sedentary agriculturalists.  It is a 2.5 hectare village
              composed of small subrectangular rooms aligned on a series of steep terraces
              overlooking the Aja river. An abundance of ceramic material at the site
              indicates that its inhabitants probably came from further north in the Ica
              valley. Local development and trade cannot explain the presence of this
              material due to the absence of earlier settlements in the region. La Puntilla,
              along with similar sites, is significant both historically and theoretically.
              It provides us with a clear archaeological case of post-migratory
              reorganization that will shed light on the dynamics of migration in prehistory
              as well as on the elusive relationship between the Paracas (Ica Valley donor)
              culture and the celebrated Nasca society. 

Archaeologists have identified
              migrations in prehistory, but have only recently elaborated on their
              theoretical significance. This work helps define archaeology's contribution to
              migration literature in the social sciences by examining migration's potential
              effects on the social dynamics of newly-formed communities. Mr. Van Gijseghem
              considers that migration may provide opportunities for individuals to maintain
              or better their social status through the creative manipulation of existing
              social frameworks. Anthropological literature does suggest that this is a
              frequent outcome of population movements because patterns of authority, wealth
              and power are likely to be reevaluated in a new social and physical
              environment. The nature and effects of these innovations hinge upon the
              identity and intention of the migrants. Thus, migrations in sedentary societies
              represent a fundamental vector of cultural and social change. 

Mr. Van
              Gijseghem expects to recognize the archaeological correlates of the
              post-migration reorganization through a comparative analysis of households at
              La Puntilla.  He theorizes that patterns of production, distribution and use of
              ceramic vessels bearing traditional Paracas symbols diverged from those of
              contemporaneous communities in the homeland. Also, the traditional symbols were
              likely altered and used in different overall contexts, while new canons were
              created and modified patterns of wealth and power emerged.

This research
              represents one of the first explicit attempts to produce an archaeological test
              of models about migrations and their effects on social organization. It will
              also help document the transition between Paracas and Nasca societies of the
              Peruvian south coast and will assist in training a promising young
              scientist.




