Title       : ITR/AP: Development of Efficient Real-Time Multi-mode Data Assimilation and
               Analysis Techniques for the Arecibo and Related Geophysical Radar Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0113454

Award Number: 0113454
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Mathews JDMathews@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Doherty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,1521,1652,1686,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A three-year program is proposed involving development of the IT-techniques
              necessary to make the most efficient bandwidth and science use of the available
              observation time at Arecibo Observatory (AO) by flexibly accelerating the data
              processing.  The proposed IT-approach will be tested via two high-impact
              science test/demonstration cases to be conducted at AO.  The first involves
              simultaneous high-range/time resolution dual-beam incoherent scatter radar
              (ISR) observations of the 50-600 km ionosphere and a simultaneous search-using
              the same data stream-for heliocentric orbital objects above the atmosphere. 
              The second will search the data-stream for meteors and completely reduce the
              highly complex meteor data to geophysical parameters in real-time while also
              processing the same data-stream for ionosphere D-region spectra.  These science
              goals will be pursued while processing for interference and satellite-returns,
              providing appropriate real-time display, and archiving both original and
              processed data.  The proposed approach will allow full use of off-the-shelf
              technological advancements such ad the wide-bandwidth/large-dynamic-range
              IF-sampling receivers developed for cell-phone base-stations and cheap but
              powerful general-purpose desktop/single-board computers.  This hardware plus
              proposed algorithm development will permit assimilation of the real-time data
              at the full rate thus flexibly enabling optimal interference processing,
              real-time data display, and multi-mode parallel-outcome scientific processing. 
              The proposed development of this flexible data-processing environment would not
              only prove useful to the geophysical radar community but would also provide the
              same environment for wide-bandwidth/multi-frequency radio astronomy
              observations at AO.  This approach would also broadly-impact other geophysical
              radar and radio astronomy facilities by enabling simple adoption of this
              proposed low-cost general-purpose data processing/interpretations
              environment.

