Title       : ITR/IM: An Internet Environment for BioDiversity Survey Collaboration and
               Verification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0113918

Award Number: 0113918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475866             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Bryan Heidorn pheidorn@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carole L. Palmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marylin Lisowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Jeffords  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1655,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Much field data for ecology and biodiversity studies uses data collected from
              hundreds of mostly novice collaborators.  In order to address the issues of
              distributed intelligence, field support, mobile computing, remote training,
              data quality and coordination of information across time and space, with
              real-time expert feedback, a BioDiversity Collaboration Environment (BDCE) will
              be developed.

Information technology could fundamentally change the way we
              understand the world and the way science in done.  Substantial improvements in
              science can be made if the information technology is carefully developed and
              integrated.  The system will integrate collaboration, collection development,
              information retrieval, and information creation and management.  A key
              component of the technology is the development of software agents that will
              analyze the needs of survey members, prior surveys of the same site, museum
              record and other resources to create a customized collection of digital support
              material that can be put on disk and taken to the field, thereby overcoming
              bandwidth problems.  

The DBCE will be developed within the framework of a
              project being conducted by the Illinois Department of Natural Resources, which
              increases the impact of the research by it use in hundreds of surveys across
              Illinois.  This is a largely volunteer effort, including high school students,
              for the data collection.  The education to students and other non-scientists
              provides significant impact, beyond the information technology impact of smart
              devices.

