Title       : 2001 Gordon Research Conference on Condensed Matter Physics; New London, CT;
               June 17-22, 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2001      
File        : a0113186

Award Number: 0113186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlyle B. Storm grc@grc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul M. Chaikin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Gordon Conference on Condensed Matter Physics is aimed at bringing
              together world leaders, young investigators and students at all levels to
              present and discuss exciting new results and the inter-relations between the
              diverse subfields in condensed matter physics. The topics covered range from
              quantum electronics and transport to soft condensed matter and biophysics.  In
              this years conference the different areas are tied together by an interest in
              organic molecules their properties and assembly.  Dramatic new results on
              insulting organic crystals doped metallic and superconducting by applying a
              gate electrode lead to new insights into transport in carbon based systems. 
              The results on organic crystals are to be compared/contrasted with those of
              nanotubes, polymers and DNA.  Transport in DNA is then considered in solution
              and leads to an understanding of its dielectric properties and the way it can
              be manipulated and self assembled into various structures.  The information
              content and its value in biological systems is presented.  Problems of
              frustrated packings and jamming are then discussed also in relation to the
              glasses and granular materials.  The conference provides lectures, but
              emphasizes a large amount of time for formal and informal discussions between
              lecturers and students.  The students are encouraged to participate directly by
              presenting posters on their work to serve as a focal point for interaction with
              more senior researchers.

The Gordon Conference on Condensed Matter Physics
              is aimed at bringing together world leaders, young investigators and students
              at all levels to present and discuss exciting new results in forefront areas of
              the physics of new electronic, structural, organic and biological materials. 
              The participants will be from academe, industry and government labs.  Organic
              crystals, polymers, and biological materials have very recently been shown to
              be electrical conductors with controllable properties useful for data storage,
              light emission, computation, mobility and interesting new structures.  These
              materials bring new insight into both fundamental science and potential and
              present applications.  They also illustrate the relative advantages of organic
              and inorganic systems.  Student participation is encouraged both by the large
              amount of time devoted to formal and informal discussion as well as poster
              sessions where the students present their results as a focal points for
              interaction with more senior researchers. 


