Title       : ITR/AP: A Motion Planning Approach for Protein Folding Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0113974

Award Number: 0113974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy M. Amato amato@cs.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop a framework for studying protein folding that is 
              based on techniques recently developed in the robotics motion planning 
              community. In particular, this work uses Probabilistic Roadmap (PRM) motion 
              planning techniques which have proven to be very successful for problems 
              involving high-dimensional configuration spaces. The key advance that PRMs 
              offer protein science is the ability to efficiently explore large 
              conformational transitions of realistic models of proteins. The work  involves
              research in both protein science and information technology.  

The project
              has two main research goals related to protein science. First,  PRMs are
              expected to provide a computational method to predict the folding  kinetics of
              proteins, when the native structure is already known. This  makes PRMs ideal
              for investigating classical problems in protein folding  kinetics such as
              kinetic intermediates, kinetic traps, parallel vs. series  folding routes, and
              general folding mechanism questions related to  potential energy landscapes and
              zippers processes. Second, PRM, used in  conjunction with a new ENPOP parameter
              optimization strategy, has the  potential to improve energy models both
              high-resolution and low-resolution  models for predicting biomolecule
              conformations.  

The project has two main research goals related to
              information technology.  Both are motivated by the massive computational
              requirements of the  simulations needed to investigate the protein folding
              questions. First, new  strategies and optimization techniques for PRMs will be
              needed to support  the efficient extraction of high quality paths from the
              roadmaps for  problems with hundreds of dof.  Second, since PRMs are known to
              be amenable  to parallel implementation, they will utilize high-performance
              computing.  This will include the development and application of an adaptive
              parallel  version of the C++ STL (Standard Templates library) called STAPL.
              With  STAPL, the simulations can be optimized and run on various parallel and 
              distributed systems and yield a performance approaching that of code  manually
              optimized for each platform

