Title       : Family Environment and Intergenerational Mobility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a0113213

Award Number: 0113213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick L. Mason pmason@garnet.acns.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Families are crucial institutions for intergenerational mobility. Family
              values influence the acquisition of marketable skills by offspring. Family
              social and economic status affects both skill acquisition and the next
              generation's access to individuals embedded in positions of authority and
              power. It has been argued that differences in family and neighborhood
              characteristics are ultimately for increasing racial wage inequality that began
              in the early 1980s and that remains with us today. Researchers have also argued
              that ethnic and racial capital, that is, a demographic group's average level of
              social or economic wellbeing, interacts with parental and neighborhood
              socioeconomic status to determine intergenerational mobility. 

This research
              project unites the literature on family environment (that is, the combination
              of family values/behaviors and family socioeconomic status) and
              intergenerational inequality with an exploration of the nature and extent of
              racial and gender inequality. Accordingly, this paper investigates four
              questions. First, do childhood family values and family status matter for young
              adult social and economic outcomes? Second, does accounting for individual
              differences in childhood family environment eliminate racial and gender
              differences in the wellbeing of young adult workers? Third, does the relative
              importance of childhood family environment on young adult wellbeing vary across
              racial and gender groups? Four, are there racial and gender differences in the
              intergenerational transmission of socioeconomic status? To answer these
              questions, the research project examines the impact of family values and family
              economic and social status on educational attainment, annual earnings, wealth
              (home value), and annual hours of employment for four race-sex groups: African
              American females and males, white females and males.



