Title       : ITR/SI: Automatic Consistency Checking for IPSec/VPN Security Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0113388

Award Number: 0113388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388429             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shyhtsun F. Wu wu@cs.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1667,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Although various IPSec policy issues [2,3,4] have attracted a lot of attention,
              within the IETF IPSP (IP
Security Policy) working group, there is certain
              amount of confusion and concerns about the two
fundamental issues: 1) How to
              ensure the correctness of a set of distributed security policies? 2) How
to
              systematically determine the correct set of policies and securely distribute
              them across the
network?
Internet will be more and more dynamic in many
              aspects. With the capability of various wireless network
technologies, users
              and even sub-networks can be mobile. Mobility implies potential changes in
              the
policies or the inter-relations among distributed policies. Adaptive
              security is another cause of policy
changes. It will be uncommon in the near
              future that, in reacting to a newly detected intrusion, a security
management
              system might on-the-fly determine to strengthen the security level by modifying
              the IPSec
security policies. Therefore, it is critically important to have a
              safe and rigorous solution to handle the
above two issues.
Policy
              Specification Correctness
Currently, in the research community of IPSec/VPN
              policy, to our best knowledge, no rigorous definition
for IPSec/VPN policy
              correctness has been developed. Later in this proposal, we will give a formal
              and
reasonable definition for correctness such that we will have a basis for
              policy specification analysis. Such
correctness analysis must be automated
              such that the security configuration of a network system can be
adaptive to
              changes, faults/intrusions, and mobility. On the other hand, if there are
              inherent constraints
and conflicts among the existing security policies such
              that it is impossible to have a consistent policy set,
the policy analysis
              engine should also automatically determine the impossibility.
Inter-domain
              Secure Policy Distribution
The proposed work under the first issue assumes
              that we have a perfect and centralized collection of
information related to
              the policies and security requirements around the whole Internet. However, in
              reality,
this might not always be possible as Internet is owned and managed by
              different administrative domains,
while, for trust and privacy consideration,
              information regarding local policy and network topology might
not be sharable
              across domain boundaries.
The second objective of this proposed research is,
              under some inter-domain related constraints, to develop a
collaborative
              framework/architecture and a suite of distributed protocols such that we can
              still analyze the
correctness of a set of decentralized IPSec/VPN policies. We
              will study the issue of the minimum amount
of policy information needed for a
              particular policy domain to determine whether its local policies
              and
requirements will be consistent with other domains. Once the set of
              policies is decided, a policy distribution
mechanism is also needed.
Under
              this proposed research project, we will first focus on the theoretical aspect
              of policy and requirement
specifications and their analysis. We will develop
              algorithms and analytical results to fundamental enhance
our current
              technology in policy-driven networking systems such as IPSec/VPN. Second, we
              plan on
implementing a prototype to validate and evaluate our proposed
              approach on a realistic networking
environment. The first phase will be a
              small testbed to run the prototype software, which will be open
sourced and
              available to the community. Furthermore, we would like to collaborate with
              industry partners
such as equipment venders and ISPs to further evaluate and
              validate our approach against real-world
challenges. Furthermore, we will pay
              special attention to the application of our solutions in a mobile
network
              environment. In such environment, the capability of dynamically updating IPSec
              security policy is
extremely critical. To summarize, we will not only deliver
              academic publications about our proposed works
but also produce a prototype
              system and perform extensive experiments, including the real-world data set
              if
possible, to evaluate the performance and accuracy and to validate our
              theoretical model in handling
difficulty issues in Policy-driven networking
              systems.
