Title       : Development and Evaluation of an Automatized Comprehension Assessment Tool
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2001  
File        : a0113669

Award Number: 0113669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 15,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393793             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Golden golden@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1657,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The  goal of this project is to develop a nationally available fully automated
              web-based diagnostic system called ARCADE (Automated Reading Comprehension and
              Diagnostic Evaluation) that will be capable of assessing complex comprehension
              based upon student free response data. The technology used will be to combine
              information extraction (IE) technologies and advanced psychometric techniques
              in novel ways so as to provide detailed assessment and diagnostic information
              for use by teachers and students in the service of improving classroom
              instruction and learning. The ARCADE system will also contribute to a data
              infrastructure useable by other investigators. Specifically, computer
              scientists interested in the development of new information extraction
              technology and cognitive scientists and educators interested in the development
              of new theories of comprehension and assessment would be able to access the
              database that will be developed in the course of using ARCADE with students.
              Thus, in addition to improving educational effectiveness in classrooms on a
              national level, the ARCADE system has the potential to provide a nation-wide
              resource for facilitating the advancement of scientific research in both the
              fields of reading comprehension and information technology research.

The
              specific research being pursued is  to develop and empirically test the core
              mathematical algorithms of the ARCADE system with respect to their reliability
              and validity for assessing reading comprehension in foundational literacy in
              science and literature. The empirical database will consist of free response
              data generated by student examinees in grade school and junior high school
              classroom settings in response to open-ended probe questions. The core ARCADE
              system employs innovative combinations of information extraction and
              psychometric techniques to address a critical educational need, namely, ways to
              assess multiple dimensions of complex comprehension. Such dimensions of
              comprehension are specified by a set of special semantic networks (called
              "knowledge digraphs") which embody meaning relations among ideas in texts and
              documents as well as relations to prior knowledge and inferences. A new
              statistical model of examinee behavior is then defined which incorporates
              techniques from the fields of Item Response Theory (IRT), Hidden Markov Model 
              IE technology, and Knowledge Digraph Contribution  analysis. The important
              innovation of this new statistical model is that multiple dimensions of
              comprehension in conjunction with their respective standard errors can be
              directly estimated from examinee free response data using Monte Carlo
              simulation and econometric methods   Moreover, using an approach analogous to
              that developed in IRT , these assessments of comprehension dimensions can be
              mathematically proven to be reliable across a given family of equivalent
              testing materials.

