Title       : A Broad Information Security Curriculum: Integrating Technologies and Practices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a0113767

Award Number: 0113767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243304             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mustaque Ahamad mustaq@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jun Xu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Seymour E. Goodman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andre Dos Santos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kameswara R. Namuduri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1668      FED CYBER SERV: SCHLAR FOR SER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1668,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project develops an information security curriculum to serve students from
              a broad range of backgrounds. It takes an integrated approach to information
              security education that covers both technological and policy issues. It
              includes a partnership with Clark-Atlanta University to design and development
              of an innovative and broad curriculum that could be used to train future
              information security professionals. The curriculum starts with a gateway course
              that provides a broad introduction to the field. This is followed by an initial
              set of courses, each of which focuses on a coherent body of knowledge. Each
              course introduces students to core concepts that cover a particular aspect of
              information security and includes projects that provide hands-on experience
              with the tools and techniques that can be used to build high assurance systems.
              A key component of the project is the creation and testing of teaching
              materials and projects for the courses. The curriculum development and its
              implementation is part of the development of a variety of programs in the
              information security area for a diverse body of students. These include an
              undergraduate specialization and a masters certificate and a concentration area
              for doctoral students. The courses that support these programs are available to
              students from Georgia Tech, Clark-Atlanta and other institutions that are
              located in the Atlanta area. This enables students to meet the critical needs
              for information assurance specialists in our country.


