Title       : Increasing Security Expertise in Aviation-Oriented Computing Education: A
               Modular Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2002    
File        : a0113627

Award Number: 0113627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183366             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan L. Gerhart gerharts@erau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matt Jaffe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Hriljac  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Bloom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jan G. Hogle  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Embry Riddle Aero Univ
	      600 S. Clyde Morris Blvd.
	      Daytona Beach, FL  32114    386/226-6319

NSF Program : 1668      FED CYBER SERV: SCHLAR FOR SER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1668,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project produces course modules related to critical aspects of aviation for
              internal use and projected for external distribution. Modules are considered to
              be a part of a course, developed from both technical and policy perspectives,
              integrated with other course materials, involving both labs and lectures, and
              presented to bring the topic alive, and leave a lasting impression on the
              student's professional attitude. The first step of the project involves both
              external survey of the field and identification of potential module partners
              (importing and exporting) and internal examination of engineering and policy
              curricula for most productive module injection and evaluation. The long-range
              objective is meeting the criteria for curriculum and institutional
              certification as a center for academic excellence in information assurance
              education. The modules have an aviation engineering orientation, thus potential
              high impact on the aviation and related industries. The project should have a
              high impact on the institution, faculty, and students as well. Results are
              disseminated as both publications and packaged courseware with extensive
              website support


