Title       : Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope/Energy Dispersive Spectrometer for
               Materials Investigation and Student Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0113362

Award Number: 0113362
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lance E. Kearns kearnsle@jmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbra L. Gabriel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Lawrence  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael H. Renfroe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 5728, Med Arts West 22-B
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9141,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program and the Major
              Research Instrumentation program will allow James Madison University to acquire
              a Scanning Electron Microscope/ Energy Dispersive Spectrometer (SEM/EDS).  The
              SEM/EDS system will serve the Materials Science Center, the College of Science
              and Mathematics and the College of Integrated Science and Technology at James
              Madison University. The instrument will provide new capabilities for
              micro-chemical analysis of solids, digital micro-imaging using secondary and
              backscatter electrons, electron beam induced current for locating p-n junctions
              in semiconductors, and cathodoluminescence for elemental zoning studies in
              crystalline substances. The instrument will be a focal point for faculty and
              undergraduate student research and will foster cooperative research initiatives
              across several departments and colleges within the university. Outreach and
              collaboration among neighboring colleges, universities and local industry will
              be encouraged. 

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research
              program and the Major Research Instrumentation program will allow James Madison
              University to acquire a Scanning Electron Microscope/ Energy Dispersive
              Spectrometer (SEM/EDS).  The SEM/EDS system will serve the Materials Science
              Center, the College of Science and Mathematics and the College of Integrated
              Science and Technology at James Madison University. The instrument will provide
              new capabilities for solid state research. The instrument will be a focal point
              for faculty and undergraduate student research and will foster cooperative
              research initiatives across several departments and colleges within the
              university. Outreach and collaboration among neighboring colleges, universities
              and local industry will be encouraged.



