Title       : SGER: Iceberg Lake: A High Resolution Glacial Record Exposed in an
               Outburst-Drained Proglacial Lake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2001     
File        : a0113400

Award Number: 0113400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34859              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Anderson rsand@rupture.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne P. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A high resolution neoglacial record of glacial sediment yield 
exposed in a
              jokulhlaup-drained proglacial lake

Documentation of the production of
              sediment by glaciers is critical to our understanding of the roles of glaciers
              in the topographic evolution of mountain ranges and in global geochemical
              cycles. While proglacial lakes offer an excellent opportunity to investigate
              the relationship between sediment source and sink in a non-tidewater glacier
              environment, access to their sedimentary record is often poor. We will examine
              sediments impounded by "Iceberg Lake," a large, stable, long-lived proglacial
              lake in Alaska's Chugach Mountains. Iceberg Lake unexpectedly drained in 1999
              and again in 2000, offering a tremendous (but ephemeral) opportunity to
              characterize the lake's accumulated sediments in three dimensions. Although
              glacier-dammed, there is no historical record of Iceberg Lake draining prior to
              1999. The lake's apparent stability over hundreds of years resulted in 1) a
              series of four well-developed shoreline deposits ringing the lake, 2) a series
              of four sandy deltas, and 3) strongly-varved lacustrine sediments.  As the
              lake's main inlet stream is now rapidly cutting down through all of these
              deposits, virtually all of Iceberg Lake's neoglacial sedimentary record is
              currently exposed. In this small glacial basin, with very tight coupling
              between source and sink, these deposits promise a centuries-long sediment
              record with annual resolution. By mapping the sediments, and by detailed
              sampling of the varve record, we will produce a detailed time-series of coarse
              and fine-grained sediment delivery to Iceberg Lake. This will document
              year-to-year variability in the volume and type of sediment deposited in
              Iceberg Lake over hundreds of years, and will provide insight into glacier
              dynamics, sediment production and evacuation, and fluvial transport during,
              after, and possibly even prior to the Little Ice Age.

