Title       : ITR/SY (Revolutionary Computing) Multipass Programming for Personal
               High-Performance Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a0113968

Award Number: 0113968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $489671             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Hart jch@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The performance of graphic processors is outpacing the performance of general
              processors, in fact cubing the growth curve. It has been recently shown that
              some graphics algorithms can be performed in new ways on the graphics
              processor, using a novel technique known as multipass programming. Multipass
              programming treats the graphics processor as a SIMD processor acting on a data
              array stored in the screen's pixels, with each operation applied as an
              image-processing pass. The proposed research will extend this concept further
              not only within the graphics community, but also for the scientific computing
              and general computing communities, by developing a multipass programming
              language general enough to support both graphical and non-graphical programs.
              Existing problems of numerical range and precision will be overcome, and the
              fidelity of the resulting numerical implementations analyzed.

Work in
              multipass algorithms for procedural shading will be continued our, and
              multipass programming applied to radiosity and physically-based animation.
              Multipass programming will also be extended to applications outside of computer
              graphics, including solving linear systems, the finite element method and
              computational fluid dynamics.

If graphics processors continue to grow at the
              current rate, they will attain a four teraflop performance at the end of the
              proposed funding period. During this growth period a library of programming
              techniques and applications that will harness this otherwise untapped source of
              high-performance computing power will be developed. The result will be richer
              graphics, more realistic virtual environments, more natural simulated motion,
              and the ability to perform sophisticated supercomputing simulations on
              consumer-level personal computers.

 

