Title       : Dissertation Research: Language and Ideology and Local Identity in Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1997       
File        : a9708138

Award Number: 9708138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5661               (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Collier gcollier@Stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
              Stanford University.  The project explores the relationship between language
              and identity in Guatemala, focusing on the tension between the model of
              pan-Mayan identity supported by urban intellectuals versus the model of
              local-language-group Mayan identity supported by most rural dwellers.  The
              student will do a community study in a highland town whose residents claim to
              be Tzutujil Maya even though they speak Kiche, a different but related Maya
              language.  The student will census the households of the town; conduct
              participant observation in school programs and language workshops focusing on
              Mayan language as well as in normal social settings like the marketplace;
              conduct focused interviews on people's beliefs about language; and conduct some
              sorting tasks from cognitive anthropology to elucidate the local model of
              language groupings. After this intensive study in one community the student
              will conduct briefer comparative research in 10 communities speaking 6
              different Mayan languages.   This research is important because it will advance
              our understanding of how local `folk` use scientific discourse, in the context
              of historical arguments as well as contemporary social behavior, to further
              their nationalist goals.  This case study will provide valuable information to
              advance theories of language nationalism in other parts of the world.  In
              addition the project will add to our expertise about this important region of
              the hemisphere.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
