Title       : Small Grants for Exploratory Research: Nanofabrication Techniques Based on Two
               Levels of Molecular Self-Assembly Self-Assembled Monolayers & Ordering of Block
               Copolymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1997  
File        : a9708944

Award Number: 9708944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Nealey nealey@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9708944  Nealy, Paul F.  U of Wisconsin, Madison    The proposal's
              short-term research goal is to demonstrate the enabling technology for the
              resist system described below.  This proposal for a Small Grants for
              Exploratory Research supports the investigation of the interfacial phenomena
              that govern the ordering of thin films of amphiphilic block copolymers on
              patterned hydrophobic/hydrophilic surfaces.    Optical lithography, the most
              widespread technique for the fabrication of microelectronic devices, is
              approaching the lower limit (>100 nm) in the size of features that it can
              produce.  At the same time, there is little doubt that the need for denser,
              faster and more powerful circuits will continue.  Smaller features (50nm) can
              be produced with electron beam writing or stylus lithography.  These processes,
              however, are currently serial and will require significant development for
              high-volume commercial applications.  Lithographies based on shorter wavelength
              radiation, for example extreme ultra violet (EUV) and X-ray lithography (XRL),
              have the required resolution. but no satisfactory resist materials exist for
              applications below 100 nm.  Current resist systems rely on kinetic processes
              such as diffusion and dissolution.  The principles that govern these systems
              cannot be blindly extrapolated in the nanometer regime because of vanishing
              small tolerances and margins.  New resist systems for the nanometer regime must
              be able to produce features of molecular dimensions with tolerances and margins
              of atomic dimensions.    The proposed long -term research goal is to develop a
              nanofabrication technique based on interfacial phenomena and two levels of
              molecular:  self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) and ordering of thin films of
              block because it leads to equilibrium structures that are at (or close to)
              thermodynamic minimum.  Self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) will be formed on the
              surface of a substrate, and the SAMs will patterned in the plane of the
              amphiphilic block copolymer will be depos ited on the substrate, and surface
              energy will govern the ordering of the strongly segregating copolymer upon
              annealing.  If the dimensions of the patterned SAMs are of the same order of
              magnitude as the dimensions of the polymer molecules, then structure in the
              polymer film will be induced normal to the substrate.  Regions of low surface
              energy will be covered with the hydrophobic block of the polymer, and regions
              of high surface energy will be covered with the hydrophilic block of the
              polymer.  It is expected that the order to propagate will pass through the
              entire thickness of the deposited film.  One of the blocks of the block
              copolymer will be selectively etched.  Arbitrarily shaped patterns with lateral
              dimensions of tens of nanometers will be transferred from the patterned SAMs to
              resist material (the remaining block of the copolymer) at the resolution of
              X-ray lithography.
