Title       : Modeling of Contaminant Dispersion in Complex-Terrain Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9708452

Award Number: 9708452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John F. Foss                            
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harindra J. Fernando J.Fernando@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Don L. Boyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neil S. Berman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alex Mahalov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0100000   Special Interest                        
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1415,1524,1525,1584,9104,9146,9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                      ABSTRACT  CTS-9708452  FERNANDO    This proposal was submitted to the
              environmental Geochemistry and Biochemistry (EGB) solicitation NSF 96-152.   
              The aim of this research program is to utilize the complementary expertise of
              laboratory experimentalists, turbulence modelers, numerical analysts and field
              observationalists to carry out an interdisciplinary study of air flow and
              pollutant dispersion, including chemical and physical transformations, in
              rugged (complex) terrain. As a result of restricted vertical mixing, pooling of
              air during nocturnal cooling and absence of background meso-scale wind flow to
              flush the basins, urban developments in complex terrain are prone to severe air
              pollution problems.  Often the important surface features which influence the
              local wind flows are of the order of 100 meters while the valley diurnal air
              motions are governed by scales of more than 100 km.  These scale disparities
              pose a difficult problem for numerical models.  In addition, during morning and
              evening transitions from cooling to heating of the ground and vice-versa
              (turnover or transitional periods), wind motions are intermittent with wind
              speeds of the order of one meter per second, thus posing problems for field
              measurements.  The existing models for the prediction of flow and dispersion in
              these areas are known to yield unsatisfactory results, especially during
              turnover periods.    The proposed work will be directed primarily toward the
              development of a robust, general-purpose, geo-chemo-physical numerical model
              for complex-terrain flows and its validation. Laboratory and theoretical
              studies will be conducted to improve the fundamental understanding of and
              develop new parameterizations for complex-terrain, non-equilibrium turbulent
              flows.  Detailed analyses of particle samples taken in selected field sites at
              10 minute intervals will be used for the validation of turbulence
              parameterizations and the development of an aerosol model.  An available
              meteorological model will be significantly m odified to incorporate these new
              parameterizations, including unsteady vertical mixing and aerosol transport and
              chemistry.  This new complex-terrain model will be tested and calibrated
              against available and new field data.  The wind fields during transitional
              low-wind periods will be deduced by using properly scaled laboratory
              complex-terrain models; a physical model of the Phoenix, Arizona area will be
              used for this purpose.  The numerical model will be run for specific areas --
              with realistic initial and boundary conditions and source distribution -- for
              operational forecasting of wind fields, pollutant levels, impacts on soil,
              interaction between indoor and outdoor air and assessment of human exposure.
