Title       : Trait Impressions Predicted from Connectionist Modeling of Facial Metric
               Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2001    
File        : a9708619

Award Number: 9708619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238865             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie A. Zebrowitz zebrowitz@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Marc Fellous  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Considerable research demonstrates that people have a strong tendency to use
              facial appearance when forming first impressions of others' psychological
              traits, and that these impressions show considerable consensus across
              perceivers. The aim of the proposed research is to explain consensual first
              impressions of faces. The explanation to be tested is that social attributes
              revealed by the facial qualities that mark babies, fitness, or emotion are
              overgeneralized to people whose facial structure resembles that of babies, a
              particular level of fitness, or a particular emotional state. Research
              investigating relationships between facial qualities and trait impressions has
              provided indirect support for the overgeneralization hypothesis. However, the
              assumption that these impressions actually happen because of the
              overgeneralization of reactions to faces has not been tested. Connectionist
              modeling will be used to test the overgeneralization hypothesis. This technique
              may reveal whether the physical similarity between two faces is sufficient to
              account for similar impressions of them independent of similarities in the
              social or semantic implications of the faces. A series of experiments will
              provide facial metrics as input to standard back-propagation neural networks.
              Additional experiments will be conducted to determine whether human perceivers'
              impressions of the faces can be predicted from the responses of the networks.
              The proposed experiments will test the overgeneralization explanations for
              consensual first impressions of faces, and they will help identify the
              qualities that distinguish among faces that vary in emotional expression,
              genetic fitness, and maturity. The research will contribute to a better
              understanding of how people form impressions of one another, and ultimately how
              such impressions influence social interaction and interpersonal relationships. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
