Title       : Biologically-mediated Manganese Oxide Deposition and its Effects on Trace Metal
               Cycling in Aquatic Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1998   
File        : a9708093

Award Number: 9708093
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard W. Lion LWL3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Shuler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Ghiorse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
Program Ref : 1584,1585,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry program  
              supports research on trace metal cycling in the environment by Drs.   Leonard
              W. Lion, Michael L. Shuler, and William C. Ghiorse of the   Department of Civil
              and Environmental Engineering, Cornell University.    The research is supported
              by the Divisions of Chemistry and Earth   Sciences and the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities.  The long   term goal is to develop an accurate
              mechanistic model for predicting   formation of biologically-mediated surface
              coatings and their subsequent   influence on transition metal distribution in
              natural and engineered   environments.  This project focuses on identifying the
              role of manganese   oxides in controlling transition metal cycling and on
              developing a   quantitative model for the process.  In particular, the
              influence of   bacterial processes and biofilm formation on both manganese
              oxidation and   metal binding by manganese oxides will be included in the
              model.    Manganese oxidation and manganese oxide deposition will be measured
              in   cultures of bacteria in a bioflim reactor system where pH, temperature,  
              dissolved oxygen concentration, fluid shear and light intensity can be  
              controlled.  Manganese oxide surface properties and adsorption of lead   and
              cadmium for biologically oxidized samples will be compared to results  
              obtained for abiotic chemical redox processes.  The result will be an  
              integrated computational model to predict manganese oxidation and   manganese
              oxide trace metal binding, including cellular growth, biofilm   accumulation,
              manganese redox reations, and trace metal speciation and   adsorption.  
              Adsoprtion of lead and cadmium to iron and manganese oxide particles is  
              thought to be an important means of transport of these toxic metals in   the
              natural environment.  This study is directed toward understanding the   role of
              manganese oxide adsorption, including the role of   biologically-mediated
              manganese oxidation and cycling, in the transport   process.  The results will
              also be relevant to development of remediation   strategies for toxic metals.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
