Title       : Electronically Linked Cluster Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1999      
File        : a9708107

Award Number: 9708107
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1207811            (Estimated)
Investigator: Supriyo Datta datta@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Janes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald P. Andres  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald G. Reifenberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford P. Kubiak  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1589,1775,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               9708107 Datta  This FRG project is multidisciplinary, involving elements of
              Chemistry, Physics, Engineering and Materials Science, to address research on
              Linked Cluster Networks-2D lattices consisting of nm-sized gold clusters
              electronically linked by pi-conjugated organic molecules. The project includes
              research to explore and exploit unique properties of LCN's for device
              applications such as interconnects, opto-electronic devices and sensors. Three
              areas will be emphasized(i)self-assembled LCN's that can form the interconnect
              networks for high density integrated circuits, (ii)programmable LCN's whereby
              the conductivity in selected regions can be increased by orders of magnitude by
              doping and controlled with an external optical signal, (iii)exploration of a
              new class of nanoscale LCN-based chemical sensors whose conductivity can be
              changed by orders of magnitude in the presence of particular chemical
              species--because of their high surface to volume ratio these chemical sensors
              are anticipated to be have speed and sensitivity advantages. The project is
              co-supported by five NSF programs, and the MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities). %%% This project addresses forefront research issues in an
              interdisciplinary area of science and engineering having high technological
              relevance.  The research will contribute basic knowledge at a fundamental level
              to important aspects of materials and devices, and will provide improved
              understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved materials and
              structures for devices of the future.  An important feature of the program is
              the integration of research and education through the training of students in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***
