Title       : SBIR PHASE II: Electronic Beam Steering for Ground Probing Radar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9708205

Award Number: 9708205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304759             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ChT Engineering Systems
	      HC89-69, PO Box 228
	      Hermosa, SD  577440228    605/394-2458

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0510203   Model Validation                        
Program Ref : 0000,1057,1148,9150,CVIS,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
              marketable beam steering transmitter array for ground probing radar (GPR). 
              Research conducted under Phase I demonstrated feasibility of forming a focused
              beam, from the superposition of multiple antenna elements, that can be steered
              to targets beneath the subsurface.  Beam steering opens opportunities for
              enhanced target discrimination, increased depth of penetration, and broader
              area of coverage from a single location.  Through post processing,
              three-dimensional images may be created of an area under investigation.  The
              beam steered array product will be positioned as a hardware accessory that
              enhances the operation of existing GPR systems.  Therefore, it is important
              that such an "add-on" be versatile, cheap, easy-to-used, and compatible with as
              many of the existing GPR systems as possible.  In Phase II, testing of a
              prototype in as many realistic GPR environments as possible will be done to
              extend capabilities to the operational domain of typical GPR systems.  To
              facilitate analytical understanding of subsurface beam-forming, the Phase II
              effort will extend the modeling of Phase I (which was done without targets and
              in an homogeneous subsurface) to more realistic media.  The analysis will
              employ finite difference time-domain methods in order to model more complex
              media.  In addition, refinement of the array hardware and its associated
              software will be accomplished in order to enhance end-user features.   Markets
              exist in subsurface exploration; geophysical and hydrological studies; location
              of underground facilities, hazardous wastes, and unexploded ordinance; non
              invasive exploration of subsurface tunnel systems such as mining tunnels and
              subway systems; detection of fluid front migration from underground spills; and
              large areas surveys (added coverage from beam steering).   This award is
              supported by the SBIR Program and the Experimental Program to Stimulate
              Competitive Research (EPSCOR).
