Title       : Activation and Functionalization of Hydrocarbons by Soluble Transition Metal
               Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1999     
File        : a9708356

Award Number: 9708356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Flood Flood@chem1.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Thomas C. Flood, Department of Chemistry, University of Southern  
              California, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and   Organometallic
              Program of the Chemistry Division with a contribution for   instrumentation
              from the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the   Mathematical and
              Physical Sciences Directorate for the study of the   activation and
              functionalization of hydrocarbons by soluble transition   metal complexes.
              Investigations will focus on alkene insertion and   carbon-hydrogen activation
              through metal mediated oxidative addition and   electrophilic alkane
              metathesis. Using triamine-ligated complexes of   rhodium, iridium, ruthenium,
              and osmium, the influence of metal,   oxidations state, steric bulk, electronic
              effects of the ancillary   ligands, alkyl group structure, charge, and chelate
              ring size on these   reactions will be assessed. Amine ligation will be
              exploited to prepare   high oxidation state and oxo species that will display
              an enhanced   ability to functionalize hydrocarbons. In all cases reaction
              mechanisms   will be analyzed.  Chemical transformations of hydrocarbons are
              the basis for much of our   utilization of energy and material natural
              resources, which are in turn   an integral part of our economy and an important
              source of our standard   of living. Many transformations of hydrocarbons are
              carried out through   their interactions with metals and metal compounds. It is
              a basic tenant   of chemistry that a better understanding of mechanisms of
              reactions will   lead to improved methods for converting raw materials into
              materials to   improve our lives. Expressed as broadly as possible, it is the
              purpose of   the proposed research to enhance and extend our understanding of
              how   metal complexes can be used to manipulate the structures of hydrocarbons,
                which should ultimately lead to enhanced availability of energy   resources. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
