Title       : Rigidity and Flexibility in Social Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1999   
File        : a9708910

Award Number: 9708910
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156681             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Harrington joe.harrington@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Johns Hopkins University  Project Abstract  The defining question of this
              research proposal is: within a social system such as a corporation, government,
              or even society at large, what determines the behavioral pattern of its members
              regarding how they respond to change? Are certain features of the external
              environment conducive to agents being rigid in their behavior? Are certain
              features of the internal structure of the social system conducive to promoting
              rigidity or promoting agent's to respond to internal rather than external
              conditions?   The theoretical approach developed to address these questions is
              predicated upon three observations. First, people differ in how they respond to
              change. Heterogeneity along a rigidity-flexibility dimension has long been
              noted and documented in the psychology literature. Based on this observation,
              it is assumed that agents are heterogeneous in how they respond to change-some
              are relatively rigid and some are relatively flexible. Second most social
              systems are hierarchical. While this is clearly true for corporations and
              governments, it is applicable to many informal systems for which status is an
              operative force. A second element of the theoretical formulation is a model of
              the process by which agents move up through a hierarchical system. A key factor
              behind behavioral patterns within a social system is conjectured to be the
              selection process which determines whether rigid or flexible agents survive and
              occupy a system's higher levels. Third, part of people's behavior is learned by
              imitating others. Imitation as a form of social learning is well-documented for
              many species. While how a person responds to change may be partly endowed (that
              is, due to factors external to the social system under consideration), it is
              also influenced by the level of rigidity exhibited by others, and especially
              those with high rank (that is, high social status). The third element of the
              theoretical formulation is a model of social learning with imitation being the
              mechanism. Imitation is modeled as a two-step procedure: i) identification of a
              set of role models worth emulating; and ii) drawing inferences from a role
              model's behavior and integrating what one learns into one's own behavioral
              rule. Selection and social learning are then intertwined processes in that
              selection influences who survives and advances within the social system and
              thus determines the set of role models. Social learning affects the
              characteristics of those at the bottom of the hierarchy and thus influences the
              population upon which selection operates.   With this model, new and
              substantive insight is to be provided into how features of the meta-environment
              influence the way in which people respond to change. By under- standing the
              determinants of individual behavior, new insight into organizational behavior
              will be possible. Why do some established firms fail to adequately respond to
              significant changes in market conditions (notable recent examples include IBM,
              Sears Roebuck, and Kmart)? In response to a drastic change in economic or
              social conditions, why are some governments unresponsive and ultimately
              collapse? This research should contribute to answering such questions.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
