Title       : Gender Differences in Self-Evaluation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1997 
File        : a9708981

Award Number: 9708981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eva M. Pomerantz pomerentz@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Considerable evidence suggests that women are almost twice as likely as men to
              experience depression. There is little evidence, however, as to how this sex
              difference develops. Because a number of studies have shown that the sex
              difference in depression first occurs during adolescence, it has been assumed
              that the difference reflects changes occurring at this time. Yet, there is
              evidence to suggest that the difference may emerge prior to adolescence. As
              early as elementary school, girls evaluate themselves more negatively than do
              boys, especially in the face of failure. This may lead to depression during
              adolescence when children make the transition from elementary to junior high
              school and when failure is often more common. Consistent with this proposal,
              depression does appear to increase among girls, but not boys, following such
              transitions. The major goal of the proposed research is to examine the social
              factors that cause girls to evaluate themselves more negatively than boys, and
              consequently to be more vulnerable to depression. To this end, the research
              investigates whether parents' gender stereotypes cause parents to exert more
              control over their daughters than over their sons. Importantly, the research
              also investigates the role that such a gender socialization plays in the
              development of sex differences in self-evaluation and consequent depression.
              The proposed study employs a longitudinal design in which children's reaction
              to a school transition both before and after adolescence is examined. The
              results yielded by the proposed research will elucidate the social
              underpinnings of the development of sex differences in self-evaluation and
              consequent depression as well as the development of these phenomena in general.
              Hence, the research will provide basic knowledge which may ultimately be used
              to develop intervention programs to prevent depression in children of both
              sexes.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
