Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeological Excavation of the Xunantunich Maya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1997       
File        : a9708489

Award Number: 9708489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10708              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy A. Ashmore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Wendy Ashmore, MS Angela Keller will collect data for
              her doctoral  dissertation. For the last several years she has participated in
              the survey and excavation of Xunantunich, a Mayan site located in lowland
              Belize. It consists primarily of a core cluster of monumental architecture with
              walkways, roads, public plazas and terraces as well as larger more impressive
              temple mounds. The site is particularly interesting for several reasons. First,
              it dates to relatively late in the Maya sequence with only Late Postclassic and
              Terminal Classic components. This means that the architectural layout can be
              viewed as essentially synchronous and minimal segregation of features by time
              period is necessary. Secondly, a curious disjunction exists between the site
              itself and the surrounding hinterland which maintained a large and prosperous
              population both before the site was occupied and after its abandonment. This is
              unusual in a Mayan context. Ashmore, Keller and other team members have
              examined the spatial organization of the Xunantunich core and compared it to
              ethnohistoric documents which describe how Mayan villages, when first described
              by the Spanish, were arranged. They believe that major buildings and causeways
              were organized along ritual lines and that the arrangement in space reflected
              Mayan beliefs about cosmic order. Only portions of the site have been excavated
              and detailed mapping has not been completed. During one season of NSF supported
              fieldwork MS Keller will do both. She has determined what configuration of data
              is necessary to support a `cosmic` model and will collect the necessary
              information to test this idea.  Archaeologists wish to understand how the Mayan
              civilization arose and was maintained by people who lived in an extremely harsh
              environment and who possessed a simple level of technology. How was it possible
              to integrate large numbers of people into widespread social and economic
              systems? Many archaeologists have postulated that political and ritual power
              were essentially synonymous and through control of important rituals rulers
              were able to exercise considerable power. Were Xunantunich spatially organized
              along ritual lines, this fact would strongly support this hypothesis. This
              research is also important because it will assist in training a promising young
              scientist.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
