Title       : Theory of Semiconductor Surface Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1997      
File        : a9708363

Award Number: 9708363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Doren doren@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Doren of the University of Delaware is being supported by the  
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to continue his work   using
              theoretical methods to address reactive and non-reactive chemistry   that
              occurs on semiconductor surfaces.  During the next grant period   Doren will
              use computational methods, based primarily on Density   Functional Theory, to
              address certain aspects of the surface chemistry on   silicon and germanium.  A
              major component of this new work will be   concentrated on the recombinative
              desorption of hydrogen.  Specifically   the role of an excited electronic state
              will be investigated as part of   the kinetics and dynamics of this process. 
              The scope of this project   will also address similarities and differences in
              the behavior of silicon   and germanium.  The computational  approach used will
              utilize both a   finite cluster as well as periodic  slabs in the calculations.
                The immediate objective of Doren's research is to develop reliable   methods
              for calculating mechanisms and rates of reactions on silicon   surfaces, and to
              apply them to several examples which are important in   semiconductor device
              fabrication.  A mechanistic understanding of silicon   surface chemistry will
              be essential for developing new semiconductor   technologies that require
              unprecedented control over the properties of   these materials.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
