Title       : Electrostatics of Macro-Ions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2001   
File        : a9708646

Award Number: 9708646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $690001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robijn F. Bruinsma bruinsma@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Gelbart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1051,1589,9162,9181,9183,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9708646  Bruinsma  This is a grant to conduct theoretical research to develop 
              further a fundamental understanding of the electrostatic  interactions in
              aqueous media between lamellar, cylindrical  and spherical macro-ions.  The
              research is funded by the  Mathematical and Physical Sciences Office of 
              Multidisciplinary Activities and the Divisions of Materials  Research,
              Chemistry, Molecular and Cellular Biology, and  Physics.    One aim of the
              research is to study electrostatic forces  between macro-ions of mixed
              dimensionality, such as  interactions between charged spheres and planes, and
              charged  rods and planes.  Under conditions of mixed dimensionality  and
              opposite charges on the macro-ions, release of  counterions into the solvent by
              the rod and/or the sphere  produces an unusual entropic mechanism for binding
              in the  plane.  Adsorption of charged biopolymers onto oppositely  charged
              lipid membranes by counterion release attraction  will be studied.    A second
              aim will be to address various deficiencies in  Poisson-Boltzmann (PB) theory,
              the main analytical tool  available to describe the electrostatic interactions
              between  macro-ions.  Whereas PB theory predicts repulsive  interactions
              between like-charged rods, simulations show  that attractive forces can appear
              due to counterion  correlation effects.  A theoretical, many-body description 
              of macro-ion attraction between rods by polyvalent  counterions and by flexible
              polyelectrolytes will be  undertaken.  In the former case, a linear response
              approach  will be used to treat the interacting rods as coupled one-  dimension
              plasmas.  In the latter case, the polymer field  theory of Edwards will be
              generalized to include  electrostatic effects for this special rod-chain-rod 
              geometry.  Brownian dynamics simulations of cylindrical  macro-ion interaction
              with both ordinary polyvalent  counterions and with flexible polyelectrolytes
              will be done  by Dr. Gronbech-Jensen of UCLA/LANL.    A final aim of the
              research will be to examine the effects   of intra-bilayer fluidity on binding
              of macro-ions to  membranes which consist of non-ionic/ionic lipid mixtures.  A
              new degree of freedom is associated with a variable, and  inhomogeneous,
              surface charge layer.  Charged biopolymers  bound to such membranes are
              expected to develop a two-  dimensional variant of the well-known Manning
              condensation  of charged rods in bulk solvent.  Motivated by experimental 
              studies of condensates of DNA on cationic membranes, either  with solid support
              or in stacks, the self-assembly of ionic  amphiphiles in membranes during
              macro-ion adsorption will be  studied.  %%%  This is a grant to conduct
              theoretical research to develop  further a fundamental understanding of the
              electrostatic  interactions in aqueous media between lamellar, cylindrical  and
              spherical macro-ions.  The research is funded by the  Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities and the Divisions of Materials
               Research, Chemistry, Molecular and Cellular Biology, and  Physics.    The
              study of the electrostatic interactions between large,  macro-ions of various
              shapes is a challenging problem of  fundamental importance.  It is also a
              problem of great  practical interest when one realizes that these systems are 
              also comprised of the biopolymers (DNA) and membranes which  make up living
              systems.  ***
