Title       : The Development of an Archaeological Information System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9708637

Award Number: 9708637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59845              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane Z. Chase chase@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With a National Science Foundation Career Advancement Award Dr. Diane Chase will
              pursue a systematic course of assisted instruction in computer sciences and use
              this knowledge to develop a computerized data base for information collected
              during twelve field seasons of investigation at the Mayan archaeological site
              of Caracol which is located in Belize. The site is important because it
              provides insight into Mayan civilization at the pinnacle of its development.
              The Caracol project as a result of its chronological duration and the number of
              individuals involved has yielded almost 600 discrete excavations. The data
              pertaining to these continues to grow as investigators conduct specialized
              analyses of excavated materials and as the research extends beyond the city
              core into the surrounding region. The Caracol data is not easily moved or
              shared and investigators must come to, or arrange to have copied, information
              contained within Dr. Chase's research laboratory.   In the first stage of this
              project Dr. Chase will pursue a carefully designed education program. She will
              work with computer scientists to gain competence in internet technology,
              virtual environments, mapping software, distance learning and virtual
              organizations. In the second stage of the research she will construct a
              prototype information system and then scan and enter the Caracol archaeological
              data into it. The expected result is the incorporation of a massive body of
              archaeological information, including maps and site plans which will be
              electronically available to interested members of the research community. The
              Career Advancement Award, as its name indicates, will also serve a second
              function. It will provide Dr. Chase with the necessary time and tools to pursue
              her research career in a more effective manner.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
