Title       : Downstream Geomorphic Impacts of Large Dams on American Rivers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a9708240

Award Number: 9708240
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189548             (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Graf   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Arizona State University    The objective of this investigation is to examine
              the downstream impacts of large dams on the nation's rivers.  In particular the
              PI wishes to develop new knowledge about how dam installation and operation
              have affected the characteristics of river channels and riparian environments. 
              Specific questions include the temporal and spatial distributions of stream
              power downstream in relation to scale and engineering characteristics of dams,
              as well as, operating rules. In addition the geographic effects of
              distributions of stream power will be assessed from the perspectives of channel
              width, flood plain dimensions, channel patterns and near channel landforms, and
              spatial distributions of riparian ecosystems.  The strategy is to compare
              present conditions on experimental river reaches that have been impacted by
              dams with nearby similar control reaches that are without such structures for
              up to 42 of the largest dams in the country.  Methods of investigation focus on
              hydrologic analyses of streamflow data using statistical techniques, geographic
              analyses of aerial photographic images using GIS, and field investigations to
              collect sediment and vegetation data.  The project will advance present fluvial
              theory for impounded rivers for such theory is in its infancy and does not
              include generalizations about the range of hydrologic and geomorphic impacts of
              dams.  From an applied perspective the work will provide new information on the
              effect of rivers on critical habitat.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
