Title       : Space-Time Processing for Digital Comm: Nonparametric Channel ID & Interference
               Cancellation & Multichannel Equalizer Design Based on Linear Matrix
               Inequalities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9708309

Award Number: 9708309
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Zoltowski   (Principal Investigator current)
              Venkataramanan Balakrishnan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In an urban cellular environment, the data pulses employed in digital 
              communications typically travel through multiple paths from transmitter to 
              receiver due to reflections from buildings and other structures.  This
              multipath  propagation causes each pulse to be corrupted by pulses transmitted
              before and  after it; the deleterious effects of this "intersymbol
              interference" (ISI)  necessitate signal processing in the form of an
              "equalizer".  As a further  complications, the projected explosion in the
              number of cellular users will  almost certainly require two users in the same
              of adjacent cells to occupy the  same frequency band.  This leads to
              "co-channel interference" that manifests  itself as cross-talk amongst users. 
              The use of antenna arrays, which enables  discrimination amongst signals
              arriving from different directions, offers a means  of suppressing co-channel
              interference.    This research focuses on the development of spatiotemporal
              signal processing  schemes to effect both equalization and interference
              cancellation for mobile  narrowband digital communications in an urban cellular
              environment.  The  equalizer design problem is reformulated as a convex
              optimization problem based  on linear matrix inequalities and solved
              numerically.  Equalization is effected  with sample-spaced taps at each
              antenna, encompassing a time duration roughly  equal to the multipath time
              delay spread.  This facilitates better tracking of  time-varying multipath
              channels as compared to conventional equalization schemes  employing
              symbol-spaced taps.  Interference cancellation is effected by forming  beams
              with directions of maximum gain steered towards the desired user's  multipath,
              and nulls steered towards strong co-channel interferers.  This is  achieved by
              processing a short training signal via a novel extended correlator  that highly
              localizes in time the contribution of the desired user's signal,  thereby
              allowing one to estimate the spatial correlation matrix of the  interferers. 
              The equalization an d interference cancellation schemes developed  in this
              research hold the greatest promise in terms of the trade-off amongst 
              convergence rate, computational complexity, robustness to model mismatch, and 
              symbol error performance for Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) systems where
               the multipath time delay spread is less than the null-to-null mainlobe of the 
              pulse symbol waveform, as is the case with cellular systems based on the IS-136
               TDMA standard.
