Title       : Cylindrical and Spherical Supermolecules from Polymer Backbones Jacketed with
               Dendritic Coats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9708581

Award Number: 9708581
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Virgil Percec   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9708581  Percec    This research will design libraries of monodendritic building
               blocks with well defined flat tapered and conical shapes which  self-assemble
              into cylindrical and respectively spherical shapes.  These supermolecules will
              generate columnar hexagonal and  spherical thermotropic and lyotropic liquid
              crystalline (LC)  phases.  These LC phases will warrant a thermodynamic control
              of  their assembly and will allow the determination of their shape by  X-ray
              diffraction.  Libraries of flat tapered and conical  monodendritic building
              blocks functionalized with polymerizable  groups will be polymerized via living
              methods to generate the  first examples of giant polymers with cylindrical and
              spherical  shapes with diameter and length and respectively diameter 
              controlled at the nanoscale level.  The organization of these  giant dendritic
              monomers in a LC assembly will also be used to  aggregate their polymerizable
              groups in a reactor of artificially  enhanced concentration and restricted
              geometry during the  polymerization process and therefore, will generate a new 
              approach to the control of polymerization.  This research will  provide an
              entry into the design of polymeric materials with  predictable and dramatically
              different properties which are  determined by their shape.  Cylindrical and
              spherical giant  polymers obtained from flexible backbones jacketed with
              dendritic  coats will access new mechanisms to control the conformation and 
              rigidity of their flexible chain regardless of their tacticity.  Mechanisms to
              change in a reversible and controlled way the shape  of the polymer from
              rod-like to spherical will be elaborated.  It  is expected that these
              cylindrical 3-D polymers will produce more  rigid structures than the currently
              known 1-D linear rigid-rods.  %%%  This research will transplant concepts from
              Nature into the field  of   complex  synthetic  polymeric  materials.   Natural
               systems  provide  the  most  efficient  mechanisms  for  the  storage  and 
              transfer  of  energy  and information and for  the  production  of  structural 
              materials.  The polymeric systems developed  by  this  program  will provide
              new technologic concepts which  will  allow  for  the  first  time the
              development of new  materials  such  as  functional   fibers,  films, 
              membranes,  viscosity  controllers,  electronic,   photonic  and  controlled 
              release   systems   with  externally   regulated   physical   properties   via 
               principles  elaborated by Nature during the long process of evolution.  ***
