Title       : Collaborative Research on Variation in Legislative Entrepreneurship in
               Presidential Systems: Data from Beyond the U.S. Case
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1998   
File        : a9708936

Award Number: 9708936
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81004              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian F. Crisp crisp@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bradford S. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Legislators from the same party can entrepreneurially seek to serve particular
              constituencies, they can work together to pursue common programmatic goals, or
              they can more commonly, strike a balance somewhere along the continuum between
              the two.  Entrepreneurial behavior by legislators to promote their own
              electoral survival can include breaking party discipline on the chamber floor,
              initiating constituency focused legislation, seeking district-targeted
              committee assignments, and allocating resources to local offices and staff. 
              The extent to which they seek votes by stressing their own individual
              attributes (the `personal vote`) has profound consequences for whether
              representation will be particularistic or programmatic, whether or not regional
              and parochial concerns will be delegated to other levels of government, and
              whether or not interbranch stalemate and democratic instability are likely. 
              This project measures legislative entrepreneurship in four Latin American
              presidential democracies:  Argentina, Chile, Colombia, and Venezuela.  Until
              now, virtually all comparative studies of entrepreneurship have included
              detailed data from only one presidential system - the United States.  while
              comparing presidential and parliamentary systems is important, the fact that
              the executive and legislative branches in parliamentary systems do not have
              independent electoral origins dramatically changes the nature of interbranch
              relations, theories of representation, and the prospects for entrepreneurship. 
              The researchers test their hypotheses using data on nomination procedures,
              electoral systems, and entrepreneurship collected during field work stays in
              each of the four countries.  The resulting data base of information on behavior
              within legislative chambers is analyzed using quantitative and qualitative
              methodologies designed to exploit the variance in legislative entrepreneurship
              both cross-sectionally and time serially.  The research fleshes out a recently
              developed model for explaining the likelihood that legislators will behave
              entrepreneurially and develops a research design for testing the model
              empirically.  The findings should enhance our knowledge of the institutional
              incentives of politicians and offer ideas about how to explicitly design
              particular forms of representation, decentralization, and interbranch relations
              in presidential systems.  The resulting data base will be of use to numerous
              scholars interested in the topic.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
