Title       : Sedimentary Records of Pyrogenic PAH Emissions from Fossil Fuel and Biomass
               Sources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1997    
File        : a9708478

Award Number: 9708478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David C. Kadko                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $448095             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy I. Eglinton teglinton@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann P. McNichol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Farrington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1584,4444,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9708478  Eglinton       This proposal was submitted in response to the 
              Environmental Geochemistry & Biogeochemistry (EGB)  solicitation, NSF 96-152. 
              It is being jointly funded by the  Divisions of Earth Sciences and Ocean
              Sciences and Atmospheric Sciences.  The objective of this proposal is to use a
              newly  developed method for molecular-level radiocarbon analysis to establish a
              200 year record of combustion-derived (pyrogenic) polycyclic  aromatic
              hydrocarbon (PAH) inputs to aquatic sediments.  Radiocarbon represents an ideal
              parameter to distinguish fossil fuel (infinite 14C age)from modern biomass
              (contemporary 14C age) combustion sources.  Exploiting these isotopic
              characteristics we seek to determine (a) the extent to which the proportion of
              fossil fuel derived pyrogenic PAH have varied since the pre-industrial age; (b)
              which PAH represent the most effective  tracers of modern and fossil combustion
              sources; and c the source(s) of selected PAH of uncertain origin (perylene). 
              Radiometrically-dated sediments with established PAH profiles from Lake
              Siskiwit (MI) and the Pettaquamscutt River (RI) have been selected for this
              study.  By virtue of  their remote/rural location the PAH burden in these 
              sediments is a function of atmospheric deposition (i.e. exclusively
              combustion-derived inputs).  Down-core PAH isotopic profiles will be used in
              two ways:  (I)isotopic mass balance calculations will provide quantitative
              constraints on the contributions from different source  materials; (ii)
              molecular 14C data will be used as a new source discrimination "vector" when
              plotted against concentration or compound specific 13C composition in 
              property-property plots.    The product of this novel study will be a refined
              assessment of the impact of anthropogenic activity on the  provenance of this
              important class of contaminants.  The data obtained may also place constraints
              upon temporal variations in the source(s) of other combustion products  which
              are introduced into the environment via atmospheric transp ort, but are harder
              to trace (e.g. CO2, "soot" or  "elemental" carbon). Finally, this study will
              lead to improved source apportionment capabilities and an  unprecedented level
              of understanding of the distribution and fate of PAH in the environment.   
              This project impinges on several aspects of  environmental chemistry; it will
              bring together sediment,  aquatic and atmospheric chemists and will employ
              novel  molecular isotopic tools.  As such we believe this study is  central to
              the goals of the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry program.***
