Title       : The Agaricales: Molecular Systematics and Evolution of Mushrooms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1999      
File        : a9708035

Award Number: 9708035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218044             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rytas Vilgalys fungi@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9708035  Vilgalys   Mushrooms are among the most conspicuous groups of fungi
              found in nature, and are of ecological and economic importance. This project by
              Dr. Rytas Vilgalys of Duke University and his colleagues in Canada and the U.S.
              supports the development of a DNA sequence data base for taxonomic studies of
              mushroom fungi and their allies (usually placed in the order Agaricales, of the
              basidiomycetes). Although there has been much speculation about the
              relationships of diverse mushroom groups (gilled or poroid forms, underground
              "truffle" forms, etc.), little is known about their phylogenetic origins or the
              characters that reliably define each of the lineages. The taxonomy of mushrooms
              has traditionally relied on morphological features that are known or suspected
              to be subject to parallel or convergent evolution, or are phenotypically
              plastic within species or genera; as a result, many families are considered
              artificial assemblages, keyed to easily recognizable characters that
              nonetheless do not correlate with other features of their biology. An
              independent data set of DNA sequences from the nuclear ribosomal genes, from
              more than 500 representative species sampled from tropical, temperate, and
              boreal regions, provides for measurement of mutational differences that can
              then be used to construct phylogenetic trees for mushroom groups. When compared
              and integrated with traditional morphological and life-history characters of
              the fungi, the molecular sequence data will aid researchers in the
              identification of new or poorly known species, and provide a comparative basis
              for studies on mushroom ecology and biology.   The evolutionary origins and
              diversity of "fruit body" formation in mushrooms, of their enzymatic
              capabilities for digesting wood and carbohydrates, and of their general
              nutritional modes (saprophytic, parasitic, mutualistic) can be studied in a
              rigorous comparative manner in the context of a well-supported phylogenetic
              framework that establishes the genealogical connections among  species. Dr.
              Vilgalys is one of the leaders in this new comparative biology of fungi.
