Title       : Trifluoroacetic Acid: Its Environmental Occurrence and Its Effects in Biota in
               Seasonal Wetlands Downwind from Sources of Precursor HCFCs and HFCs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9708504

Award Number: 9708504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Seiber jseiber@med.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mae S. Gustin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1043,1584,9169,9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9708504  Seiber     This proposal was submitted to the Environmental
              Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry (EGB) solicitation NSF 96-152. The project
              described  below is being jointly supported by the Divisions of Atmospheric
              Sciences and Earth Sciences.    This project addresses the environmental
              occurrence of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and its effects in biota. TFA is a
              product of the atmospheric degradation of certain hydrochlorofluorocarbons and
              hydrofluorocarbons, which are replacement compounds for chlorofluorocarbons.
              The primary objectives of this project are: (1) To measure environmental
              concentrations of TFA in air, wet deposition, dry deposition, surface waters
              and plants at selected sites downwind from source regions, and to relate them
              to atmospheric concentrations of the precursor compounds; (2) To determine the
              uptake and effects of TFA in higher plans and the effects of TFA on microbes
              representative of seasonal wetlands under controlled exposure conditions. In
              addition, the experimental data on TFA occurrence and distribution will be
              compared with modeling efforts carried out at Harvard University. Seasonal
              wetlands in California and Nevada will be identified which might be
              particularly susceptible to effects of TFA from buildup over time.  
              Environmental sampling will include both proximate downwind sites and more
              remote sites in the Sierra Nevada and Great Basin. TFA will be analyzed as its
              methyl ester using GC/MS, a technique recently developed by the PI. Controlled
              exposures of plants to known amounts of TFA will be conducted using misting
              chambers and long-term hydroponic exposures for selected wetland and crop
              species. The flux of gaseous and fog-dissolved TFA to and from plant surfaces,
              and the root uptake and emission of TFA from selected crop and wetland plant
              species will be measured to determine bioconcentration and toxic effects of
              TFA. For the microbial study, soils collected from wetland environments will be
              amended with TFA at several concentrations and the effect on  microbial
              communities monitored by measuring microbial respiration.
