Title       : The Heterogeneous Oxidation of Sulfur Dioxide on Alkali Halide Surfaces:
               Kinetics and Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9708995

Award Number: 9708995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43978              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane A. Ganske iganske@pepperdine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pepperdine University
	      24255 Pacific Coast Hwy
	      Malibu, CA  902634819    310/506-4000

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
Program Ref : 9178,9222,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This Career Advancement Award is supported by the Analytical and  Surface
              Chemistry Program.  Professor Ganske will spend a  sabbatical year at the
              University of California at Irvine working  with Professors Hemminger and
              Finlayson-Pitts studying the  heterogeneous oxidation chemistry of sulfur
              dioxide that occurs on  salt surfaces.  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and
              quadrupole  mass spectrometry will be used to analyze the products of these 
              oxidation reactions.  This work will expand on the experience  gained by
              Professor Ganske using diffuse reflectance infrared  Fourier transform
              spectroscopy to study these important reactions  in her own laboratory. 
              Following her sabbatical leave a new  quadrupole mass spectrometer is planned
              for new space in a science  annex at Pepperdine University.  This sabbatical
              will substantively  enhance the future research experiences of Professor Ganske
              and her  undergraduate students at Pepperdine University in the areas of 
              heterogeneous atmospheric chemistry.  The reactions of gaseous sulfur dioxide
              on inorganic surfaces is  important in many areas of air pollution caused by
              the burning of  fossil fuels.  In this work the oxidation of sulfur dioxide on 
              inorganic surfaces will be characterized using several techniques  new to
              Professor Ganske of Pepperdine University.  This experience  will be gained
              during a sabbatical leave at the University of  California at Irvine working
              with Professors Hemminger and  Finlayson-Pitts.  The aim of this project will
              be to develop  processes that efficiently remove sulfur dioxide from gaseous 
              samples in an economical way and to introduce undergraduate  students to this
              important research area.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
