Title       : Democracy, Technology and Nuclear Power in the Czech Republic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1997    
File        : a9708180

Award Number: 9708180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Regina Axelrod   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Institute of Public Admini
	      55 W. 44 Street
	      New York, NY  10036    /   -

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for the investigator to make several research visits
              to the Czech Republic to develop further background and understanding of
              factors affecting energy policy and regulation there.  The particular research
              focus is the upgrading of the Temelin nuclear plant.  This upgrading is part of
              the commitment of Western nations to respond to the legacy in Central and
              Eastern Europe (CEE) of unsafe nuclear plants built by the former Soviet Union.
               The research will place the Czech experience in the context of nuclear power
              development in the CEE, focusing on problems common to these states.  The goal
              is to increase knowledge about the influence of scientific/bureaucratic elites
              and the role of citizen participation.  The research will identify the
              significant stakeholders, stages in the decision-making process, relevant
              legislation and regulations, institutional authority and bureaucratic
              influence.  During these trips, the investigator will meet with her Czech
              collaborator.  She will interview representatives of the non-governmental
              organizations involved in Temelin, and spend time in Brussels interviewing
              officials of the European Union concerning nuclear standards and reviewing
              documents.  The second trip may also provide an opportunity to work with the
              European Environmental Bureau or DGXI of the European Commission.  Research
              findings will be reported in a chapter of a co-edited volume under production. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
