Title       : Synthesis of Ion Channel Forming Peptides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1997      
File        : a9708649

Award Number: 9708649
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karin S. Akerfeldt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9141,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With the support of a Research in Undergraduate Institutions award from   the
              Organic Synthesis Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary   Activities of
              the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate,   Professor Karin S.
              Akerfeldt, of the Department of Chemistry at Rutgers,   the State University of
              New Jersey, Camden Campus, carries out the   synthesis and analysis of ion
              channel forming peptides.  Structurally   well-defined artificial proton
              selective channels are synthesized as   models to study the fundamental
              mechanisms involved in proton transport.    The models are designed to form
              amphiphilic alpha helices which, in a   membrane and in the presence of an
              applied electrical field,   self-associate to form conducting helix bundles. 
              Following design of   suitable peptide sequences to allow convenient handling,
              covalently   linked dimers of the designed sequences are prepared to probe the
              factors   influencing channel stability, while incorporation of norvaline  
              derivatives into specific positions of the sequences permits evaluation   of
              their effects on the packing properties of the peptides.  Membrane channels,
              permitting the transport of ions or small molecules,   constitute one of the
              critical modes of communication across cell   membranes.  In addition, they are
              critical in cell regulation and mediate   all electrical excitability of the
              nervous and muscle systems.  Professor   Karin S. Akerfeldt, of the Department
              of Chemistry at Rutgers, the State   University of New Jersey, Camden Campus,
              with the support of a Research   in Undergraduate Institutions award from the
              Organic Synthesis Program   and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of
              the Mathematical and   Physical Sciences Directorate, prepares comparatively
              small model   polypeptides designed to serve as transmembrane ion channels. 
              Through   the synthesis and study of these model compounds, Professor Akerfeldt
                explores various factors influencing the flow of ions across membranes.   
              These factors are difficult to explore with the naturally occurring  
              channel-forming peptides given their complexity, instability in the   absence
              of membranes, and often limited availability in significant   quantities.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
