Title       : The Reactions and Energetics of Organic Radical Ions in Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1999     
File        : a9708935

Award Number: 9708935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vernon D. Parker vparker@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program, Professor Vernon D.   Parker
              studies the reactions and energetics of organic radical ions in   solution. 
              Professor Parker, of the Department of Chemistry at Utah State   University,
              addresses the influence of coupling between charge and   radical centers on the
              reactivity of one or both of these centers.  For   example, dimerization rates
              of arene radical cations are greatly enhanced   by methoxy and
              N,N-dimethylamino substituents which separate the charge   and radical centers.
               Kinetic support for the hypothesis of a correlation   between reactivity and
              extent of coupling is sought through study of   radical ions with varying
              degrees of spin-charge coupling.  Professor Vernon D. Parker, of the Department
              of Chemistry at Utah State   University, is supported by the Organic Dynamics
              Program for his studies   of the factors influencing the reactivity of a class
              of compounds known   as radical ions.  These compounds, which contain an atom
              bearing a   positive or negative charge (an ion) as well as an atom bearing one
              less   electron than ordinarily found (a radical), often display reactivity  
              distinct from that of a molecule containing only one of these structural  
              elements (radical or ion).  Professor Parker is exploring the hypothesis   that
              atomic or molecular groups intervening between the radical and ion   centers
              influence the reactivity of these centers, with those groups   providing the
              greatest `coupling` leading to the most dramatic alteration   of reactivity. 
              Radicals and ions appear as important intermediates in a   wide variety of
              chemical and biochemical systems and are additionally   significant in areas
              such as radiation chemistry and toxicology.    Professor Parker's studies are
              leading to the development of a more   fundamental understanding of those
              factors influencing the chemical   properties of these important species.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
