Title       : Applications and Tools for Configurable Computing in Sequential and Parallel
               Computers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1997       
File        : a9708624

Award Number: 9708624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Foster                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Martonosi martonosi@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Configurable computing can customize the hardware of a computing environment for
               each application.  Recently some configurable machines based on field- 
              programmable gate arrays have shown significant performance improvement over
              more  traditional processors.  However, this performance has come at the cost
              of  meticulous and time-consuming algorithm mapping.    This research consists
              of two projects that attempt to lower the cost of entry  to configurable
              computing.  In the uniprocessor domain, performance monitoring  and compilation
              techniques are under investigation for systems that integrate  configurable
              hardware with traditional processors.  Drawing on SUIF compiler  technology,
              this project is working toward identification and optimization of  code
              sections that are both time consuming and implementable using configurable 
              hardware.  Such code includes stream-oriented data processing, irregular logic 
              operations, and short integer arithmetic.    In the multiprocessor domain,
              FPGAs are being used to implement application-  specific cache coherence
              protocol processors.  The key contribution of this work  will be studying the
              performance tradeoffs of application-specific software,  configurable hardware,
              and custom hardware.  These may lead to expanded benefits  for
              application-specific protocols.
