Title       : New Methods in Free Radical Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1999   
File        : a9708139

Award Number: 9708139
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric J. Enholm enholm@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0313040   Water Pollution                         
Program Ref : 9146,9198,EGCH,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Professor Eric J. Enholm, of the Department of Chemistry at the   University of
              Florida, is supported by the Organic Synthesis Program for   his studies of new
              reactions and methodology using radical anions.  These   studies focus on
              metal- and silicon-associated ketyl radical anions,   representing bifunctional
              intermediates with both free radical (single   electron) and
              anionic/nucleophilic (two electron) behavior.  Professor   Enholm exploits the
              reactivity of these intermediates to develop novel   allylation, ring scission,
              radical trapping, alkylation, and sigmatropic   rearrangement chemistry. 
              Reactions of allylstannanes with allylic   O-stannyl ketyls represents a mild
              and chemically neutral alternative to   classic Michael-type additions of
              organometallic reagents.  Silane-based   analogues of these reactions promise
              both to provide environmentally   benign alternatives to tin reagents and to
              allow access to asymmetric   reactions through the use of optically active
              O-silyl ketyls.  Tin(IV)   enolates undergo (3,3)-sigmatropic shifts via
              formation of intermediate   allylic O-stannyl ketyls, offering entry to the ABC
              ring system of   phyllanthocin, a novel bisabolene glycosidic inhibitor of
              several cancer   tumor cell lines.  Carbometallation reactions mediated by
              tin(IV)   enolates permit the formation of products similar to those obtained
              via   Conia ene reactions but at greatly reduced temperatures.  With the
              support of the Organic Synthesis Program, Professor Eric J.   Enholm, of the
              Department of Chemistry at the University of Florida,   explores and exploits
              new reactions of radical anions, a class of   reactive compounds which contain
              both a negatively-charged site and a   site bearing a single unpaired electron.
               By taking advantage of the   reactivity of each of these sites, Professor
              Enholm is able to prepare a   wide variety of carbon `skeletons` which can
              serve as intermediate   scaffolds for the construction of various natural
              products, medicinal   agents, and biologically active molecules.  His studies
              also target the   development of silicon-based alternatives to the more
              traditional   tin-based reagents for the formation of organic radicals,
              offering   promise for the development of environmentally friendly alternatives
              to   the toxic tin reagents.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                  
