Title       : Demonstration of an Internet-Based Research Collaboration Framework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1998      
File        : a9708561

Award Number: 9708561
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83616              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyran D. Mish   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Chico Res Fdtn
	      1st and Normal Streets
	      Chico, CA  95929    916/895-6116

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                  9708561  Mish  The  goal  of  this workshop is to develop a format  for  an 
              Internet-based    environment    to    foster     productive  collaborations 
              among  geographically-distributed  teams  of  researchers,  especially  among 
              researchers  in  earthquake  engineering applications, focusing on applications
              in siting  and geotechnical systems.  It will be held during the summer  of 
              1997 on the campus of the California State University at  Chico.    The
              workshop consists of three components:    Phase 1 consists of the preparation
              for the actual workshop,  utilizing    the   capabilities   of   the   Internet
                 for  communications.   As  such,  it  is  a  "virtual   workshop"  intended 
              to  demonstrate  the key  characteristics  of  the  desired    electronic   
              collaborative    framework.     Key  technologies  will  be made available in a
               simplified  form  appropriate for demonstration purposes.  Each  demonstration
               will  be accompanied  by  collaborative  correspondence among members of the
              target audience, so that  the  full  impact  of  the technology can  be 
              detailed  and  clarified.    In  phase 2, the "physical workshop", the results
              from Phase  1 will be discussed to provide a more detailed assessment of  the
              requisite computer technology needed.  The workshop will  summarize  and 
              extend an understanding of the  technologies  demonstrated  in  Phase  1, in
              order  to  provide  necessary  detail   for   the  needs  of  the  earthquake  
              engineering  community.    Phase  3, the documentation phase, will prepare and 
              publish  the  proceedings  of  the workshop.   The  proceedings  will  include
              a formal specification for the implementation of the  Internet collaborative
              framework.  The lessons learned  from  the  workshop  will  be encapsulated in
              a  functional  needs  document.  This functional assessment will be circulated
              for  approval  by the earthquake engineering community, following  which  it 
              will be translated into a technical specification  to  serve  as a blueprint 
              for future implementation  of  the  virtual collaborative environment.    The  
              dissemination  and  implementation  of  the   workshop  proceedings  will 
              yield an important demonstration  of  new  technologies  for fostering
              productive collaborations  among  geographically    distributed  teams  of 
              researchers.    In  addition  to  providing obvious standards  of  practice 
              for  engineers in the earthquake engineering community (for  such  basic 
              topics  as  report preparation and dissemination  via  electronic  means), it
              will deliver concrete  demonstrations  of  modern  Internet technologies, along
              with  the  type  of  "hands-on"  documentation that will be  required  to 
              permit  others  to implement the results developed via the  "virtual  workshop"
              and the actual workshop.
