Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Mesozoic Nonmarine Sedimentary Record of Transition from
               Contractile to Extensional Deformation, Southern Mongolia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1999     
File        : a9708207

Award Number: 9708207
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100095             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephan A. Graham graham@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9708207  Graham         The Mesozoic tectonic evolution of southern Mongolia
              includes a poorly understood transition from contractile to extensional
              tectonism and associated sedimentary basin development.  Only in its broadest
              outline has this transition become apparent in recent years, as a consequence
              of recognition of a major north-verging early Mesozoic fold-thrust belt in
              adjacent north-central China, reconnaissance description of syn-tectonic
              coarse-grained strata in southern Mongolia, and limited geophysical and
              geological documentation of late Mesozoic rift basins in southern Mongolia. 
              Major aspects of the kinematics, rates, and styles of structural and
              sedimentary systems associated with the tectonic transition remain unresolved,
              and form the basis for this research proposal.  From such issues stem a suite
              of exciting questions:  How do sedimentary basin systems formed atop
              heterogeneous crust respond to fundamental changes in tectonic deformational
              style?  Do previously unrecognized basin types occur, as recently documented
              for collisional foreland basins formed atop accreted terranes in western China?
               What role to metamorphic core complexes, documented across the border in
              north-central China and apparently structurally continuous with similar though
              undocumented structures in the proposed field area, play in the transition from
              a contractile to extensional tectonics?   These questions are but several among
              many to be addressed by this proposal.  Specifically, this proposal seeks three
              years of funding to investigate and document the sedimentary response to a
              rapid and fundamental transition from compressional tectonics of early Mesozoic
              age to extensional tectonism of late Mesozoic age.  In answering each of the
              above questions, we propose first to document the fundamental geology of the
              contractile and extensional systems to fill the very large gaps which exist
              presently in the geologic understanding of Mesozoic southern Mongolia.  The
              principal tools and means of investigation we  propose to employ involve an
              integrated structural and sedimentary geologic approach in which structural
              data and detailed mapping will serve as backdrop for detailed depositional
              systems and stratigraphic architectural analysis, provenance analysis, and
              reconnaissance thermochronologic studies.  Importantly, subsurface data will be
              incorporated into the investigation, thanks to access to vital core material
              from a small oil field currently in development.  After fundamental
              documentation of each tectonic system and its sedimentary record has been
              completed, the important broader scientific questions posed above can be
              addressed.   Beyond its scientific importance, the proposed research will
              enable continued scientific exchange between U.S. institutions and the
              Mongolian Academy of Sciences.  An important additional educational dimension
              of the proposal lies in its support for one Post-doctoral Research Associate,
              one Ph.D. student, and two M.S. students.
