Title       : Taphonomy and Site Structure at Bois Roche
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1997       
File        : a9708046

Award Number: 9708046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69830              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence E. Bartram   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paola Villa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin & Marshall Col
	      Office of the Provost
	      Lancaster, PA  176043003    717/291-3911

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Laurence Bartram and Paola Villa
              will conduct three seasons of archaeological/paleontological research at the
              cave site of Bois Roche which is located in the Charente region of France.
              Based on previous work the investigators have determined that it served as a
              den for hyenas during the last Ice Age. In addition to large amounts of bone,
              it contains hyena coprolites and juvenile hyena bones. Although a few worked
              stone artifacts are also present, it appears that humans played a negligible
              role in the faunal accumulation. The goal of the research is to excavate a
              large faunal sample with fine scale horizontal control and develop criteria
              which serve to characterize a hyena derived faunal assemblage. The team will: 
              test the hypothesis that significant spatial patterning exists in
              hyena-generated bone accumulations; develop methods to distinguish bone tools
              from hyena-gnawed bone; evaluate current methods for quantifying archaeofaunal
              bone assemblages;  determine whether hominids occupied the cave at other
              periods of time; and provide training for American and French archaeology
              students. Analyses will include comprehensive study of taxonomic, skeletal
              part, bone modification, and examination of spatial data including conjoining.
              Sedimentological and palynological analyses will elucidate site formation
              processes and electron spin resonance dating will be conducted on tooth enamel.
               The earliest evidence for human occupation of caves in Europe dates to over
              100,000 years ago and stratified caves with abundant stone tools and faunal
              remains have played a crucial role in archaeological investigations. Through
              analysis of food remains researchers can gain insight into prehistoric diet,
              hunting ability and spatial organization of activities. However the problem
              arises since caves are often alternatively occupied by humans and other species
              such as hyena and cave bear. It is surprisingly difficult to assign faunal
              remains unambiguously to collector species and to gain information on human
              behavior it is necessary to do so.  Bois Roche is one of the few cave sites in
              Europe where one can be reasonably that hyenas are the responsible agent.
              Through their research Dr. Bartram and Villa can determine what constitutes a
              `hyena signature` and the criteria they develop can be employed by
              archaeologists not only in Europe but also in other parts of the world.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
