Title       : (EGB) Understanding and Modeling Hydrogeological, Microbiological, and
               Geochemical Processes that Control Groundwater Redox Zonation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a9708487

Award Number: 9708487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $466000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David T. Long long@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Klug  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Hyndman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Velbel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sheridan K. Haack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1584      ENVIRO GEOCHEM AND BIOGEOCHEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1584,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9708487  Long    One of the most fundamental issues in aquifer biogeochemistry
              concerns the mechanisms by which solute transport and geochemical processes
              combine with microbiological activity to influence spatial and temporal
              variations in redox zonation.  We will examine these mechanisms in a shallow
              sandy aquifer contaminated with petroleum hydrocarbons, which has exhibited
              redox zonation that varies on seasonal time scales.  The dynamic nature of
              redox zonation at this site allows us to examine the interaction among
              hydrogeological, geochemical, and microbiological processes, and test
              hypotheses regarding the (1) reactions that govern groundwater evolution from
              zone to zone and (2) factors which control the spatial and temporal dimensions
              of redox zones.  By coupling information gained from the three disciplines,
              through field and laboratory research, a three-dimensional, transient reactive
              flow and transport model for the evolution of redox zonation will be
              constructed.    The goals of this interdisciplinary study are to (1)
              quantitatively assess hydrogeologic, geochemical and microbiological
              constraints that influence redox processes within a given zone; (2) use these
              constraints to identify sets of reactions that describe the evolution of
              groundwater from one zone to another; and (3) integrate the reaction sets with
              a dynamic flow and transport model to simulate past observations regarding the
              dimensions of various redox zones at the site, as well as compare the predicted
              and observed outcome of groundwater hydrologic events such as prolonged periods
              of high or low water table.  These goals will be achieved through field
              sampling (seasonal and event), laboratory analysis and experimentation, in-situ
              hydrolgeological, microbiological, and geochemical analyses, and
              hydrogeochemical modeling.  Unique aspects of the methods include: (1)
              combining geophysical and hydrolgeological data to estimate aquifer properties;
              (2) using 16S rRNA nucleic acid probe hybridization to determine microbial abu
              ndance, fatty acid methyl ester profiles and 16S rDNA restriction analysis
              (ARDRA) to determine community structure; (3) estimating redox state from H2
              gas concentrations; (4) assessing minerals-microbial interactions using in-situ
              samplers and experiments; and (5) combing geochemical and microbiological
              reaction sets in a reactive flow and transport model to quantitatively account
              for observed water chemistry at the study site.    This approach will benefit
              each discipline through improved understanding of the interaction among
              physical, chemical and biological processes that lead to redox zonation in both
              pristine and contaminated aquifers, and will provide fundamental information
              valuable to the design of appropriate sampling, monitoring and remediation
              methodologies.    This proposal was submitted in response to the Environmental
              Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry solicitation NSF 96-152, and is being funded
              jointly by the Divisions of Earth Sciences and Environmental Biology.
