Title       : The Impact of New Deal Relief Spending on Local Labor Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9708098

Award Number: 9708098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176469             (Estimated)
Investigator: Price V. Fishback   (Principal Investigator current)
              Shawn E. Kantor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The growth of government is the most dramatic change in the American economy 
              during twentieth century.  The greatest peace-time expansion of the federal
              government occurred during the 1930s, when New Deal programs added
              significantly to the nation's infrastructure while employing millions of
              unemployed workers.  Policy makers today, faced with the simultaneous problems
              of crumbling infrastructure and the public's demand for welfare reform, often
              cite New Deal-type relief projects as a potential model for an effective
              solution.  Many of these proposals are based on views of the New Deal's
              successes, but these claims have rarely been tested quantitatively.  Given the
              importance of the modern debate over welfare reform, and despite numerous
              studies of the politics of the New Deal, there are surprisingly few micro-level
              analyses of how New Deal expenditures affected local economies in the 1930s. 
              To help fill this gap, this research examines how relief spending during the
              New Deal affected private wages and employment in urban labor markets
              throughout the United States.  This project involves both the collection of
              data on wages, employment, and relief spending and the quantitative analysis of
              the interaction between these and other variables.  The research will explore
              how New Deal spending on work relief influenced private employment and wages in
              local labor markets during the 1930s.  A wide variety of data sets will be
              constructed from a combination of state reports, federal reports, and archival
              sources that will allow an examination of the effect of work relief on private
              labor markets, the geographic and industrial variations in the timing of
              downturns and recoveries during the Depression, as well as the factors that
              contributed to the distribution of work relief projects across the United
              States.  The most extensive data collection effort will be the construction of
              a panel data set that will contain monthly information on private employment
              and average monthly earnings, and spending on relief programs and other forms
              of social insurance for at least 131 cities during the 1930s.  The data will be
              combined with a combination of monthly and annual data on labor demand and
              supply determinants, as well as variables that portray the political climate in
              each of the cities.  A second data set will be constructed that will contain
              monthly information on employment and earnings in the building construction
              industry in 62 cities between 1932 and July 1935.  This sample will allow much
              closer inspection of the impact of work relief and public building projects on
              employment in the building industry, the industry that was presumably most
              closely affected by the New Deal building projects.  Further study of the
              building trades will be performed using a third data set containing annual
              contractual wage rates and hours worked, which the U.S. Bureau of Labor
              Statistics published for about 100 cities throughout the 1930s                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
