Title       : Doctoral Consortium for Students in AI; July 28, 1997; Providence, RI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1997  
File        : a9708559

Award Number: 9708559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11920              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce G. Buchanan buchanan@cs.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vibhu O. Mittal  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              One  of  the most important aspects in learning  how  to  do  research  is 
              early  and  detailed  discussions  on  various  aspects  of  the  research 
              plan with  experienced  mentors.  Unfortunately,  most students get little
              feedback  on  their  thesis  at  the  initial stages except from their 
              immediate  advisors.  Attending conferences can be a good way  to  meet  other
              researchers and discuss work.  However, the chances of  a  student  at  an
              early stage of his/her work  getting  the  opportunity  to  discuss their
              preliminary ideas  with  well  established  researchers are not very  good.  
              The  Doctoral  Consortium  (DC) at the American Association for  Artificial 
              Intelligence conference was planned as a way to improve this  situation.  
              Students about to begin their thesis  work  are  chosen  to present their
              research plans in front of a  group  of carefully selected faculty panelists. 
              Unlike traditional  conference presentations, the bulk of the time in  a  DC 
              is  devoted  to discussions between the students and the faculty  panelists.  
              Each student is also assigned a faculty  mentor  who  works  with  the  student
              at  a  more  detailed  level.  Students learn from both their own presentations
              as well  as  watching  other  students  being  advised  by  the   faculty 
              panelists.  A survey taken after the first DC held last year  found  all
              participants (both students and faculty) agreeing  that the DC was tremendously
              useful.  We anticipate that all  students  attending the DC this year (both as
              presenters  as  well  as  those  just  attending) will  leave  with  renewed 
              confidence  in  their work, suggestions for improving  their  thesis  plans 
              and  a clearer idea of what constitutes  good  research practice.
