Title       : The Archaeology of Kahikinui, Hawai'i
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1997       
File        : a9708341

Award Number: 9708341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103484             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Kolb aloha@niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundations support Dr. Michael Kolb will conduct two
              seasons of archaeological excavation and survey in the Kahikinui district on
              the island of Maui. The goal of the work is to understand how stratified
              chiefly society developed and what mechanisms chiefs used to accrue and
              consolidate their power. The rise of complex society in Hawai'i occurred over
              an 800 year period which witnessed the rapid development of chiefdoms.
              Hawai'ian temples and large-scale dryland and pondfield agricultural systems
              attest to significant central leadership and social ranking and the first
              Westerners to visit the island encountered a ranked society with a noble ruling
              class. In the anthropological literature Hawai'i stands as one of the most
              important archaeological and ethnographic examples of a complex chiefdom.  The
              rural nature and arid climate of Kahikinui provide an excellent venue to
              examine this development process since the entire archaeological landscape has
              been preserved essentially intact. Thousands of stone features, including
              habitation sites, agricultural terraces, shrines and temples are still visible
              and until recently the region has received scant archaeological attention.
              Through study of individual temples and the contents they contain and through
              comparative analysis across sites it is possible to build up a broad picture of
              how society was organized and how this changed through time. Kolb is
              particularly interested in how chiefs used ideology to consolidate their power
              and can gain insight into this through the study of pig remains. In addition to
              their role as food, pigs served important ceremonial roles and most often they
              were slaughtered in ritual contexts. Through the analysis of such faunal
              remains across sites and examination in how their distribution changed over
              time it is possible to relate ideology to political power. Kolb and colleagues
              will make detailed maps of individual temple sites. These will provide data for
              measuring labor investment costs. Excavation will be conducted at all of them
              to recover cultural and faunal remains as well as materials for absolute
              dating.  Archaeological evidence indicates that civilization arose
              independently in many parts of the world and that similar stages of development
              are common across all cases. This strongly indicates that a basic developmental
              process underlies these common trajectories and anthropologists wish to
              understand the forces involved. Because of the excellent ethnographic and
              ethnohistoric data available as well as the presence of well preserved
              archaeological remains Hawai'i provides an excellent context in which to
              examine this question. The results of this research will be generalizable well
              beyond an individual group of islands.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
