Title       : Copper Bioavailability on Microbial Degradation of Trichloroethylene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a9708557

Award Number: 9708557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy D. Semrau jsemrau@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kim Hayes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1305,1584,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9708557   Semrau   This proposal was submitted in response to the Environmental
              Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry solicitation NSF 96-152, and is being funded
              jointly by the Divisions of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Chemistry and
              Earth Sciences, and by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.   This
              research will determine how soil surfaces limit the bioavailability of copper
              to methanotrophs and the resulting effect on the expression and activity of
              both forms of methane monooxygenase (MMO). Copper to biomass ratio is a key
              factor in regulating expression and activity of soluble and particulate methane
              monooxygenases (sMMO and pMMO, respectively) in liquid cultures of
              methanotrophs. To determine how different soil surfaces can limit the
              bioavailability of copper and the resulting effect on MMO expression and
              activity, two representative methanotrophs, M. trichosporium OB3b and M. albus
              BG8 will be grown in pure cultures in the presence of aluminum oxide (a
              representative of commonly occurring metal oxides) and montmorillonlte
              (representative of an important ion-exchange site bearing mineral) under a
              variety of solution conditions. These organisms were chosen for initial study
              because M trichosporium OB3b can express both forms of MMO while M. albus BG8
              can express only pMMO. Experimental measurements include: speciation and amount
              of aqueous, adsorbed and cell-associated copper using atomic adsorption
              spectroscopy or a copper ion electrode; copper sorption by X-ray absorption
              spectroscopy; sMMO and pMMO expression by naphthalene oxidation assays and
              Western blots; propylene oxide assays of soluble and particulate fractions to
              localize and measure MMO activity; GC-MS analysis to determine the ability of
              these cells to oxidize methane and trichloroethylene. In subsequent
              experiments, artificial mixed cultures of both organisms will be grown in
              similar soil/solution conditions to understand how surfaces can cause
              population fluctuations by acting as a sink for copper. Experimental mea
              surements include: expression and activity of sMMO and pMMO; population
              composition by Western blot, acridine orange direct count, and PCR
              amplification of the genes for 16s rRNA, sMMO and pMMO; and the ability of
              mixed cultures to oxidize methane and trichloroethylene. This multidisciplinary
              research incorporates approaches from molecular biology, biochemistry and
              geochemistry, and is a model system for examining the effect of bioavailability
              of other metals on microbial degradation of both aromatic and aliphatic
              halogenated hydrocarbons.  ***
