Title       : Reducing Properties of Anaerobic Sediments: Molecular Probe Studies of
               Biogeochemistry and Contaminant Fate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1997       
File        : a9708554

Award Number: 9708554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul G. Tratnyek tratnyek@ese.ogi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Boone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              V Renganathan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Grad Inst of S&
	      20000 NW Walker Road
	      Beaverton, OR  970068921    503/645-1121

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1584,9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry Program   is
              made to Drs. Paul G. Tratnyek, V. Renganathan, and David R. Boone of   the
              Department of Environmental Science and Engineering, Oregon Graduate  
              Institute, for studies of contaminant fate in anaerobic sediments.  The  
              research is supported by the Divisions of Chemistry and Earth Sciences   and
              the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.  Some contaminants   undergo
              reduction in anaerobic soils, but the biochemical and geochemical   factors
              controlling the chemical reaction are not well understood.  The   goal of this
              research is to develop molecular probes that can elucidate   reduction
              processes in sediments from coastal, estuarine, and freshwater   environments. 
              Initial work will use 2-chloroacetophenone (2-CAP) to   monitor the reduction
              process.  This chemical is reduced to   2-(chloromethyl)benzyl alcohol when it
              reacts by electron transfer, and   to acetophenone when reduced by hydride
              transfer.  By measuring the   amount of each of these three compounds present
              in the sediment, the rate   of reduction and the capacity of the soil for
              reduction will be   determined.  The formation of acetophenone implies reaction
              with   extracellular nicotinamide, one of the few possible sources of hydride
              in   such systems.  Results will be correlated with microbiological studies to 
               develop a model of the biogeochemical reduction process in various soils.   
              Additional molecular probes will be studied as means of more fully  
              characterizing the reducing capacity of real environmental materials. 
              Pollutants such as chlorohydrocarbons, sulfoxides, and quinones can be  
              transformed in soils by chemical reactions in which electrons are added   to
              the contaminant from environmental sources, both organic and   inorganic.  The
              details about how these reactions occur as well as the   rates and extent to
              which they occur in various types of soils are not   sufficiently understood to
              predict contaminant fate in the environment.    In this research a general
              method to test the environmental relevance of   various models will be
              developed with the long-term goal of providing a   predictive tool useful to
              regulatory decision-making.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
