Title       : Exploration of Solvent Mediated Electronic Coupling in Electron Transfer and
               Energy Transfer Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9708351

Award Number: 9708351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew B. Zimmt Matthew Zimmt@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Matthew B. Zimmt, of the Department of Chemistry at Brown  
              University, is supported by the Organic Dynamics Program and the Office   of
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences  
              Directorate for his exploration of solvent-mediated electronic coupling   in
              electron transfer and energy transfer reactions.  The mediation of   electronic
              coupling between an electron donor and an electron acceptor by   the
              surrounding medium represents an essential element in chemical and   biological
              electron transfer.  Through the synthesis of a family of   molecules bearing
              donor and acceptor moieties attached to a common rigid   spacer, Professor
              Zimmt explores the role of intervening solvents in   electron transfer
              processes, addressing the generality of   solvent-mediated coupling in
              electron-mediated and hole-mediated   processes, the dependence of
              solvent-mediated coupling on solvent   properties and on donor-bridge-acceptor
              electronic symmetry, the effects   of interference between solvent- and
              bond-mediated coupling, and the   relevance of solvent-mediated electronic
              coupling to triplet energy   transfer.  Reactions in which an electron is
              transferred from one molecule to   another form the basis of a wide range of
              important chemical and   biological processes, including the photosynthetic
              capture and   utilization of energy from sunlight by plants.  With the support
              of the   Organic Dynamics Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities   of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, Professor
              Matthew   B. Zimmt, of the Department of Chemistry at Brown University, studies
                chemical factors influencing the transfer of an electron from one   molecule
              to another.  By constructing molecules designed to hold the   donor and the
              acceptor of the electron with a well-defined orientation   and spacing with
              respect to one-another, Professor Zimmt examines the   role of intervening
              solvent molecules in mediating the electron transfer   process.  These model
              studies shed light on the fundamental factors   controlling biological electron
              transfer reactions and are of additional   relevance to areas such as the
              design and construction of molecular-scale   electronic devices.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
