Title       : Effects of Base Flipping on Guanine-Metal Electrode Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1999   
File        : a9708584

Award Number: 9708584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239472             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Holden Thorp holden@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  This joint award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic  
              Chemistry program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities under   the
              Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)   activity
              supports research in the laboratory of Professor Holden Thorp at   the
              University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.  The work is to develop   a new
              bioanalytical method of detecting base flipping by proteins that   bind DNA and
              RNA.  Initial studies will be done with proteins known to   turn bases out of
              the nucleic acid, which leaves their complementary base   `orphaned` and so
              extruded from the nucleic acid thereby exposing it to   oxidation by
              photochemically excited (Pt2(pop)4)4-  or by (Ru(bpy)3)3+,   which is generated
              electrochemically.  The method is specific to guanine   (G) residues, which
              upon oxidation yields 8-O-G.  In the presence of   piperidine, the 8-O-G site
              is cleaved, so that nucleic acid sequencing   reveals the site of base
              (cytosine) flipping.  M.HhaI is now under study,   which turns C into the
              protein for methylation.   The GOALI collaboration   involves New England
              Biolabs (NEB) in Cambridge MA, which  is a primary   supplier for restriction
              enzymes for molecular biology.  One or more   students from UNC would be hosted
              at NEB to clone and overexpress enzymes   of interest and to transfer this
              expertise back to UNC.  Gel assay   results  would be transferred to NEB.  If
              successful, the GOALI   interaction could provide an important new reagent for
              the study of   proteins that process nucleic acids through base flipping.      
              This research funded under the GOALI activity explores the use of   two new DNA
              cleaving agents as indicators of base flipping by several   important DNA
              binding proteins.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
