Title       : Workshop on Physical Organic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1999       
File        : a9708432

Award Number: 9708432
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55277              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Wei alexwei@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Squires  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Workshop on Physical Organic Chemistry, an annual conference for the  
              discussion of topics that span bioorganic chemistry to gas-phase   reactions,
              will be convened for the next three years.  Although the range   of topics is
              wide, all focus on the methodology used by physical organic   chemists. 
              Attendance will be limited to about twenty persons, all of   whom present
              informal talks on new, unpublished results.  Conferences   will be held at
              remote sites in order to minimize distractions and   encourage informal
              discussion.  Strong efforts will be made to include   minorities and females
              and, in keeping with past tradition, there will be   a large number of younger
              investigators along with some senior   investigators. This award from the
              Organic Dynamics Program supports the   continuing meeting of Workshops on
              Physical Organic Chemistry, which is   organized by Professor Robert R. Squires
              of the Department of Chemistry   at Purdue University.  The workshops will
              provide opportunities for the   generation of new ideas, facilitate
              collaborations and introduce young   investigators to their senior peers. The
              number of attendees and location   of the meetings are designed to facilitate
              these goals. The workshop   benefits the Organic Dynamics Program by
              identifying new and imaginative   research projects and young investigators
              that will strengthen the   Program as new awardees and reviewers.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
