Title       : An Investigation of the Fundamental Aspects of Underfilm Corrosion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1999     
File        : a9708148

Award Number: 9708148
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $518877             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald M. Latanision lats@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              D. B. Mitton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1037,1589,1771,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9708148  Latanision    Past effort on understanding the structure and dynamics
              of  interfacial processes in underfilm corrosion has resulted in 
              non-destructive electrochemical techniques to monitor  underfilm corrosion.  
              Most of the data reported in the  current literature have been generated by the
              technique of  Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS).  These data 
              suggest that:  (1) corrosion initiates well before it can be  detected
              optically; (2) delamination results from either a  loss of adhesion or
              corrosion at the polymer-metal  interface; and (3) delamination and corrosion
              rate can only  be estimated by EIS.  In order to achieve a better 
              understanding of underfilm degradation, it is imperative  that the correlation
              between electrochemistry, loss of  metal, and delamination rate is fully
              understood.  While a  correlation between electrochemistry and corrosion rate
              is  well established for non-coated samples, no accurate  measurement of mass
              loss beneath a polymer coating has been  achieved.  This FRG (Focussed Research
              Group) project  circumvents the problems associated with determining the 
              change in mass of a coated substrate by following the change  in the magnetic
              saturation of a polymer-coated ferromagnetic  sample.  Mass loss is assessed
              with a vibrating sample  magnetometer (VSM), which provides an unambiguous
              method for  determining the corrosion rate of a coated sample.  In  addition,
              the sample is monitored visually and with EIS.  When correlated to visual and
              electrochemical data, these  results should provide significant insight into
              the  evaluation of underfilm corrosion and assessment of coating  performance. 
              The current research should also be able to  distinguish between delamination
              resulting from loss of  adhesion or from corrosion.  During an experiment, if
              no  metal loss is recorded on the VSM but delamination is  visually and
              electrochemically detected, it can not be  associated with corrosion.  In this
              FRG project emphasis is  also placed on the development  of an
              in-situ/real-time  electrochemical technique (Fast Transient Technique, FTT) to
               monitor solute uptake and the initial stage of coating  degradation. The grant
              is co-funded by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities and the
              Division of Materials  Research.  %%%  This project is expected to lead to an
              improved  understanding of both the reliability of protective organic  coatings
              and the use of electrochemical techniques (EIS and  FTT), thereby providing a
              basis for the selection of the  most suitable commercially available protective
              coatings.  ***
