Title       : CRHCT: Reducing Health Care Costs Using 3-D Time-Resolved Contrast-Enhanced MR
               Angiography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9708319

Award Number: 9708319
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $784395             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Grist tmgrist@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              D.G. Fryback  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles A. Mistretta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1177,5345,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9708319  Grist  Cardiovascular disease costs an estimated $151.3 billion in  the
              U.S. annually, and atherosclerosis is the leading cause  of these expenditures.
               The treatments for atherosclerotic  vascular disease require an accurate
              diagnosis of the degree  and extent of arterial vascular disease.  Diagnosis of
               atherosclerotic vascular disease currently relies on digital  subtraction
              angiography (DSA), in which an intraarterial  catheter is placed at the vessel
              of interest, and iodinated  contrast is injected during the acquisition of
              images  depicting the arterial lumen.  Magnetic resonance  angiography (MRA)
              has recently been widely advocated as a  noninvasive method for imaging
              arterial disease.  The method  can be performed at a much lower cost than DSA,
              since it  does not require arterial catheterization and is nearly risk  free. 
              Cost savings using the MRA techniques have been  estimated at from $800 (aorta
              studies) to $3,430 (carotid  studies) per examination.  For the carotid
              arteries alone,  this could account for $1.5 billion in medical savings. 
              However, the expected savings would exceed this value  because the MRA methods
              can be used in several different  anatomic regions, including the renal,
              carotid, aortic,  peripheral, and pulmonary arteries.    The investigators have
              developed a method called 3D MR-DSA  that combines a number of the positive
              attributes of MRA and  digital subtraction angiography.  The method has been
              shown  to be very powerful, but the operational aspects need to be  improved by
              research.  Results from this project are  expected to : 1) Improve operational
              aspects of 3D MR-DSA  data acquisition and processing to provide an examination
               procedure as close as possible to X-ray DSA, 2) Improve  image quality for 3D
              MR-DSA, 3) Identify, methods to reduce  the dose of contrast agent required for
              3D MR DSA, 4)  Develop a strategy for disseminating 3D MR-DSA to 5 study 
              sites, and 5) Determine the costs of 3D MR-DSA relative to  conventional
              angiography.  The ultima te goal of the  investigation is to develop a robust,
              low cost MRA technique  that provides accurate diagnostic information and has 
              operational characteristics similar to conventional  angiography.  This
              requires a collaborative research effort  between medical physicists,
              engineers, and radiologists to  define the performance requirements and
              identify technical  solutions to the existing problems.  The educational 
              component of the project is directed towards developing a  seminar series
              course that teaches engineers and medical  physicists the basics of cost
              analysis and technology  assessment.  The initial implementation of the course
              will  be performed at the University of Wisconsin and is to be  presented at
              the 1999 International Society for Magnetic  Resonance in Medicine (ISMRM)
              meeting.  ***
