Title       : Physiological and Molecular Diversity of Atmospheric CH4 Oxidizers in Soil
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1999       
File        : a9708092

Award Number: 9708092
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Steudler steudler@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    STEUDLER  (97-08092)    Atmospheric CH4 contributes substantially to
              the greenhouse effect and has increased dramatically in the past century
              because of human activity associated with agriculture and industrial expansion.
              Consumption of atmospheric CH4 in well-drained soils is an important regulator
              of atmospheric CH4 concentration. The significance of the soil sink lies not in
              its magnitude relative to the global CH4 budget, but rather in its potential to
              mediate long-term, anthropogenic effects on atmospheric CH4 through its
              response to disturbance. Soil CH4 consumption is very sensitive to land-use
              changes, such as agriculture and forest clearcutting, and also may be sensitive
              to climate change factors, such as drought or soil warming. Because the amount
              of atmospheric CH4 consumed annually in soil is comparable to the annual
              increase in atmospheric CH4 over the past decade, the cumulative effects of
              disturbance on the soil CH4 sink over time could contribute significantly to
              CH4 accumulation in the atmosphere. However, the biology of this process is
              poorly understood because researchers have yet to determine what type(s) of
              soil bacteria actually oxidize atmospheric CH4 in situ.    This project will
              investigate the physiology and molecular ecology of atmospheric CH4 oxidizers
              in four temperate and taiga forest ecosystems where disturbance effects on soil
              CH4 consumption have been well characterized. The study focuses on the
              following questions: (1) What are the physiological characteristics of the
              atmospheric CH4 oxidizers in a given soil?, (2) What types of organisms oxidize
              atmospheric CH4 in a given soil: Methanotrophs or Nitrifiers? and (3) How does
              the ecosystem type and disturbance regime affect which group of organisms is
              active in a given soil?    A number of laboratory and field process-level
              measurements including CH4 starvation and enrichment experiments, kinetic
              studies and differential inhibitors will be used to access the microbial
              community response across the suit e of study sites. Phylotype distribution and
              functional gene studies will be used to characterize the methanotropic and/or
              nitrifier communities within and across the study sites.                 This
              research will provide an estimate of the biodiversity among soil atmospheric
              CH4 oxidizers, examine how this diversity is distributed in nature and assess
              how important this diversity is in controlling the ecosystem-level response of
              soil CH4 consumption to disturbance and climate change. The strategy is
              scientifically unique in that it will bring the power of modern molecular
              biology to bear on ecosystem-level process ecology. It will allow the
              qualitative quantitative examination of the relationship between in situ
              process dynamics and the molecular ecology of the microbial community, thus
              improving understanding of the biological controls over soil CH4 consumption,
              which remains the most enigmatic dimension of the soil CH4 sink. Methane
              oxidation is an ideal model for initiating this type of approach because it is
              a highly specialized physiology, and because substrate supply can be controlled
              precisely in laboratory incubations. Future investigations on other
              biogeochemical processes will benefit from experience gained during this
              research.
