Title       : Models and Model Checking for Spatially-Varying Environmental Hazards and
               Decision Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9708424

Award Number: 9708424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227074             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew E. Gelman gelman@stat.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1094,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Decisions concerning public health and public expenditures must often be based
              on highly uncertain data; for example, consider the uneven quality of
              measurements of individual economic decisions and effects of public programs
              and policies.  In the field of environmental policy, data such as pollutant
              measurements that are required for informed decisions are usually sparse,
              spatially dispersed, and subject to substantial measurement error.  One
              response by regulators and other policy makers to the large uncertainties
              typical of environmental and other public decision problems has been the use of
              `conservative` (often inflated) estimates of exposure, risk, etc.  However, the
              recognition that policy should be based on assessment of both likely costs and
              benefits has led to increased use of benefit-cost analysis in recent years.  A
              key step forward that needs to be made, especially for spatially-varying
              environmental hazards, is to calibrate risk estimates:  this means recommending
              different courses of actions and also different data-gathering strategies in
              different areas.  In order to do this effectively, it is useful to spatially
              model the relevant exposures and risks.  The goal of this project is to develop
              more reliable methods of models and model-checking for spatially-varying
              hazards, in settings with uncertainty (due to incomplete information) and also
              true underlying variability.  In recent years, much progress has been made in
              the field of statistics in modeling complex data structures using Bayesian
              methods.  Areas in which more progress needs to be made and on which the
              investigators plan to work include model fitting, computation, model checking,
              and display of inferences using graphs or maps.  The investigators plan to
              particularly focus on the use of model-checking and graphical methods to build
              confidence in the results of the modeling fitting, so that individuals and
              policy-makers will have trustworthy tools to allow them to take better account
              of uncertainty and variability when making decisions.  As an important example,
              the investigators propose to develop their model in the context of remediation
              of risks from home radon, based on a combined analysis of home radon data from
              many sources.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
