Title       : Model Predictive Control of Chemical Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1997    
File        : a9708497

Award Number: 9708497
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202040             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Rawlings jbraw@che.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Rawlings - 9708497    The goal of this research project is to further
              develop the theory of model predictive control (MPC) and further its
              application as a means to improve real-time operation of chemical processes.   
              The research focuses on four areas:     (1) Developing new theory for the
              linear plant case.  This new theory is needed to support the next generation of
              MPC technology for plants described by linear models, which are the MPC models
              for most current industrial implementations.      (2) Handling large-scale
              applications through better optimization methods.  The industrial trend in
              several of the process industries is towards larger scale MPC applications. 
              The industrially implemented optimization approaches are reaching their limits
              on these large problems.  This research develops the optimization theory and
              provides new optimization algorithms to enable practitioners to tackle these
              large-scale applications.    (3) Developing improved methods for controlling
              nonlinear plants.  Although the straightforward extension of linear MPC to
              nonlinear plants works from a control theory perspective, the optimization
              difficulties are intractable from the implementation perspective.  Building on
              the research of several groups during the last several years, the PI plans to
              implement several new approaches for the nonlinear plant, which do not require
              the solution to non-convex optimization problems.    (4) Application of MPC in
              collaboration with industrial partners.  The applications serve both as a
              vehicle to transfer technology and as a test-bed for evaluating the strengths
              and weaknesses of these new theoretical results.  The PI's approaches are made
              freely available in high-level computing languages to aid practitioners in
              testing and evaluation via computer simulation.
