Title       : Strontium Isotope Analysis and Prehistoric Residential Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9708001

Award Number: 9708001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297000             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Douglas Price tdprice@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Burton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jane E. Buikstra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Douglas Price and James Burton
              will conduct three years of laboratory based research. Their goal is to develop
              strontium isotope analysis as a tool to address significant anthropological
              questions. Strontium has two isotopes and these are present in soils, plants
              and animals in varying ratios. This ratio is ultimately determined by the
              relative amounts of each isotope in underlying bedrock and because this varies
              by region, ratios show geographic patterning. These ratios are also reflected
              in human tooth and bone and if an individual lives their life in one area and
              eats local foods the relative amounts of strontium will bear a regional
              imprint. Isotope ratio analysis is a potentially valuable tool because ratios
              in different parts of the dental and skeletal system turn over at different
              rates and thus provide locational information for different times in an
              individual's life. Teeth for example have no turnover and the ratio is set at
              the time of formation. In bones strontium is replaced during an individual's
              lifetime but the rate varies by skeletal element. Likewise, permanent teeth are
              formed at different times. Thus it is theoretically possible to trace an
              individual's movement over major spans of their life and to determine, for
              example what percentage of a skeletal population were born locally and what
              percentage were immigrants. Migration, residence and marriage patterns can be
              examined in this way.  Drs. Price and Burton will use three well controlled
              archaeological skeletal populations to refine and develop the technique. They
              will establish intrinsic isotopic variability in populations and relate this to
              geological diversity. They will develop criteria for establishing significant
              threshold values for migrant individuals. The case studies come from the late
              Neolithic of Central Europe (Bell Beaker populations), Mesoamerica (the Classic
              period of Highland Mexico) and South America. This research is extremely
              important because the strontium isotope tool, if refined, will be useful in a
              wide range of archaeological situations.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
