Title       : Gravity Waves, Lee Cyclones and Precipitation Bands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2000  
File        : a9708170

Award Number: 9708170
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396631             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Rauber r-rauber@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian F. Jewett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohan K. Ramamurthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9708170  Rauber        The proposed research relates to the organization and
              evolution of phenomena  associated with mid-latitude cyclones and their
              influence on clouds, precipitation and  other meteorological elements. 
              Specifically, research will focus on three  phenomena: mesoscale gravity waves,
              lee cyclones, and mesoscale precipitation  bands.        The high spatial and
              temporal resolution data sets obtained during the  Stormscale Operations and
              Research Meteorology-Fronts Experiment, Systems Test  (STORM-FEST) provides the
              Principal Investigators with a unique opportunity to  further understanding of
              mesoscale gravity waves.  It is suspected that these gravity  waves are
              sometime associated with locally heavy snowfalls.  Analyses of  observations
              and ongoing numerical modeling studies will enable the investigation of  the
              mechanisms that generated and maintained a well-defined mesoscale gravity  wave
              that occurred on 14-15 February 1992, as well as the interaction between the 
              wave and the convection.        Analyses by the Principal Investigators of
              observations for four  STORM-FEST cyclone cases have raised important questions
              concerning the  variability in the pre-storm low level environment and its
              influence on the structure  and evolution of fronts, embedded precipitation and
              associated mesoscale phenomena  within lee cyclones. Understanding the
              influence of pre-storm environmental  conditions on the formation and
              subsequent structure and evolution of lee cyclones  is critical toward
              developing a comprehensive model of mid-latitude cyclones.  The  focus of the
              proposed research is to investigate the mechanisms behind the  variability of
              the structure and evolution of upper-level precursor disturbances,  surface and
              upper level fronts, lee cyclones, and mesoscale precipitation bands.       
              Research on heavy snowbands will be conducted in association with the 
              Lake-Induced Convection Experiment  (Lake-ICE) scheduled in the Great Lakes 
              region in the winter of 1997-98.  The Lake-ICE  is a large, multi-investigator
              project  that is designed to further understanding of the impact of the Great
              Lakes on  different weather phenomenon.  The research activities of the
              Principal Investigators  within Lake-ICE will consist of detailed observational
              and modeling studies of the  evolution of winter cyclones and embedded
              mesoscale processes as the cyclones  interact with the Lakes.         
              Successful completion of this research will lead to better conceptual models 
              of wintertime weather and could eventually lead to better forecasts.  ***
