Title       : SBIR PHASE II: Gridless Density Functional Calculations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a9708206

Award Number: 9708206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301366             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jing Kong jkong@q-chem.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Q-Chem, Inc.
	      317 Whipple Street
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15218    412/268-1056

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research  (SBIR) Phase II  project seeks to
              construct new density functionals for use in quantum chemistry.  All of the
              popular functionals in use today lead to difficult three-dimensional integrals
              that cannot be computed exactly and which are estimated approximately using 
              large three-dimensional grids. This project approaches the problem by devising
              functionals which, by construction, can be integrated exactly and which,
              therefore, require no grids.  The work will proceed in a number of stages and
              should yield "gridless" functionals for the exchange and correlation energies. 
              It should also yield "gridless" functionals for the kinetic energy. The results
              will be published in respected journals and presented at international
              scientific conferences.
The use of gridless density functionals offers two
              advantages over present methods:  (1) The results will not be contaminated by
              "grid noise", the error introduced by the imperfect quadrature afforded by a
              finite numerical grid.  (2) Exact integration is much more efficient than
              quadrature on a three-dimensional grid (with thousands of grid points per atom)
              and, as a result, gridless calculations should require much less computing time
              than   grid-based ones.  The new functionals, will be implemented within the 
              software package and made available commercially to computational scientists in
              a future release.  Because gridless density functional calculations will be
              both more numerically robust and more computationally efficient than grid-based
              calculations, their availability will allow computational scientists to
              undertake first principles quantum mechanical studies of larger and more
              complicated systems than were previously accessible.  This will benefit
              research in biochemistry, pharmaceuticals, new materials and elsewhere.


