Title       : Emphasis Year: Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations and Their Applications;
               Spring, 1998; Evanston, Illinois
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9708261

Award Number: 9708261
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gui-Qiang Chen gqchen@math.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tom Ilmanen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel I. Tataru  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Emmanuele DiBenedetto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9708261  Chen    This award will provide partial support for the  1997-98
              Emphasis Year in   Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations and Their
              Applications at   Northwestern University. The goal of this special year is to
              develop some of   the new connections between nonlinear partial differential
              equations and   such diverse areas as fluid mechanics, phase transitions, free
              boundary   problems, materials science, and mean curvature flow. The focus of
              this   emphasis year will be an International Conference on Nonlinear Partial  
              Differential Equations and Applications in the Spring of 1998. During the  
              year, a series of visits of experts and junior researchers in the indicated  
              areas is planned.    Nonlinear partial differential equations arise in almost
              all areas of science   and engineering. In particular, they arise in materials
              science, biophysics,   environmental and global change processes, and
              industrial manufacturing   processes.  These equations are predominant in such
              areas as elasticity,   plasticity, semiconductors, biological transport of
              ions, phase transitions,   multi-phase processes, combustion, and etching and
              deposition  processes.   Understanding solutions of such nonlinear equations
              enables one to gain   new physical insights, to discover the intrinsic laws,
              and, in turn, to solve   some challenging problems in these areas.  The
              proposed project is intended   to bring together a diverse group of applied
              mathematicians and theoretical   analysts in partial differential equations and
              their applications who are able   to explore connections between their fields. 
              Individuals will be selected   who can share expertise with an eye toward
              applications in the indicated   areas in applied sciences and other
              mathematical areas represented by the   Northwestern faculty.  Researchers with
              such diverse expertise have often   unexplored common interests which, by means
              of fruitful exchanges, can   lead to novel results and discoveries.  Particular
              attention will be focused on   the p articipation of recent doctoral recipients
              and/or graduate students in   order to foster their interests in nonlinear
              partial differential equations and   applications in science and engineering.
