Title       : Research Conference: Computing Science and Statistics Interface Symposium to be
               held May 14-17, 1997 in Houston, Texas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1997     
File        : a9708176

Award Number: 9708176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James M. Davenport                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14400              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Scott   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Interface Fdn N Amer Inc
	      P.O. Box 7460
	      Fairfax Station, VA  220397460    703/993-1691

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Scott  9708176    This proposal requests funding to support young researchers
              and speakers to attend the 29th  symposium on the Interface of Computing
              Science and Statistics in Houston, May 14-17, 1997, along with related
              conference expenses.  The theme of  this year's interface is "Mining and
              Modeling Massive Data Sets In Science, Engineering, and Business," which is
              related to other special NSF initiatives.  The Symposium is designed to bring
              together top researchers and workers in several related disciplines to focus on
              a breaking theme, and to bring younger researchers, graduate students, and
              interested  scientifically minded individuals from a wide cross-section of
              fields and industries to interact and  exchange information and ideas.  This
              year's program has drawn a field of invited speakers from an international
              group, as well as some of the best minds in the American academic, computer,
              and business worlds.  Furthermore, a large and diverse group of young
              individuals will attend.  The conference also has a sub-theme of the
              environment and quantitative environmental science.  The conference is
              sponsored by the Interface Foundation of North America, a non-profit
              educational corporation.  The Statistics Department at Rice University is
              hosting the meeting with David W. Scott as organizer and program chair. 
              Co-hosting institutions include M.D. Anderson Cancer Center and U. Texas School
              of Public Health.  The Symposium has a number of cooperating societies.  Data
              mining holds the promise of dramatically improving our utilization of massive
              data records accumulating in all areas of government, industry, business, and
              research.  Some of the best statisticians, computer scientists, federal
              researchers, businessmen, and others are contributing to providing new
              algorithms and ideas for finding structure in massive data sets.   Over 27
              invited and 12 contributed paper sessions will be offered.  Keynote speaker
              Jerry Friedman of Stanford will discuss the role of statistics in data mining
              research.   This work poses serious hardware and software problems for computer
              vendors, and speakers from IBM, SGI, Oracle, AMS, and others will discuss
              hardware and software issues related to massive data sets management and
              analysis.   Other sessions will describe case studies and war stories.  A
              number of marketing researchers have won permission to describe usually
              proprietary work that should have educational scientific value.  Special
              luncheon presentations will offer a more informal atmosphere and interaction
              with leading researchers in computing, genetic and molecular modeling, and
              network  understanding.  Visualization is a common thread, with sessions on the
              uses of virtual reality, exploration, and spatial statistics for massive data
              sets.  The CEO's and chief scientists of some of the leading data mining and
              statistical software houses will be speaking at this year's meeting.  Large
              scale optimization and wavelet techniques will also be covered among the many
              sessions.  Each speaker will provide a manuscript for a proceedings of the
              conference, which is to be published in the early Fall.  Thus the results and
              information provided during the session will be available to a very wide
              audience at low cost.
