Title       : Mathematical Studies in Colloid Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1997    
File        : a9708421

Award Number: 9708421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Logan dlogan@math.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven D. Cohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1584,9189,9263,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Logan  9708421       The principal investigators and their colleagues undertake
              a  systematic study of nonlinear phenomena in the transport of  bacterial and
              other colloidal substances through domains of  variable porosity.  They assume
              that the porosity is a function  of the colloid concentration, which places a
              nonlinearity in the  time-derivative term of the resulting 
              reaction-diffusion-convection equations that govern the flow.  The
              investigators address issues of well-posedness and  qualitative behavior for
              some of these types of biofilm problems,  using techniques such as energy
              arguments and semigroup analysis.  They also study the existence of traveling
              wavefronts in these  systems using dynamical systems methods.  A significant
              part of  their effort is to interact with colleagues in the geosciences in 
              order to be certain that the models they study are physically  well-founded.   
                 The presence of colloids, of which some bacterial substances  are examples,
              in subsurface aquifer systems can have a profound  effect on the transport of
              contaminants.  For example,  hydrocarbons can form a substrate for microbial
              growth which can  then result in the formation of a biofilm on the solid
              surfaces  of the aquifer.  The behavior of biofilms in important in the  mining
              industry for the leaching of metals from ores, in the  petroleum industry for
              the control of biofilm accumulation to  prevent plugging in oil recovery, and
              especially in the  environmental water resources area for in-situ
              bioremediation.  It  has been demonstrated experimentally that the presence of 
              bacterial substances can enhance the transport of harmful  chemicals, like DDT,
              through the soil; in other cases, biofilms  can form barriers that block the
              transport of such contaminants.  The investigators study mathematical equations
              that model the  interaction of contaminants and colloidal particles and the 
              effects of these interactions on the flow characteristics of  subsurface
              domains.  One goal is to understand, through exami ming  the validity of
              various models, how different mechanisms affect  the hydrodynamic flow.
