Title       : Student Paper Competition at the 1997 IEEE MTT-S International Microwave
               Symposium, Denver, CO, June 8-13, l997
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9708447

Award Number: 9708447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Magdy F. Iskander                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9720               (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger B. Marks   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IEEE
	      445 HOES LANE
	      Piscataway, NJ  088544103    /   -

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  ECS-9708447    Principal Investigator:  Roger Marks (Conference
              Chair)    Title:  Student Paper Competition at the 1997 MTT-S Interantional
              Micorwave Symposium      The IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium (IMS)
              is the annual meeting of the Microwave Theory and Techniques Society (MTT-S) of
              the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE).  The IMS is also
              the major international symposium in the microwave field and a focus of
              research results in wireless communications.  Each year the MTT-S promotes
              students education in microwave theory and techniques through a number of
              mechanisms.  One of the most important is the Student Paper Competition at the
              IMS.  This is a selective program which brings the world's best students
              together in an integrated program in which they present their work not only to
              a technical audience but again to a group of judges.  The program helps to
              develop the student's technical acumen, introduces them to the international
              research community and helps to build a community of students who will lead the
              next generation of microwave engineers.    The Student Paper Competition
              Program is open to any full-time student, typically, although not necessarily,
              a graduate student.  First author student papers are judged by the Technical
              Program Committee along with regular submissions, using the same standards.
              These are presented in regularly scheduled oral or poster sessions for optimum
              dissemination to the research community, followed by a separate presentation
              before a panel of judges. Each winner will receive a certificate and a cash
              prize provided by MTT-S.  First, Second, and Third Place winners will be
              selected.  Due to the high standards of this conference, winning such a prize
              can have a real and highly beneficial impact in a student's career.
