Title       : Early Conceptual Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1997    
File        : a9708953

Award Number: 9708953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean M. Mandler jmandler@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laraine L. McDonough  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research examines the development of conceptual thought in infancy and
              early childhood, and the way these developments are reflected in early
              language. Until recently, we have had little information about the way infants
              conceptualize the world. It has traditionally been thought that infants first
              form concepts about concrete objects, such as dogs, chairs, and cars, and only
              later develop broader concepts of animals, furniture, and vehicles. However,
              research from our laboratory indicates that the broader concepts precede the
              more specific ones. Infants first form global and rather diffuse concepts, for
              example a general notion of how animate things differ from inanimate ones. With
              experience these gradually become differentiated into more adult-like concepts.
              In addition our tests of language comprehension indicate that a good deal of
              infant vocabulary refers to broader and more diffuse concepts than the meanings
              these words have for adults.   This research uses several new techniques,
              involving the way that infants handle and explore objects. One of these
              techniques uses imitation to discover what preverbal children understand from
              events. We model events using little objects and then encourage the infants to
              imitate what they have seen. Infants and young children will only imitate what
              they understand, so by carefully varying the choices of objects available for
              them to use for their imitations, we can discover how they have construed the
              events that we model, even when they are too young to describe the events in
              words. The overall goal of  the research is to provide a systematic body of
              knowledge about the preverbal foundations of thinking so that we can better
              understand what young children need to know in order to learn language. These
              studies are also important to provide an assessment of the level of young
              children's understanding of the world at the time they start preschool.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
