Title       : Biomolecular Materials - Spider Silk as a Model System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1999     
File        : a9708062

Award Number: 9708062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $840001             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Zax dbzl@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn W. Jelinski  (Principal Investigator former)
              David T. Grubb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1773,9162,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9708062  Jelinski    This Focused Research Group (FRG) award, supported by 
              MPS/DMR, MPS/OMA, and BIO/MCB, seeks to understand the  structure-function
              relationships in a model biomolecular  material - spider silk.  The project
              draws on the  synergistic skills of the four Principal Investigators (PIs) 
              Lynn Jelinski (Cornell; NMR and biomaterials), David Kaplan  (Tufts;
              biotechnology and proteins), David Grubb (Cornell; x-  ray diffraction and
              mechanical properties of fibers) and Ron  Eby (Akron; x-ray diffraction and
              polymer science).  The  goal is to understand and mimic the design and crystal-
               growth processes found in a naturally occurring system in  order to obtain an
              improved structural material.  To this  end, the project team will share
              samples, including various  silks collected in the wild, fibers produced from 
              genetically engineered silk-like proteins, and fibers  produced from proteins
              containing a reversible redox switch  to control solubility.  The primary
              characterization  techniques will include mechanical measurements, synchrotron 
              x-ray diffraction, and solid state NMR spectroscopy.  The  FRG will provide a
              focus for interdisciplinary education and  will serve to integrate education
              and research.  The  objectives are  1  to correlate the structure and materials
               properties of different natural silks with their protein  content and
              sequence;  2  to correlate the structure and  materials properties of
              regenerated fibers and fibers drawn  from silk-like proteins made by
              recombinant DNA technology;   3  to design into silks a reversible redox switch
              to  control solution properties, and then to test films and  fibers made of
              this material.  %%%  This research will lead to a better understanding of the 
              relationships between structure and function in protein  polymers and lead to
              protein polymers with improved  mechanical properties.  The research will also
              serve as a  springboard from which undergraduate and graduate students  will be
              exposed to a wide range of interdisciplinary  s cience.  ***
