Title       : The Impact of Childhood Family Background, School Resources, and Curriculum on
               Black and White Women's Educational Attainments, Labor Market Experience,
               Occupational Mobility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2000    
File        : a9708016

Award Number: 9708016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori G. Kletzer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will examine differences between black and white women in economic
              status.  The poject,while while focused methodologically within economics in
              general and multivariate statistical techniques, will draw from a number of
              other disciplines, including sociology, psychology, and education.  Several
              longitudinal data bases will be used to develop anindividual-level approach to
              questions of educational attainment, occupational status, and earnings.  The
              focus on family background and school inputs will highlight issues of the
              intergenerational transmission of wealth and poverty.  The investigation will
              permit insights into the following questions:       How do secondary school
              inputs affect educational attainment such as high school graduation, the extent
              and quality of post-secondary schooling, major selected, occupation, and
              earnings?       How do family background characteristics, such as parental
              education and income, family size, birth order, and presence of one or two
              parents affect these outcomes?       How do school resources and family
              background affect measured secondary school academic achievement or cognitive
              skills?       How do college characteristics affect labor market success?  How
              important are college resources per student and the quality of college peers
              for learning of the type that is rewarded in the labor market?  How can the
              effects of college per se be separated from the effects of pre-college
              education and ability?       What is the role of educational attainment in
              occupational mobility?  How much of occupational convergence between black
              women and white women is explained by rising educational attainment amongst
              blacks?  What is the role of anti-discrimination legislation and affirmative
              action?       How can these questions about human capital accumulation be
              related to the special concerns of low-income women, particularly black women? 
                    What is the impact on black females of the deteriorating economic status
              of black men?  Black women face both disadvantage and discrimination and their
              economic status is more precarious than the economic status of white women. 
              This project will provide a basis for a deeper understanding of the factors
              that explain advances, stagnation and decline in relative economic status for
              black women.  It will also contribute to our understanding of changes in the
              economic status of white women.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
