Title       : Exploration of the Manufacture of Protein Polymer Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1997    
File        : a9708095

Award Number: 9708095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel C. Davis                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Youqi Wang wang@mne.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,9221,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The  purpose of this project is to explore a manufacturing  process for a high
              strength fiber reinforced composite with  protein based polymer matrix. The
              major advantages of the new  composite include:  Compared to the petroleum
              based polymer, which is widely used in  fiber reinforced composites, the
              protein based polymer is tough  and ductile. These are the key factors
              affecting impact strength.  It should be expected that the protein based
              polymer composite  would absorb more energy created by collision and have a
              greater  impact strength than the petroleum based composite.  The manufacturing
              process proposed for the new composite is  environmentally friendly. Little
              toxic chemical materials will be  involved in the manufacturing process.  The
              cost of the protein polymer is relatively low. There are  abundant natural
              resources for the protein polymer, such as  soybean and various grains in the
              U.S.  Protein polymer has never been combined with high strength fibers  to
              manufacture composites. Therefore, a preliminary study is  necessary. During
              the preliminary research period,all the polymer  behaviors related to
              manufacturing process will be examined and  a test run of the prepregging
              process will be carried out. The  outcome will determine the feasibility of
              developing a high  strength fibrous composite with a protein polymer. By the
              end  of  the project period, a follow up proposal will be submitted.  The
              research conducted following the proposed planning period  will include two
              phases. Phase I concerns each step of the  manufacturing process and its effect
              on the mechanical  properties. An effective strategy will be proposed for the 
              development of the manufacturing process of the new composite.  In phase II
              static, dynamic and impact tests will be conducted  to examine the properties
              of the new composite, particularly the  toughness and impact strength.
              composite. An inexpensive high  toughness composite will have a big potential
              market in the  automobile, civil engine.  This is the first employment of a
              protein based polymer as the  matrix of a high strength, light weight
              composite. An inexpensive  high toughness composite will have a big potential
              market in the  automobile, civil engineering and infrastructure fields.
              However,  this research is still in a fundamental stage.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
