Title       : GOALI: Feature Extraction for Mesh Generation in Virtual Prototyping: A
               Distributed Industrial Traineeship Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1997      
File        : a9708531

Award Number: 9708531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99760              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajit Gadh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9148,9290,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for a GOALI project between the University of
              Wisconsin-Madison, Ford Motor Company and ALCOA Technical Center to establish a
              graduate student traineeship site. The project is done in a distributed setting
              between three locations: (1) Ford Motor Company, Dearborn, MI;  (2)  ALCOA
              Technical Center, Pittsburgh, PA;  and (3) University of Wisconsin, Madison,
              WI. Internet-related technologies will be used for achieving synchronicity in
              research and adequate levels of collaboration. The graduate student traineeship
              site is focused on research and development of feature recognition and
              subsequent decomposition of such shapes into simpler shapes to support
              automatic finite element mesh generation.  Creating meshes for simpler shapes
              and combining them is easier and results in better meshes than creating meshes
              for complex shapes.  In the present research, these simpler shapes are called
              BLOBS (Basic Logical Bulk Shapes).  BLOBS represent the basic elements into
              which an object must be decomposed.  This project will result in a systematic
              methodology for decomposing a shape feature into BLOBS and the creation of a
              BLOB tree which can be used to sequence the generation of the mesh for
              efficiently generated and high quality meshes go beyond finite element mesh
              generation.   This project, if successful, will educate the students about the
              value and needs of industrial research in the field of shape decomposition for
              mesh generation. By this technological and methodological exchange, industry
              will learn the constraints of academic research as well as the opportunity to
              influence university  research.  Finally, due to the university-industry
              collaboration, this project will create a conduit for technology transfer of
              university research into a company environment.
