Title       : Villages on the Periphery: Neolithic Adaptations at Ghwair I, Southern Jordan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2001   
File        : a9708241

Award Number: 9708241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152777             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan H. Simmons simmonsa@nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammad Najjar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Alan Simmons will conduct two
              seasons of archaeological research at the site Ghwair I which is located in the
              Wadi Feinan region in central Jordan. The site is dated to the pre Pottery
              Neolithic B (PPNB) period from ca. 7,350 - 6,000 B.C. The site is small, covers
              an estimated 1.5 acres, and thus likely represents a village. It contains at
              least four architectural phases in over 3 meters depth of deposit and
              preservation is spectacular. Walls containing windows and doorways are
              preserved to over 2 meters in height. Faunal remains as well as ceramics and
              worked stone tools are also abundant.  The general time period and region of
              the world is important because it documents an early stage in the Neolithic
              Revolution, when village life first emerged and domestic plants and animals
              first  provided the major source of subsistence. A number of larger `urban`
              PPNB sites have been examined but these likely are not typical of this period.
              The small Ghwair I excavation will shed light on a little known aspect of this
              society. Because the site is located in a marginal environmental area it will
              also provide a new perspective on subsistence adaptation. During the two field
              seasons Dr. Simmons and his collaborators will excavate large areas to reveal
              details of village layout and will analyze the cultural materials as well as
              faunal and floral remains. An areal site survey will also be conducted and
              geomorphological analysis will trace changes in past environments. 
              Archaeologists have come to realize that within `simple` societies, sites
              cannot be studied in isolation. They form parts of large social systems which
              are economically and politically integrated and that individual sites may serve
              specialized functions. Dr. Simmons' research is important because it takes this
              broader perspective and will fill in a crucial missing portion of the picture.
              He postulates that Ghwair I , despite its small size was, in fact, an elite
              settlement. He also believes that the site, as well as many other PPNB
              occupations was abandoned because of environmental degradation.   This research
              is important because it will provide data of interest to many archaeologists.
              It will shed new light on how complex societies, including our own, emerged.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
