Title       : Paleontology in the 21st Century Workshop, September 1997
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1997 
File        : a9708433

Award Number: 9708433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Richard Lane   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jere H. Lipps  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc of Sed Geol SEPM
	      1731 E 71st St
	      Tulsa, OK  741319108    713/366-4156

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9708433  Lane    Paleontology is a diverse science.  Flanked by Biology and
              Geology, it stands as the study of biotic diversity and life history.  Its
              close relations with Biology and Geology are both a strength and a liability. 
              A strength because of the rich information shed by both sister sciences on
              paleontologic interpretation and knowledge.  A liability because paleontology
              is commonly treated as a subset of both and therefore a "second string" player
              in funding and integrated project planning.  This latter liability cuts across
              all organizations where paleontology is practiced.  Paleontologists are
              gainfully employed in academia, industry, government, museums and institutes
              and represent knowledgeable specialists of the gamut of biotic groups within
              the plant and animal kingdoms.  As important as paleontology is to societal and
              human needs, a truly representative assembly of paleontologists has never met
              to consider problems facing the science and to establish agreed strategic
              directions for its livelihood and betterment.  Now is the time for such a
              meeting because many aspects of Paleontology are in transition as it approaches
              the millennium.  Funding for academic and government research and staff
              positions worldwide has decreased significantly over the last ten years, and
              continues to do so with no end in sight.  Academic geology departments, by and
              large, are not replacing retiring members of our profession in kind, and
              experienced stratigraphic paleontologists are being laid off in record numbers
              as the petroleum industry continues to reel from adverse world-wide business
              and political climates.  Ironically, all this comes at a time in which the
              science of paleontology is undergoing a period of unprecedented progress as new
              technologies and data analytic approaches are integrated with its rapidly
              growing and increasingly detailed database.  It is hard to imagine a geological
              discipline that has made, and, despite these problems, continues to make, as
              many different practical contribut ions to the earth sciences as paleontology. 
              Yet, for a variety of reasons, continued access to these data and individuals
              trained to expand and interpret them is in serious jeopardy.    Because
              problems facing paleontology today span the entire science and the world, a
              global, pan-paleontological effort is needed to address them.  For this reason,
              a one week workshop is being organized for September 3-9, 1997 at Senckenberg
              Museum, Frankfurt, Germany.  The workshop entitled "Paleontology in the 21st
              Century" is a Senckenberg Conference and co-sponsored by SEPM, The
              Paleontological Society, American Association of Stratigraphic Paleontologists,
              Paleobotany Section of the Botanical Society of America, The International
              Paleobotanical Organization, the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology, the
              International Paleontological Association, Gulf Coast SEPM and additional
              society sponsorships will be secured, especially those representing other
              specialties of paleontology.  The Workshop will identify and address issues
              impacting paleontology and the paleontological community as they enter the 21st
              Century.  The following are seven possible positive outcomes of the workshop.  
               1.  Identification of broad scientific initiatives for the 21st century that
              would maximize paleontology's relevance and impact on technology, society, and
              industry.  2.  Development of an overall, unified, direction(s) for
              paleontology as it enters the 21st Century.  3.  Evaluation of the current
              organizational structure of paleontology and recommend/implement changes for
              the future, if judged needed.  4.  Better communication between the various
              specialties/fractions in Paleontology.  5.  Development of a stronger public
              support base.  6.  More effectively structure and use government regulation and
              enhance paleontology's interface with governments.  7.  More effective
              interfaces with sister sciences.    Senckenberg Museum will provide the space,
              equipment, publications support and $20,000 travel moneys for participants from
              third  world countries.  Additional moneys to support other participants will
              be raised from private, public and government sources in Europe and the United
              States.  In North America, $7500 have already been raised and there are known
              commitments in western Europe.  DFG and ESF are expected to contribute $14,000
              and $10,000.  Revenues generated in North America will be dispersed by the SEPM
              Foundation to Western Hemisphere participants; those generated in western
              Europe will be dispersed by Senckenberg to Eastern Hemisphere attendees (see
              attached budget in Appendix A).  At this time, 104 invited delegates are spread
              among 29 countries (see attached list of delegates, Appendix B).
