Title       : "PRESSS Phase III: Analytical Predictions of Five-Story Precast Superassemblage
               Test Structure Performance"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1998      
File        : a9708627

Award Number: 9708627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93764              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Sause rs0c@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Le-Wu Lu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen P. Pessiki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9708627  Sause    This project is part of the third phase of a coordinated 
              program of research on Precast Seismic Structural Systems  (PRESSS).  The
              PRESSS program, funded by the National  Science Foundation has two goals:  (1)
              to develop new  materials, concepts, and technologies for precast concrete 
              construction in seismic zones; and (2) to develop  comprehensive and rational
              design recommendations for  precast concrete construction in seismic zones. 
              The first  two phases of the PRESSS program are near completion.  He  remaining
              work to be done to achieve these objectives is the  testing of a large-scale
              precast structure design according  to preliminary design recommendations and
              analyzed using  models developed in the earlier phases of PRESSS program.   
              The PRESSS Phase III program requires three components to  achieve these
              objectives: (1) design studies; (2) analytical  studies; and (3)
              superassemblage tests.  Englekirk and  Nakaki, Inc. and the University of
              Washington will conduct  design studies, Leigh University will conduct
              analytical  studies, and the University of California, San Diego will  conduct
              experiments on the five story superassembage test  structure.    The objectives
              of the Leigh University component this  project of the PRESSS Phase III program
              are: (1) to use  nonlinear static analysis to predict the monotonic and  cyclic
              lateral force displacement behavior of prototype  buildings, and to assess this
              behavior of the five-story  superassemblage test structure using nonlinear
              dynamic  analysis, and assess the behavior; (3) to compare the  predicted
              performance and the experimental performance and  assess the models and methods
              used in the analytical  prediction; and (4) to develop design recommendations
              for  precast seismic structural systems.  Analytical models of  precast
              structures developed at Lehigh will be used.  The  dynamic analysis will use a
              set of earthquake ground motions  representing various site characteristics
              compiled at  Lehigh.  Comparisons with the  performance of the prototype 
              buildings anticipated in design, and with the experimentally  observed
              performance of  the five-story superassemblage test  structure will be made. 
              The analytical studies will be  carefully coordinated with the Phase III design
              studies and  superassemblage tests.
