Title       : SGER: Using Stable Isotopes as Tracers to Measure Below Ground Neighborhoods in
               Plant Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1997      
File        : a9708165

Award Number: 9708165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25154              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brenda B. Casper bcasper@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9708165  Casper   The ultimate goals of this project are to measure the lateral
              spread of plant roots and to determine how rooting area changes with certain
              soil conditions and the presence of neighboring plants.  The one year project
              funded here will primarily test whether recently devised techniques in plant
              science can be applied to this problem.  We will test to what extent isotopes
              of cesium, lithium, rubidium, and strontium can be used as tracers to determine
              whether plants take up nutrients from a particular point in soil space.  These 
              elements serve as nutrient analogs which means that plants should take them up
              in place of common nutrients.  Because they are rare within most soils, we can
              place solutions containing these elements at defined locations in the soil and
              by detecting their presence in newly produced plant tissue, be certain that the
              plant's root system intersects the pocket of tracer.  By knowing how many of
              the plants in the population   have taken up a particular tracer, we can
              determine exactly how many root systems overlap in the area marked by tracer. 
              The use of all four tracers within a single population will enable us to
              measure root extension in four different directions and facilitate estimates of
              lateral rooting area.  A second technique will be applied to the question of
              whether fungal-root associations mycorrhizae) enlarge the soil area over which
              a plant takes up nutrients.  GORE-TEXR fabric will be used to separate tracer
              from plant roots.  Roots and nutrients do not pass through the small pores in
              the fabric but mycorrhizal hyphae do.  By physically isolating roots from
              tracers in this way, we can determine whether the mycorrhizae extend the
              distance over which a plant takes up nutrients.  Another experiment will
              determine whether the tracer moves laterally in the soil even in the absence of
              plant roots.   These experiments are important to understanding how below
              ground competition for soil resources takes place among plants.  We can measure
              how the presenc e of below ground competition affects plant growth, but we have
              little knowledge of which individuals are engaged in the competition.  We do
              not know whether interactions primarily occur between nearest   neighbors or
              whether root systems extend beyond nearest neighbors to include many other
              plants.  It is impossible to determine this information from excavating root
              systems because the fine roots that are most active in nutrient uptake cannot
              be recovered from the soil.  This information is essential to determining how
              the number and proximity of neighboring plants affect plant growth, whether it
              be in agricultural or natural systems.
