Title       : Dissertation Research: An Archaeological Investigation of Baking Pot, Belize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2001   
File        : a9708140

Award Number: 9708140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11960              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Wyllys Andrews wandrews@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. E. Wyllys Andrews MS Jenifer Piehl will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological excavation at
              the Mayan site of Baking Pot, located in Belize, and analyze the materials
              which she and other researchers collect. She will focus on the relative status
              of women at this Classic Mayan site and the results of her study will provide
              insight into how this complex society was organized. It is clear that the
              Mayans divided themselves into lineages and residential units and that clear
              status distinctions existed between individuals. However is not known whether
              status distinctions cut across lineage groups  or whether entire lineages were
              ranked as units relative to each other. Through the study of females and
              variation of status within this gender based group, underlying principles of
              Mayan organization can be addressed.  Past work at Baking Pot has yielded a
              series of burial remains but the number of individual graves is not great
              enough to permit statistical analysis. MS Piehl will participate in the
              excavation of domestic areas in order to increase sample size. She will then
              study both new and old material and analyze the skeletons themselves as well as
              associated grave goods. On the basis of the amount and nature of the latter
              insight into status is possible. Elite individuals are buried with
              non-utilitarian objects crafted from rare materials often imported from
              considerable distances. Analysis of skeletal remains also provides extremely
              important information. Stress indicators such as defects in tooth enamel,
              caries, premortem tooth loss and thickness of cranial bone provide insight into
              health and nutrition. Isotopic analysis of bone can indicate relative access to
              valued food resources such as corn. Through such analyses ranges of variation
              within and between genders can be determined.  This research is important for
              several reasons. It will shed light on how Mayan civilization arose and was
              maintained. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and assist
              in training a promising young scientist.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
