Title       : Theoretical and Computational Studies of Chemical Reaction Dynamics and
               Electronic Spectroscopy in Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1997   
File        : a9708575

Award Number: 9708575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hyung J. Kim kim@chem.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hyung Kim is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational  
              Chemistry Program to continue his research in chemical reaction dynamics   and
              electronic spectroscopy in solution.  Kim will implement the   Born-Oppenheimer
              reaction field theory with quantum chemical techniques   to make a detailed
              comparison with existing self-consistent methods for   treating solvation.  The
              solute-solvent electronic correlation effects on   solvation of small molecules
              and reaction free energetics of charge shift   processes will be investigated. 
              This approach should clarify some of the   shortcomings associated with the
              self-consistent approach with regard to   overestimation of activation barriers
              for 2+2 cycloadditions.    Furthermore, a reaction field approach involving
              quadrupolar polarization   will also be developed for treating solvent systems
              such as benzene and   carbon dioxide.  Solvents to be studied include alcohols,
              amines,   alkanes, cycloalkanes and aromatic systems.  An effort will also be
              made   to understand and quantify the solvation properties of normal and  
              supercritical water.  Excellent theories are available for understanding gas
              phase chemical   reactions involving binary encounters between molecules. 
              However, most   chemical reactions of technological importance occur in
              condensed phases   consisting of reacting solutes dissolved in non-reacting
              solvents. The   effect which the solvent has on chemical reactions, and
              theoretical   methods for dealing with this complex interaction are still in
              early   stages of development. Nevertheless, progress in this area of research 
               can have an important long range impact on our fundamental understanding   of
              chemical reactions of industrial significance. Kim's research is   helping to
              provide a theoretical basis for the interpretation of solvent   effects on
              chemical reactions in condensed phase systems.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
