Title       : Computerization & Reorganization of the Robert S. Peabody Gulf of Maine
               Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1999   
File        : a9708187

Award Number: 9708187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92649              (Estimated)
Investigator: Malinda S. Blustain   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Phillips Acad, Peabody Mus
	      
	      Andover, MA  01810    /   -

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, the Robert S. Peabody Museum of
              Archaeology will upgrade storage and access to their Gulf of Maine
              archaeological collection. These materials which include approximately 80,000
              artifacts were excavated from sites extending in an arc from maritime Canada to
              Cape Cod Massachusetts. The Museum was established in 1901 and Warren Moorehead
              who served as first curator was a major figure in Northeast US archaeology. The
              earliest collections therefore date to the founding of scientific archaeology
              in this broad region and they played a central role in the construction of the
              culture/historic sequence. They have grown significantly and constitute a
              central corpus of data which is widely consulted. The archaeological materials
              extend chronologically from the earliest paleoindian cultures of North America
              to historic times and allow researchers to examine human environmental
              interactions from early postglacial periods onwards and to address issues such
              as the causes and social consequences of the shift from a hunting and gathering
              to a settled village way of life.  Because the collections are poorly curated,
              are stored in a non-systematic fashion and are unevenly catalogued, they are
              extremely difficult for researchers to use. With NSF support the museum will
              conduct a series of activities. Collections will be sorted by material type and
              stored by geographic region. They will be reboxed and organic and fragile
              objects such as bone, shell, textile and animal and plant remains will be
              buffered from acidic drawer surfaces. Structural supports will be produced for
              objects which need them. Collection records will be verified against objects,
              updated and then input into a computerized data system. The project will result
              in a well conserved, organized and readily available collection for scientific
              research.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
