Title       : Human Paleoecology in the Western Great Lakes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1997      
File        : a9708616

Award Number: 9708616
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12509              (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Overstreet 6617sullivan@vms.csd.mu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marquette University
	      P.O. Box 1881
	      Milwaukee, WI  532011881    414/224-7200

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. David Overstreet will coordinate
              the analysis of the skeletal remains of two woolly mammoths excavated from the
              Hebior and Schaefer sites, located in southeastern Wisconsin. At the start of
              the last glacial retreat, the region contained many small ponds and lakes
              surrounded by encroaching wetlands. They eventually were infilled by peats and
              mucks which afford excellent preservation of faunal remains.  The two mammoths
              discovered in this context both date by radiocarbon to slightly older than
              12,000 years ago and this may provide possibly the oldest evidence of humans in
              North America. Several worked pieces of stone were found in possible
              association with each specimen and this suggests, but does not prove humans
              were present at that time. To reach a more definitive conclusion, Dr. Eileen
              Johnson will conduct a careful taphonomic analysis of both skeletons. This will
              include identification and mapping of various marks on the bone, and
              examination of the condition of the cortical surface and patterns of breakage.
              Dr. Johnson's  methodology will incorporate gross morphology, low and high
              power magnification and selected samples for scanning electron microscopy.
              These analyses will generate sufficient empirical evidence to evaluate relative
              roles of predation and/or scavenging, carcass utilization patterns, bone
              resource utilization and the effects of natural forces which also can alter
              bone. In addition a further suite of materials will be subjected to radiocarbon
              analysis.  The strongest evidence for early humans in North America comes from
              numerous sites in the Southwestern United States. Worked stone tools are
              clearly associated with animal remains and all date to younger than 12,000
              years. All are associated with a stone tool tradition known as `Clovis` after
              the site where it was first identified. Clovis is characterized by finely
              worked spear points and has been widely viewed as the earliest lithic tradition
              in North America. The few stone implements which have been recovered in
              possible association with the Wisconsin mammoths, according to Dr. Overstreet,
              do not appear to be Clovis.  The materials then are of particular interest both
              because of their age and the fact that they may represent an unknown cultural
              group. If successful this research may set the stage for a large scale project.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
