Title       : Mono- and bis-Triazene Proteolysis: A Mechanistic Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9708166

Award Number: 9708166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Smith rhsmith@wmdc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : McDaniel College
	      2 College Hill
	      Westminster, MD  21157    410/857-2222

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Organic Dynamics Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary   Activities of
              the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate support   Professor Richard
              H. Smith, Jr., of the Department of Chemistry of   Western Maryland College,
              for his mechanistic investigations of the   proteolysis of mono- and
              bis-triazenes.  With his Research in   Undergraduate Institutions award,
              Professor Smith seeks to develop a   clearer understanding of the mechanism of
              proteolytic decomposition of   the major classes of triazenes, an important
              family of anti-cancer drugs.    He uses a kinetic method to measure the
              component constants that   determine the overall rate at which triazenes
              decompose to produce their   active principle, an alkyldiazonium ion.  These
              data provide information   about the basicities of all the major classes of
              triazenes and will lead   to the development of a computational model of the
              key decomposition   reaction, facilitating the future design of new
              triazene-based anti-tumor   drugs.  Two new classes of triazenes, bis-triazenes
              and bis-triazolines,   are effective DNA crosslinking agents and may form the
              basis of a new   family of anti-cancer drugs.  Professor Richard H. Smith, Jr.,
              of the Department of Chemistry of   Western Maryland College, carries out
              investigations of the synthesis and   reaction chemistry of triazenes with the
              support of a Research in   Undergraduate Institutions award from the Organic
              Dynamics Program and   the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the
              Mathematical and   Physical Sciences Directorate.  Triazenes, a class of
              molecules bearing   in common the structural motif of three nitrogen atoms
              connected in a   row, form the basis of an important group of anti-cancer
              drugs.  By   studying the influence of their detailed chemical structure on the
                reaction chemistry of these compounds, Professor Smith sheds light on the  
              fundamental mechanisms by which they act.  In addition, this information   is
              leading to the development of a computational model which is expected   to
              facilitate the future design of new triazene-based anti-tumor drugs.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
