Title       : Instantaneous Normal Mode Analysis of Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2000  
File        : a9708055

Award Number: 9708055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370833             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Keyes keyes@chem.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Thomas Keyes is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his research in the area of   instantaneous
              normal mode (INM) analysis of liquids.  Instantaneous   normal modes are the
              harmonic modes of a representative configuration of   a liquid, and they
              provide an intuitive description of liquid state   dynamics.  Keyes will
              further develop INM theory to treat relaxation in   supercooled liquids.  The
              self diffusion constant will be calculated from   the double well modes and the
              distinct behavior of strong and fragile   supercooled liquids will be related
              to the form of the double well   density of states.  Other properties of
              supercooled liquids including the   Boson peak in scattering, a possible
              growing correlation length,   stretched exponential decay of correlation
              functions, breakdown in the   Stokes-Einstein law, and the role of spatial
              heterogeneity will be   calculated from INM.  An extension of the current
              theory will be   investigated to introduce time-dependent adiabatic and
              diabatic normal   mode treatments.  This would extend the INM treatment to
              dephasing and   motional narrowing.  There are excellent theoretical models
              which explain the behavior and   properties of gas phase systems where the
              motion is chaotic, collisions   frequent, and interactions are weak.
              Theoretical models for the solid   state are also quite well developed since
              periodic order in crystalline   systems provides the necessary simplifications
              to lead to tractable   solutions. The properties of liquids and supercooled
              liquids or glasses   still present quite a challenge to theoretical
              interpretation.  Keyes is   one of several theoretical chemists who is making
              significant headway on   developing a molecular interpretation of the physical
              and chemical   properties of liquids. The long range impact of this work could
              be   significant in helping to understand chemistry in condensed phases.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
