Title       : Molecular Evolution of Floral Homeotic Genes in the Hawaiian Silversword
               Alliance (Asteraceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1997 
File        : a9708540

Award Number: 9708540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Purugganan michaelp@unity.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. Robichaux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9708540  Purugganan    The MADS-box regulatory gene family represents a group of
              genes that control crucial aspects of flower development.  The molecular
              evolutionary dynamics of these developmental control genes remain poorly
              understood.  This project seeks to investigate the molecular evolution of
              members of this regulatory gene family in the Hawaiian silversword alliance
              (Madiinae, Asteraceae), the premier example of island plant adaptive radiation.
               Three floral control genes - APETALA1, APETALA3 and AGAMOUS - will be isolated
              by molecular techniques in 14 silversword alliance species and their mainland
              California relatives, the tarweeds.  Analysis of these gene sequences will be
              used to infer the rates and patterns of gene evolution in these
              rapidly-evolving taxa, and will provide information on the evolutionary forces
              that shape the diversification of these regulatory loci.  This study will
              assess the dynamics of change in floral homeotic genes associated with a recent
              adaptive diversification, and may lead to the development of new nuclear
              markers for use in sequence-based, plant phylogenetic studies at low taxonomic
              levels.    Determining mode and tempo of regulatory gene evolution is vital to
              understanding the genetic basis behind differences in morphologies between
              species.  Studying these genes in the context of a well-studied adaptive
              radiation permits a greater knowledge of how genes that control developmental
              traits evolve in rapidly diversifying species.  By dissecting the mechanisms
              behind the evolution of these control genes, it may be possible to determine
              the extent to which changes in gene regulation contribute to the diversity in
              floral structures we see in the natural world.
