Title       : Photochemistry and Photophysics of Sulfoxides and Related Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9708237

Award Number: 9708237
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277600             (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Jenks wsjenks@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor William S. Jenks, of the Department of Chemistry at Iowa State  
              University, is supported by the Organic Dynamics Program and the Office   of
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences  
              Directorate for his studies of the photochemistry and photophysics of  
              sulfoxides and related species.  Through a combination of experimental   and
              calculational studies, Professor Jenks targets the characterization   of the
              photochemically active excited states of alkyl and aryl sulfoxides   and their
              dynamics, the determination of the mechanisms by which   sulfoxides quench
              traditional triplet sensitizers in cases where energy   transfer is unlikely
              due to energetic considerations, and the   determination of mechanisms by which
              other molecules can quench sulfoxide   excited states, with particular emphasis
              on development of electron   transfer reactions.  Through the study of a
              variety of photochemical   reactions of sulfoxides, including stereomutation,
              alpha cleavage, and   deoxygenation, a predictive paradigm will be constructed
              to assist in the   analysis of photochemical properties of sulfoxides and the
              development   and exploitation of their photochemical reaction chemistry.  With
              the support of the Organic Dynamics Program and the Office of  
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences  
              Directorate, Professor William S. Jenks, of the Department of Chemistry   at
              Iowa State University, studies the interactions of light with a class   of
              organic molecules known as sulfoxides, containing a bond between   oxygen and
              sulfur.  Such compounds occupy an important niche in organic   chemistry due to
              their unique combination of chemical and physical   properties.  Whereas the
              thermal reactions of sulfoxides have been   well-studied and have been
              exploited for the preparation of a variety of   significant products, the
              light-initiated reactions of sulfoxides are   still in the discovery and
              development stages.  By applying a variety of   experimental and calculational
              techniques, Professor Jenks explores the   ways in which sulfoxides interact
              with light, the structures and   reactions of the species generated by such
              interactions, and the products   which may be obtained as a result of these
              reactions.  These studies   contribute to our fundamental understanding of
              photochemical reactions   and may lead to the development of useful new
              strategies for the   synthesis of important organic molecules.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
