Title       : Prediction in the Earth Sciences: Use and Misuse in Policy Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9708983

Award Number: 9708983
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99781              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel R. Sarewitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale Jamieson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Radford Byerly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger A. Pielke Sr.  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Geological Soc. of America
	      3300 Penrose Place
	      Boulder, CO  803019140    303/447-2020

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Policy makers increasingly demand predictive information that can help guide
              political  decision-making on controversial environmental issues that include
              global climate change,  radioactive waste disposal, and mitigation of natural
              hazards such as hurricanes and  earthquakes. As a result of this demand, major
              financial and intellectual resources in the  earth sciences are now focused on
              the development of models and techniques for predicting the future behavior of
              natural and human-induced environmental phenomena  Environmental problems and
              controversies are becoming more pervasive and severe. At  the same time,
              research budgets are becoming tighter. Thus, the importance of effective 
              prioritization and allocation of research funds and activities is increasing,
              as is the need for  timely and effective political decision making. Whereas
              accurate, relevant predictions may  help decision makers respond to some
              environmental problems, the misapplication or  misuse of prediction research
              can undermine policy goals, waste scarce financial and  intellectual resources,
              and erode the overall credibility of the scientific enterprise. For  example,
              political response to given issue may be deferred in anticipation of the
              availability  of accurate predictive data, even when the success of such a
              response does not depend on  predictive knowledge.  Neither policy makers nor
              scientists possess information necessary for understanding if, how, and when
              research focusing on prediction can be productively applied to policy making.
              This project begins a process of systematic analysis that can provide such
              information. Two workshops will be convened to bring scientists, policy makers,
              and policy analysts together to develop, present, and integrate case histories
              in predictive earth science research (past and ongoing). Workshops will focus
              on the delineation of principles and criteria that can help policy makers judge
              the potential value of scientific prediction as applied to different types of
              political and social problems related to the environment. Such principles and
              criteria may be necessary for the design of science and environmental policies
              that are fiscally responsible, scientifically efficient, and socially
              constructive.  Towards this end, a significant component of this project will
              be the dissemination of workshop findings to the relevant scientific and
              policy-making communities through publications and presentations.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
