Title       : Robust Covariance Estimators and Heterogeneous Agent Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9708587

Award Number: 9708587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76529              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wouter Denhaan wdenhaan@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9708587  Haan    Many papers in the macroeconomics literature argue that
              heterogeneity is important for explaining the time series behavior of
              macroeconomic variables.  For example, when the lack of frictionless trading in
              a complete set of financial assets prevents agents from diversifying
              idiosyncratic income risk, this risk typically affects aggregate variables like
              asset prices.  In this case, the standard assumptions of the representative
              agent framework are violated and the amount of heterogeneity in agents' wealth
              and income levels affects the behavior of the variables in the model  The
              empirical failures of the representative agent framework have contributed to
              the popularity of models with heterogeneous agents and incomplete markets. 
              Models with heterogeneous agents have now been used for studying a wide range
              of topics in macroeconomics including asset pricing, consumption behavior,
              economic growth and investment behavior, the monetary transmission mechanism,
              business cycle studies, labor economics, and the international business cycle. 
               Quantitative analysis plays a crucial role in economics.  Solving dynamic
              equilibrium models with heterogenous agents, however, is a challenging problem
              because the cross-sectional distribution of agents' characteristics typically
              is a high dimensional endogenous object that is part of the set of state
              variables.  This project studies dynamic equilibrium models with a large number
              of agents and aggregate uncertainty.  This involves developing new algorithms
              to deal with the complexity of these models as well as analyzing some new
              important economic questions that could not have been addressed in the existing
              models that either assume a small number of different (types of) agents or no
              aggregate uncertainty.   In addition the project continues the work on the
              heteroskasticity and autocorrelation consistent (HAC) covariance matrix
              estimator, VARHAC, developed in the investigator's previous NSF grant.
