Title       : An Investigation of Cerros de Trincheras Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9708610

Award Number: 9708610
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35920              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Hard   (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Roney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              For many years archaeologists have been aware of a category of sites termed
              `cerros de trincheras.` Located in southern Arizona and northern  Sonora Mexico
              they date to sometime after 1,100 AD and are characterized by complexes of
              walls and terraces constructed on the slopes and tops of steep volcanic and
              granitic hills near major streams. Investigators have proposed that they served
              defensive, habitational, agricultural and other functions although definitive
              explanations have been difficult because very few sites have been excavated.
              The amount of effort invested in their construction strongly suggests a
              sedentary society which relied on agriculture to meet subsistence needs. Within
              the broader context of archaeology in the region, such occurrences are not
              surprising since evidence clearly indicates the presence of settled
              agriculturists at that time in neighboring areas. Recently Dr. Hard and
              colleagues have discovered three cerros de trincheras sites which, based on
              associated stone tools appear to be Archaic in age and thus significantly older
              than their well known counterparts. They have been tentatively dated to the
              time period between 1,500 BC and 200 AD. Were such the case they would be
              unique and strongly challenge conventional theories of how and when sedentism
              emerged in the region. Almost all available evidence indicates that Archaic
              peoples subsisted by hunting and gathering, lived in small groups and changed
              residence frequently.  With NSF support Dr. Hard and his colleagues will
              further evaluate these Archaic cerros de trincheras sites. They will conduct
              limited survey, map surface features and conduct controlled stratigraphic
              excavations. A primary goal is to collect in situ organic materials such as
              wood charcoal for radiocarbon dating. Understanding what plants were being
              exploited is critical to the basic evaluation of the site and its potential for
              further investigation. Through floation of soil the investigators will search
              for charred seeds and other plant parts. They will also situate their
              excavations to obtain information which will shed light on the functions of the
              terraces and enigmatic rock rings which are abundant. Aerial photographs in
              conjunction with geological fieldwork will permit reconstruction on the
              environment within which this culture functioned.  The process of sedentism,
              the domestication of plants and animals and the development of large scale
              complex society has occurred independently in many parts of the world. Given
              the similarities among regions scientists believe that this has not happened
              through historic chance but rather reflects an orderly set of underlying rules.
              Much effort has been expended in the attempt to elucidate them. The Cerros de
              Trincheras sites are, in this context, particularly interesting because they
              are so unusual and unexpected. It is often situations which break the rules
              which provide the opportunity to achieve deeper levels of understanding.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
