Title       : Maintenacne of Parent-Species Reservoirs in a Complex Hybrid Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1997  
File        : a9708074

Award Number: 9708074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Hilbish hilbish@biol.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   Hilbish       9708074              The  PIs  have  been conducting a
              detailed analysis of  a  hybrid  zone  between   two   species   of  marine 
              mussels,   Mytilus   edulis   and   M.  galloprovincialis that are sympatric in
              Europe. The PIs' have shown that  1)  strong   directional  selection  occurs 
              within  hybrid   populations   that  eliminates  Mytilus  edulis  and  M. 
              edulis-like  hybrids,  2)  directional  selection  is offset by immigration
              from pure populations of M.  edulis,  3)  the  balance  between dispersal and
              selection is presently  stable,  and  4)  hybridization has been an important
              feature in the evolutionary  history  of  these  species. These studies focus
              future research in a new direction:  the  primary  issue  in  understanding the
              dynamics of this  hybrid  zone  is  to  determine  how pure populations of M.
              edulis are maintained. The maintenance  of pure populations of Mytilus edulis
              is an essential element of the dynamic  equilibrium  between dispersal and
              directional selection that maintains  and  shapes this hybrid zone.         The
               PI  will  propose  to test the hypothesis that  M.  edulis  has  a  superior
              physiological capacity to cope with silt in its diet and that  pure 
              populations  of  this  species  are  selectively  maintained  in   estuarine 
              environments  where  silt  concentrations  are  high.  This  hypothesis  was 
              suggested  by  the  observation  that pure  populations  of  M.  edulis  are 
              associated with estuaries that have high silt loads and preliminary  results 
              from  separate studies that indicate that M. edulis may have a much  greater 
              absorption  efficiencies when exposed to diet containing high concentrations 
              of  silt.  The  PI will also propose a combination of laboratory  and  field 
              experiments  to test this hypothesis. Laboratory experiments will  test  for 
              the   proposed   physiological  differences  between  M.   edulis   and   M. 
              galloprovincialis while the field experiments are necessary  to  demonstrate 
              that these differ ences have significant consequences in nature.
