Title       : Response to Crowding and Vegetation Shade in Impatiens capensis: Genetic
               Variation and Fitness Consequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1998     
File        : a9708114

Award Number: 9708114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Johanna M. Schmitt Johanna_Schmitt@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                        9708114  Schmitt    Many plant species exhibit characteristic
              morphological responses to crowding and vegetation shade, such as stem
              elongation and reduced branching.   This "shade avoidance response" is cued by
              a reduction in the ratio of red to far-red wavelengths  (R:FR) in light
              transmitted or reflected from green vegetation; this R:FR signal is perceived
              by light-sensing molecules called phytochromes.  It has been hypothesized that
              phytochrome-mediated shade   avoidance responses are beneficial to plants by
              enabling them to anticipate and avoid competition for light in dense stands.
              Recent results from this project strongly support this hypothesis.  In a field
              experiment, stem elongation increased the reproduction of the common annual
              Impatiens capensis in dense stands, but plants induced to display the shade
              avoidance response at low density suffered reduced fitness relative to
              nonelongated plants, apparently due to an unmeasured physiological cost. The
              goals of the proposed research are to examine the genetic basis of the shade
              avoidance response and potential mechanisms for selection on the response in
              the field, and to test for physiological, ecological, and genetic costs of the
              response.     Replicated inbred lines differing in the magnitude of
              morphological response to R:FR will be planted into a natural population at
              manipulated densities and group compositions to study the level at which
              selection acts on shade avoidance traits.   Elongated and nonelongated
              seedlings will be grown under different levels of water and nutrients, to
              determine the conditions under   which shade avoidance traits may be costly.   
               This research will integrate genetic, physiological, and population biology
              approaches to the study of phytochrome-mediated shade avoidance responses in
              plants.  It will provide important insights into the role of these responses in
              natural populations.  The results will also provide an ecological and
              evolutionary context for current research by plant molecular biolog ists and
              developmental biologists on the underlying genetic basis for plant responses to
              light.   Since most crops are grown in dense stands, this study will also
              provide insight into possible selection strategies for improvement of
              agricultural yields.
