Title       : Zeolites--A Potential New Tool for Environmental Studies? Isotope and Elemental
               Studies of Zeolites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1996      
File        : a9628402

Award Number: 9628402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139905             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiahong Feng xiahong.feng@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Feng  9628402     This proposal describes a three year project that studies
              natural zeolites and their relationship to environmental change.  Since the
              exchange rate between zeolite and the environment is affected by many factors,
              our approach includes collecting samples from a number of different
              environments and using chemical and isotope tracers that respond to various
              environmental factors with different sensitivity.  These tracers are oxygen,
              hydrogen and nitrogen isotopic compositions, K/Ar dating, and major and trace
              elements.   Our initial efforts will be focused on Yucca Mountain drill core
              samples for two reasons.  First, preliminary results on oxygen isotopic
              compositions of zeolites and clay minerals and the K/Ar dates have provided
              very affirmed indication for the feasibility of the project.  Oxygen isotope
              compositions show that clinoptilolite from Yucca Mountains is out of
              equilibrium with the current temperature and fluid conditions.  The results
              also imply a possibility to determine groundwater level variations since
              zeolite formation.  The second and an obvious reason is that there has been a
              great amount of interdisciplinary research done for the site as a result of the
              site characterization efforts of the nation's first high-level nuclear wastes
              repository.   A number of other zeolite-containing units will also be sampled
              to do a comparative study.  These units will include the John Day Formation of
              Oregon, The Barstow Formation, Mud Hills and Lake Tecopa of Inyo County,
              California, and few zeolite ore deposits in Northeast China.  These sites vary
              in age, diagenetic history and hydrological environments, and can be compared
              to the Yucca Mountain site.   For each tracer, we will study mineral separates
              of zeolites and other authigenic minerals that are much less exchangeable, such
              as feldspars and clay minerals.  These less exchangeable minerals can be
              considered to have preserved the formational information, and can be used to
              derive the conditions and environments (temperat ure and chemical and isotopic
              compositions of fluid) at the time of zeolite formation.  If we assume that all
              the authigenic minerals formed at the same time and from the same fluid, the
              current compositions of zeolites may be related to the environmental changes
              occurred after their formation.  For zeolites, we will also study, if possible,
              the chemical and isotopic compositions of different size fractions.  This would
              help us understand the mechanisms (diffusion versus recrystallization) of
              exchange between zeolite and fluid, and determine whether zeolite has reached
              equilibrium with the current pore fluid and at the current temperature.  
              Experimental studies will be conducted to understand the mechanism for chemical
              and isotopic exchange between zeolites and the environmental fluid, and to
              determine the physical constants (such as diffusivity and rate constants)
              necessary for quantifying the rate of exchange from the analytical data of
              natural zeoliltes.
