Title       : RIMI: Effects of Crystal Field in Quasi Four-Level Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1999      
File        : a9628321

Award Number: 9628321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261063             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl E. Bonner cebonner@nsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George B. Loutts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Waldo J. Rodriguez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Norfolk State University
	      700 Park Avenue
	      Norfolk, VA  235043907    757/823-8600

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9628321  Bonner    The production of smaller, more energy efficient lasers
              offer the promise of a  convenient light source for many applications.  The key
              to the efficiency is an  understanding of the energy loss processes in the
              lasing media.  Many useful  lasers operate in quasi-four level mode where they
              experience large losses and  low efficiencies.  When the laser media is a
              crystal, the crystal field interacts  with the energy manifolds of the dopant. 
              The crystal field interaction can  adjust the energy manifolds of the dopant in
              the crystal by as much as 500 cm-1  and cause large splittings relative to the
              free ion.  The position and splittings  of these manifolds are critical for
              efficient laser performance.       The proposed research will investigate the
              effect of the crystal field on the  critical factors affecting the performance
              of quasi-four level solid state cross  sections which are key metrics in rare
              earth ion laser performance and the  effects on processes such as energy
              transfer, upconversion, and non-radiative  relaxation will provide full
              understanding of effect of the crystal field on  laser performance.  The degree
              crystal field splitting in the lower laser level  and the upper level manifold
              dictates the thermal population on each level and  ultimately laser
              performance.  The larger crystal field splitting, the smaller  the lower laser
              level population and higher upper laser level population.  The  decreased lower
              laser level and increased upper laser level populations and  larger absorption
              and emission cross sections will significantly improve laser  thresholds and
              slope efficiencies.  A favorable effect of these splittings on key  processes
              such as energy transfer, upconversion, inter-manifold, and intra-  manifold
              relaxation contributes to improved laser performance.       For the proposed
              three years, the specific objectives of the investigation   are to determine
              the effect of crystal field on the threshold and slope  efficiency of
              quasi-four level systems and  understanding the field effects on   the
              parameters and processes influencing laser performance.  The effect of the 
              crystal field on parameters such as absorption and emission cross sections, and
               processes such as energy transfer, upconversion and non-radiative relaxation
              will  be studied.  The fluorapatite family, specifically Ca5(PO4)3F,
              Sr5(PO4)3F, and  Ba5(PO4)3F have been chosen since they are excellent
              candidates for efficient  quasi-four level lasers due to their large crystal
              field splittings and crystal  field parameters are varied by substitution of
              the alkaline earth metal.  This  trend on the crystal field parameters from Ca
              to Ba will be utilized to study its  affect on the parameters and processes
              influencing the laser performance above  mentioned.  Tm3+ will be utilized as
              the probe since it exhibits a wealth of  processes which affects the laser
              performance in many quasi-four level systems.   Tm3+ itself is also an
              important quasi-four level laser ion.  In the proposed  investigation, a full
              understanding of the effect of crystal field parameters on  quasi-four laser
              performance will be achieved while evaluating a potentially  useful laser
              system such as Tm3+ doped fluoroapatites.     The investigative team combines
              the expertise of crystal growth of high  quality di-electric crystals,
              spectroscopy in solid state materials, ultrafast  kinetics, and rare earth ion
              laser development.  This team will grow, fabricate,  and fully evaluate the
              materials in laboratories housed on campus.  Temperature  dependent absorption
              and emission will be used to determine the crystal field  splitting, absorption
              and emission cross sections and energy branching ratios.   Time resolved
              emission and absorption will be used to examine the radiative, non-  radiative,
              and upconversion rates in the materials.  A laser test bed will be  constructed
              to evaluate the laser performance of the materials.
