Title       : Lamellar Phase Transformations in Fe-C-X Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1998  
File        : a9628936

Award Number: 9628936
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304260             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Shiflet gjs@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1771,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9628936  Shiflet    This is a fundamental examination of pearlite formation in 
              iron-carbon steels.  Pearlite is a lamellar product of  eutectoid decomposition
              and is one of the most familiar of  all metallographic structures.  It can form
              in steels and  also in a range of non-ferrous alloys during transformation 
              under isothermal, continuous cooling and forced-velocity  growth conditions. 
              The aim of this project is to extend  crystallographic concepts concerning the
              growth of pearlite  and examine the role of ternary substitutional alloying 
              elements in pearlite development.  Key questions addressed:  Is the alloying
              element atomic diffusion path at the  pearlitic cementite/austenite or
              pearlitic ferrite/austenite  interphase boundaries.  Are these boundaries
              really the  rapid diffusion paths they are perceived to be?  How does  the
              partitioning of substitutional elements affect pearlite  development? 
              Extensive thermodynamic calculations are  performed and correlated with
              experimental observations as  to element partitioning and lamellae development.
               The  primary experimental approach includes making all ternary  steel alloys
              in-house and performing heat treatments  isothermally in lead baths. 
              Examination of the structure is  by high-resolution transmission electron
              microscopy.  Chemical partitioning studies are performed in a Field  Emission
              Gun transmission electron microscope that is  capable of collecting chemical
              data from areas less than 1  nanometer in diameter.  %%%  Substitutional
              alloying elements are important in steel  production because they can greatly
              increase the  hardenability of the alloy, in part, by delaying the  pearlite
              reaction which leads to a greater ability to  produce martensite.  Also, small
              additions of elements that  are strong carbide formers, such as vanadium and
              titanium,  can lead to ultra-high strength pearlite structures in  medium
              carbon steel alloys through precipitation hardening  the ferrite lamellae with
              parallel sheets of carbides  roughly 10 nanome ters apart.  ***
