Title       : Examination of the Role of Inbreeding Depression in Maintaining Polymorphism in
               Eulimnadia texana Packard (Conchostraca, Crustacea)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9628865

Award Number: 9628865
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128758             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Weeks scweeks@UAKRON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/375-7111

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9628865  WEEKS   Evolutionary biologists seek to understand circumstances
              favoring self-fertilization as a viable form of reproduction.  Commonly,
              offspring produced through self-fertilization have reduced fitness compared to
              outcrossed counterparts.  This "inbreeding depression" is thought to be caused
              by either expression of recessive deleterious genes (partial dominance model)
              or by reduced heterozygote advantage (overdominance model).  Inbreeding
              depression should be reduced in a regularly  inbreeding population in the
              former case, whereas fitness continues to decrease with continued inbreeding as
              long as there is genetic variation in the latter scenario.  Quantification of
              the long-term effects of inbreeding in regularly self-fertilizing species is
              fundamental to distinguishing between these two models, and thus to increased
              understanding of mating system evolution.   The current proposal is designed to
              explore factors contributing to the maintenance of outcrossing in a naturally
              selfing species of shrimp.  Eulimnadia texana.  By exploiting both E. texana's
              unique breeding system and its extraordinarily short generation time (5-10
              days), the consequences of inbreeding over several generations of
              self-fertilization will be examined.  Data on several fitness components (egg
              production, age at maturity, survivorship, and growth) will be collected.  The
              fitness responses will be compared for 15 generations in four populations
              differing in their history of previous inbreeding.  These fitness data will be
              used to compare the predictions of two models for inbreeding depression, and
              thus to begin to understand the forces contributing to the maintenance of the
              observed polymorphism in natural populations.  This project should lead to a
              significant increase in our understanding of the evolution of cross
              fertilization in plants and animals.
