Title       : RIMI: Enhancing Minority Power Research in the Development of Advanced Tools for
               the Emerging Needs of Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a9628655

Award Number: 9628655
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roosevelt Y. Johnson                    
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Johnson jj@scs.howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Bofah  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Momoh  Howard University  HRD 9628655    Howard University has been involved in
              power systems research for over a decade and is now among the  top five schools
              in the United States for power research, attracting minority students (both
              undergraduate  and graduate), faculty and postdoctoral research associates from
              across the country as well as from abroad.   Recent outreach programs involving
              high school and pre-college minority students have created a strong  awareness
              and interest in electrical engineering concepts.    The Enhancement of Minority
              Power Research in the Development of Advanced Tools for Emerging needs  of
              Power Systems is designed to meet the challenges of today's power industry with
              the objective of  delivering an economic reliable power supply and enhancing
              research education for minority students an  faculty.  The following tasks
              outlined in this proposal build upon our current strengths:       (a)      
              Develop a program to build research of current interest to the US economy.     
               (b)       Develop a program to attract, retain and expose minority students
              (high school, college,                                         graduate and
              postdoctoral fellows and faculty and visiting professors.       (c)      
              Develop and maintain a first-class research center with modem state-of-the-art
              equipment.       (d) Conduct an outreach program via seminars and other
              activities for high school and pre-college      students.    The research
              component of the proposal focuses on investigating two of the top national
              needs in power  systems as identified by the Electric Power Research Institute
              (EPRI), Department of Energy (DOE) and  the National Science Foundation (NSF). 
              The two topics are in the area of generation and transmission   planning and
              distribution automation.  In the generation and transmission planning area, two
              major  priorities are identified- incorporating unit commitment and
              transmission constraints in the medium term  operations planning models or the
              production costing mod els, and combining unit commitment, optimal   power flow
              and power brokerage functions in an integrated environment for analysis of
              power scheduling  and trading.  A multi-objective optimization-based dynamic
              security-constrained rescheduling model is   proposed as a means to guard
              against potential instability against dynamic contingencies.  In the area of 
              distribution automation two key problems, automatic fault location and network
              reconfiguration. have been  selected.  The core research involves designing and
              implementing fault location algorithms using a hybrid  expert system/fuzzy
              logic approach.  The network reconfiguration modeling involves use of the
              interior-  point-based mixed-integer-programming optimization algorithms
              coupled with artificial neural network and  a rule-based system for performing
              switching operations, VAR control and load curtailment.     The Electrifcal
              Engineering department s educational curriculum ensures proper dissemination of
              our   finds through seminars, visiting scientists  program and short courses.  
               This proposal will help increase the representation of minority engineers in
              the field of power  engineering by increasing the number of minority students
              entering graduate and undergraduate  programs.  It will help develop the
              infrastructure, thereby providing graduate and undergraduate  students
              state-of-the-art equipment for conducting research.  It will assist minority
              research faculty and  staff in conducting and assisting minority students in
              high level research.  Finally, it will provide  solutions to top priority
              research needs of the power industry.
