Title       : Direct and Indirect Effects on the Trophic Dynamics of Holly Leaf Miner
               Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a9628929

Award Number: 9628929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Mopper                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard V. Cornell cornell@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9628929  Cornell  Whether top-down effects due to enemies or bottom-up effects
              due to resources control the dynamics of herbivore populations has been a
              venerable and divisive controversy in ecology.  With the realization that
              natural systems are diverse and heterogeneous the argument has become sterile,
              and the focus must shift to the relative importance of these two forces and
              what controls them in different environments.  Moreover, it has recently become
              obvious that exploring these interactions thoroughly requires differentiation
              between direct and indirect effects.  Indirect effects mean that the intensity
              and symmetry of an interaction between two species may be altered by the
              presence of a third.  For example, plant defenses might be able to reduce
              herbivore abundances but only in the presence of natural enemies because the
              primary effect of the defense is to make the herbivore more susceptible to
              attack.  In this study, the investigators are employing a multi-pronged
              approach using a combination of experiments and statistical path analysis to
              study top-down and bottom-up effects on the distribution and abundance of the
              holly leaf miner on American holly.  A combination of path analysis and
              experiments provides a new way of increasing inferential power beyond what is
              possible when either technique is used separately.  The investigators have
              measured heterogeneity of plant quality and enemy abundance for the holly leaf
              miner and its host and are now setting up factorial experiments to test their
              direct and indirect effects on miners.  This will be the first study to use
              such an integrated approach to answer fundamental questions about the structure
              and function of terrestrial food webs.  It should have special relevance to
              theories of trophic dynamics as well as to the applied areas of forest pest
              management and biological control.
