Title       : Magnetosusceptability Stratigraphy (MSS): Key to "Floating" Orbitally Forced
               Timescales, Cyclostratigraphy, and Cyclochronology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1996 
File        : a9628202

Award Number: 9628202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rex E. Crick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brooks B. Ellwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9628202  Crick   Are developing a new method for high-resolution
              cyclocorrelation and cyclochronology based on a combination of biostratigraphic
              control and quick, easily performed magnetic measurements.  We are calling the
              method magnetosusceptibility stratigraphy (MSS).  The high resolution of Mss is
              derived from high-frequency events under the control of orbital forcing cycles
              with current frequencies of the Milankovitch band (19-23, 41, 54, 100, 413 ka).
               The preliminary data used to document the proposal are from a number of
              Devonian marine sequences:  Morocco, an area chosen because it contains
              outstanding outcrop exposures, excellent biostratigraphic control, and the
              Eifelian/Givetian GSSP; Europe, two internationally recognized Devonian
              sequences in the Montagne Noire, southern France (including the
              Frasnian/Famennian GSSP); and the Frasnian-Tournaisian of southern Oklahoma. 
              The proposed work will allow use to demonstrate that (1) MSS works, (2) it can
              provide correlations at better than the best biozone resolution within basins,
              among basins, and between regions, (3) trends inherent to the MSS curves are
              evidence of transgressive/regressive or deepening/shallowing sequences, (4)
              with close sampling MSS proxies for orbital forcing cycles, and (5) once
              calibrated for the geologic time of interest, the duration of orbital forcing
              cycles identified from long and reasonably complete stratigraphic sections can
              be used to establish or construct "floating" orbital forcing timescales.  
              While the recognition that orbital cycles can be traced by the record left in
              sediments is an important contribution, even more important is the duration of
              cycles important in the creation of "floating" orbital forcing timescales. 
              These timescales, based on the recognition of the several orbital forcing
              cycles but not referenced to a curve anchored in the Holocene, will serve to
              further our understanding of the forces of evolution and sedimentation and to
              fix the duration of biostratigraphic zones within the l ess precise framework
              of radiometric time.  Such cyclochronologies must eventually lead to a coherent
              geochronology with increased resolution of at least one order of magnitude over
              that presently in use.
