Title       : Environmental and Taxonomic Control of Growth, Morphology, Taphonomy, and
               Sediment Production in Living Stalked Crinoids (Echinodermata)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1996 
File        : a9628215

Award Number: 9628215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49786              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles G. Messing   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nova Southeastern Univ
	      3301 College Avenue
	      Fort Lauderdale, FL  333147721    305/475-7300

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9628215  Messing   Stalked crinoids represent a major component of living
              assemblages and contribute substantially to modern skeletal sediments along the
              western flank of the Little Bahama Bank.  Three aspects of stalked crinoid
              biology and taphonomy are examined in order to better understand the processes
              and rates of production, and post-mortem modifications of modern crinoidal
              sediments, as follows:  1) How do growth rates among different species and
              within species vary at different depths and under different environmental
              conditions?  Growth rates are measured directly via proven methods of tagging
              and recovery that permit in situ maintenance of specimens.  2) To what extent
              do depth and environmental conditions control crinoid morphology?  Many
              features currently applied to crinoid species diagnoses and phylogenetic
              hypotheses vary ontogenetically, ecophenotypically, geographically and/or
              bathymetrically.  Clear understanding and recognition of crinoid species are
              critical to biostratigraphic analyses and paleoecological reconstruction and
              hypothesis-testing.  Application of previously successful tag-and-recovery
              experiments will permit specimens to be transplanted to different habitats and
              depths.  3) How do morphological and ecological variations among and within
              taxa affect taphonomic processes such as patterns of stalk disarticulation,
              skeletal sediment production rates, and the nature of skeletal grains
              contributed to sediments, and how can this information be applied to
              reconstruction of fossil assemblages?  A combination of anatomic and
              petrographic thin sections and scanning electron microscopy of living and
              experimentally decomposed crinoid stalks, and skeletal grains retrieved from
              sediments are used to examine ligament anatomy, the pattern of ligament decay
              and the development of cements relative to increasing stalk degradation.  The
              study organisms have a fossil record dating to the Triassic.  As such, these
              modern assemblages represent an excellent analogue for better understan ding
              paleoecological processes and interpreting ancient crinoidal deposits.  The
              aspects of crinoid ecology and taphonomy proposed for study are thoroughly
              interconnected and represent a logical extension of the successful research
              program carried out under prior NSF funding at previously established study
              sites.
