Title       : Routing Support for Wireless and Mobile Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1999  
File        : a9628126

Award Number: 9628126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315167             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Chen tchen@engr.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Weidong Chen  (Principal Investigator former)
              Eric Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Mobile hosts in a wireless network can move from one location to another  while
              maintaining continuous network connections. This project aims to  develop
              routing mechanisms for wireless networks that are scalable and are  compatible
              with wired networks. It integrates the basic IP mobility support  with
              hierarchical dynamic routing protocols, allowing efficient routing to  mobile
              hosts through secure and incremental propagation of location  information. It
              separates mobile handoff due to the air interface from  routing handoff at the
              network layer. Such separation provides flexible  tradeoffs between routing
              traffic and routing efficiency. Both mobile hosts  and mobile support routers
              are able to control location propagation as  route changes, in order to adapt
              to different requirements of applications  and network management. By involving
              the home agent of a mobile host only  in a routing handoff, it leads to a new
              mobile handoff procedure with a  shorter delay. It offers better support for
              multicast from mobile hosts by  control over location propagation and
              facilitates multicast to mobile hosts  by a notion of potential group
              membership.    The project includes the construction of a wireless network
              simulator and  the implementation of a wireless network testbed. The simulator
              allows  detailed performance studies and a deeper understanding of different 
              alternatives for routing and mobility support in local as well as wide area 
              wireless networks. The testbed offers an experimental tool for migrating 
              existing applications to wireless networks and for gaining practical 
              experiences of network communications on mobile hosts. Tools developed in  this
              project will be incorporated into appropriate undergraduate and  graduate
              courses. Transparent, flexible and efficient routing is critical  to seamless
              network access by mobile hosts as they move between networks in  vastly
              different environments. Insights gained in this project on routing  support for
              mobile hosts will also shed light on building m obility-aware  applications at
              higher levels.
