Title       : Molecular Phylogenetics of Neotropical Amaryllidaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1996    
File        : a9628787

Award Number: 9628787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101967             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan W. Meerow   (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles L. Guy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9628787  Meerow   With combined expertise in morphological and molecular studies
              of plants, Drs. Alan Meerow and Charles Guy of the University of Florida are
              investigating the phylogenetic relationships among tropical New World members
              of the large and taxonomically difficult family Amaryllidaceae. Building upon
              Meerow's field experience in the neotropics, the investigators have developed a
              network of collaborators in South America who can provide materials of
              localized species, material that will include samples for DNA sequencing to
              yield new molecular information for taxonomic comparisons. The new data from
              sequencing of nuclear ribosomal DNA will be integrated with other molecular
              results from colleagues in England, and in turn, these data will be integrated
              with morphological and anatomical characters, in collaboration with South
              African colleagues. The family Amaryllidaceae, with numerous horticulturally
              important forms like Crinum, Narcissus, and Zephyranthes, is notoriously
              difficult taxonomically, in part because the floral features used for
              classification are suspected to have evolved in parallel (hence, converged in
              similarity) in numerous separate lineages in Africa, Asia, and the Americas,
              for pollination by moths or birds. Molecular estimates of nucleotide
              substitutional differences from 75 or so exemplars of all the New World genera
              will provide data to construct a broad genealogical framework for the family,
              and morphological characters can then be used to assess fine-scale
              species-level relationships.   Phylogenetic and taxonomic analyses of the
              Amaryllidaceae will improve documentation of biodiversity patterns in the
              tropics, facilitate study of biogeographic migrations and regions of endemism,
              guide selection of stocks for horticultural improvement, and identify clusters
              of related species and genera that may share biosynthetic capabilities, in a
              family well-known for producing novel alkaloids, some poisonous to humans.
