Title       : Research Planning Grant: Lipid Restructuring in Gill Plasma Membranes: An
               Investigation of Domain-Specific Responses in Euryhaline Teleosts During
               Salinity Adaptation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9628952

Award Number: 9628952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17930              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth L. Crockett crockett@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9221,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Many estuarine or intertidal fishes are exposed to fluctuating salinities,
              while other fishes migrate between freshwater and marine sites.  These animals'
              solute balance might change drastically, but they maintain concentrations of
              their body fluids in a relatively narrow range with a suite of behavioral,
              systems-level, cellular, and biochemical adaptations to offset the passive
              fluxes of water and ions.  Because the gill is responsible for the majority of
              gas exchange, elimination of nitrogenous waste, acid-base balance, and
              osmoregulation in virtually all teleost fishes, it represents a key interface
              between animal and environment.  Relatively little attention has focused on
              chemical and physical properties of the plasma membranes of the gill that make
              up this interface.  Dr. Crockett will test the hypothesis that lipid
              compositions of apical plasma-membrane domains from the gill are significantly
              different in freshwater- and seawater-acclimated fishes.  Lipid changes are
              likely to occur in order to (1) ensure membrane integrity and permeability
              properties, (2) reduce changes in surface-charge density, (3) maintain such
              membrane physical properties as order and phase state, and (4) provide a
              micro-environment that permits sufficient activity of membrane-associated
              proteins.  During the 18-month planning period, Dr. Crockett will characterize
              restructuring of the lipid components in gill plasma-membrane domains from
              fishes during adaptation to varying environmental salinities.  This work will
              establish which lipid class(es) (phospholipids, glycolipids, cholesterol) is
              (are) involved in salinity adaptation.  Results will (1) establish a protocol
              to prepare simultaneously gill apical and basolateral domains and (2) provide
              the first look at gill plasma-membrane restructuring during salinity adaptation
              in fishes.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
