Title       : Dissertation Research: Hunting, Feasting, and Communal Ritual: Social
               Differentiation in Ancient Zuni Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9628617

Award Number: 9628617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5290               (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine A. Spielmann kate.spielmann@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Katherine Spielmann, Mr. James Potter will collect
              data for his doctoral thesis. He will analyze both faunal and ceramic remains
              from a series of archaeological sites from the Zuni region of Arizona. He will
              focus on the crucial interval from approximately 1250-1350 A.D. It was during
              this period, many archaeologists argue, that the first indications of
              differential status and political differentiation appear. To test this
              hypothesis Mr. Potter will examine large collections of faunal remains and plot
              their differential distribution across sites. He argues that status
              differentiation among individuals should be reflected in the clustering bones
              which derive from choice cuts of meat in relatively restricted areas. A
              non-clustered distribution should be indicative of an egalitarian society. Both
              archaeological and ethnographic data indicate that Southwestern Native
              Americans employed control of ritual knowledge to achieve status and this often
              involved the use of species of birds which were used for ceremonial purposes.
              In his research Mr. Potter will also examine the distribution of bird bones
              across the sites.  Because tree ring dating has allowed precise chronological
              ages to be assigned to many Southwestern U.S. sites, it is possible to examine
              social transitions at a chronological scale impossible to achieve in most other
              parts of the world. Thus archaeologists have used this area as a test case to
              study how complex socially stratified societies arise. Based on architectural
              changes, the period under examination appears to mark a critical transition
              stage and Mr. Potter's analyses will bring a new class of data to bear in this
              study.  This research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of
              interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light on the prehistory of
              the United States and will assist in the training of a promising young
              scientist.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
