Title       : Parsnip Webworms as Selective Agents on Primary Metabolites of Wild Parsnip
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9628977

Award Number: 9628977
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: May R. Berenbaum maybe@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur R. Zangerl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0511300   Nutrition                               
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9628977  Berenbaum  Although the presence of toxins in plants has long been
              associated with resistance to insects, the idea that low nutrient quality can
              similarly protect plants against their insect enemies has remained untested for
              over forty years.  The goal of this project is to measure variation in the
              nutritional quality of Pastinaca sativa, the wild parsnip, and determine
              whether the low levels of such vital insect nutrients as protein, fatty acids,
              vitamins, and sugars are associated with escape from attack by Depressaria
              pastinacella, the principal insect enemy of the plant.  This project is of
              interest not only because it can contribute to the conceptual understanding of
              plant-insect interactions, which collectively constitute the principal form of
              biological interaction on the planet, but also because it can potentially lead
              to new and environmentally compatible approaches to pest control.  Breeding
              strains of crop plants that are resistant to insect damage based on their low
              content of essential insect nutrients can lead to pest control without use of
              synthetic organic insecticides.  Nutrients that are essential requirements for
              insects but are relatively important in human diets can be specifically
              targeted for manipulation.  Many plant pests feed on only a narrow range of
              crop species; because of their extremely specialized diet, plant-feeding insect
              pests are particularly vulnerable to nutritional deficiencies in their diet in
              that missing nutrients in many cases cannot be compensated for by switching to
              other plant species.  Adoption of such a control strategy can lead to improved
              yields, reduced risks of resistance acquisition, and reduced impacts on
              nontarget species compared with conventional pesticide treatments.
