Title       : Sulfur and Oxygen Isotope Compositions of Seawater Sulfate as Recorded in Marine
               Barite
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1997      
File        : a9628479

Award Number: 9628479
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199737             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miriam Kastner mkastner@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adina Paytan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark H. Thiemens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kastner  9628479   Global changes in climate and atmospheric chemistry are
              intimately related to the sulfur and carbon sedimentary cycles.  Evidence for
              large scale transfers of S and C between the sedimentary reservoirs is provided
              by the isotope records of oceanic sulfate and carbon.  Coupling between the S
              and C reservoirs maintains a steady-state atmospheric oxygen reservoir.  Thus,
              an increase in the rate of sulfide oxidation must be compensated by an increase
              in the rate of organic C burial, resulting in an overall inverse relationship
              between marine   34Ssulfate and  34Scarbonate, as observed.   A high resolution
              marine carbonate  13C age curve exists.  The evidence that S and O isotope
              compositions of seawater sulfate have fluctuated significantly through the
              Phanerozoic, is mostly based on the comprehensive isotope data obtained from
              marine evaporite sulfates; but the geological record of marine evaporites is
              episodic, with gaps of millions of years.  Evaporites are also susceptible to
              diagenesis, their age control could be problematic, and the purely marine
              origin of some is questionable; it is therefore important to identify another
              marine phase that reliably records and maintains seawater sulfate S and O
              isotope compositions.   Marine barite is a readily available ubiquitous minor
              phase in deep-sea sediments, it is continuously deposited, its associated
              sediment ages can be determined, it is not susceptible to diagenetic alteration
              in oxic sediments, and has been shown to record reliably seawater Sr isotope
              composition; it seems to be a very suitable mineral for this study.   Thus, the
              objectives of this research are: (I) to confirm that marine barite is a
              reliable recorder of seawater sulfate S and O isotope values, (II) to construct
              detailed, continuous, well dated seawater sulfate S and O isotope records over
              the past 65 m.y., (III) to construct high resolution S and O isotope records
              during three special time intervals (1) the Messinian event, (2) the
              Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary , and (3) the distinct minimum in  34S near the
              Albian-Aptian boundary, using well dated deep-sea sediments.  The refined S and
              O isotope  curves of seawater sulfate will be related to the oceanic  13C
              record of carbonates and interpreted in terms of the processes controlling the
              dynamic balance between the oceanic S and C input and output fluxes.  The role
              of increased weathering fluxes, especially from the Himalayan uplift over the
              past -40 m.y., will also be evaluated by correlating data from this research
              with the existing 12C/12C and 87Sr/86Sr seawater data for this time interval.  
              The emphasis of the work will be on barite that will be separated from
              sediments of Holocene to 65Ma age, at about 1 to 2 million year intervals. 
              Barite samples from the Holocene to 38 Ma have previously been analyzed by us
              for their Sr-isotope composition.  For the three "special" geologic time
              intervals higher resolution sampling will be carried out at an interval of
              about 0.5 m.y.  The habit of the barite crystals that will be studied by SEM,
              and Sr- isotope composition of the separated barites will be tests for possible
              diagenesis.   Continuous records of seawater sulfate S and O isotope values, by
              analyses of marine barite, and their correlation with existing high resolution
              oceanic C and Sr isotope age curves, should help to unravel the
              climate-tectonic coupling during these three important geological events.
