Title       : Monumental Architecture in the Context of Emerging Sociopolitical Complexity at
               Chalcatzingo, Morelos, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1996       
File        : a9628804

Award Number: 9628804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Grove d-grove@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. David Grove, MS Maria Aviles will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological research at the site
              of Chalcatzingo which is located in the highland region of Central Mexico. The
              oldest part of the site dates from the Early Formative Period (1500-900 BC) and
              therefore it provides direct information on the first stages in the rise of
              complex stratified Mesoamerican society. In past research the investigators
              have noted the presence of large earthen mounds at the site and have partially
              excavated one of them. In this project MS Aviles will excavate an additional
              well preserved example together with an associated structure.  For this stage
              of the research, goals will focus on determining the size and horizontal extent
              of the features. An area will then be opened on all sides of the platforms to
              uncover associated remains of activities and related structures. Artifacts such
              as ceramics, obsidian, ground stone, faunal and other remains will be collected
              and analyzed and maps and photographs generated. Radiocarbon samples will also
              be obtained. The project has well established methods for the recording and
              analysis of materials.  On the basis of this research MS Aviles hopes to
              determine the uses to which these mounds were put and to gain insight how
              Chalcatzingo developed over time.  Archeologists wish to understand how complex
              societies develop and they focus on the several areas of the world where this
              occurred independently. Mexico is one such region. Work in many parts of the
              world has demonstrated that monumental architecture, of which the Chalcatzingo
              mounds are one example, are associated with early stages of this process. They
              clearly provide evidence of the ability to mobilise large amounts of labor for
              a sustained period. However the functions which such mounds served are often
              unclear. In some cases it is likely that important individuals inhabited houses
              constructed on the tops and in others that the mounds served ritual functions.
              Because of the well preserved nature of the Chalcatzingo mounds as well as
              their early dates, the structures are of particular interest. The site itself
              was occupied for a long and crucial period of Mexican prehistory and the
              research will also provide insight into how complexity increased over time. 
              This project is important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest
              to many archaeologists. It addresses a theoretical issue of great significance
              and will assist in training a promising young scientist.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
