Title       : Collaborative Research: An Integrated Study of the Fractionation of Natural
               Dissolved Organic Matter Upon Sorption to Mineral Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9628166

Award Number: 9628166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60124              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yu-Ping Chin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1325,1579,EGCH,
Abstract    :
               9628166   Chin     Natural organic matter (NOM) is an important   component of
              soils, streams, lakes, ground  waters, and estuarine  waters, and it plays a
              key role in such diverse environmental  phenomena as mineral growth and
              dissolution, cycling of trace metals, and the global biogeochemical C budget. 
              Perhaps most importantly, NOM plays a crucial, though complex, role in the
              transport of  organic and inorganic  pollutants through porous media.  On the
              one hand, NOM that is bound to mineral surfaces  may remove trace metals,
              nonpolar organic compounds (NOCs ) and other pollutants from the water column. 
              On the other hand, NOM that remains free or in colloidal form within the water
              column may increase the mobility of pollutants.  Hence, understanding and
              quantifying the bulk partitioning of NOM between solid and dissolved phases is
              fundamental to a wide range of pollutant transport phenomena.  Moreover,
              because NOM consists of a variety of hydrophobic and hydrophilic molecules with
              variable structure, functionality, and reactivity, we need to understand not
              only how NOM partitions but also how it fractionates upon sorption to mineral
              surfaces. For example, preferential sorption of the more hydrophobic components
              may increase the retardation of NOCs through porous media.    Numerous field
              and laboratory studies have suggested that NOM fractionates upon sorption, and
              provided clues to fractionation processes.  Nevertheless, many questions remain
              regarding the effects of NOM composition, solution characteristics, mineral
              surface properties and kinetic considerations on fractionation.  Additionally,
              little is known about the effects of mineral dissolution, metal complexation,
              and NOM coagulation on apparent fractionation.  Finally, much of our current
              understanding of fractionation is based on largely indirect evidence.  For
              example, although observed kinetic effects on fractionation have been
              attributed by some to changes in conformations of sorbed NOM molecules, this
              hypothesis has not been tes ted  directly.    To better understand NOM
              fractionation processes, we propose a 3-year interdisciplinary  research effort
              combining field sampling at a carefully chosen freshwater wetland watershed,
              McDonalds Branch basin in the New Jersey Pinelands, with newly developed
              molecular-level methodologies, to study NOM sorption and fractionation in a far
              more direct manner than previously has been possible.  NOM samples will be
              collected from surface waters, soils, and shallow and deep ground waters in
              carefully documented  recharge and discharge zones.  Fractionation on sorption
              of McDonalds  Branch and standard NOM samples will be quantified by
              characterizing solutions prior to and following  adsorption, using a
              combination of analytical techniques, including:  13C NMR and  1H  NMR; UV-Vis,
              fluorescence, and attenuated fourier transform infra-red (ATR-FTIR) 
              spectroscopies; high pressure size exclusion chromatography  (HPSEC); total
              organic carbon analysis (TOC); vapor pressure osmometry; potentiometric
              titration's; and elemental analysis.  Scanning-tunneling and atomic-force
              microscopy (STM and AFM), including the new tapping mode AFM, will be used to
              determine the structure of sorbed organic molecules, and the role of structural
              changes in sorption and fractionation.  High pressure liquid chromatogrphy
              (HPLC) and AA will be used to study oxide dissolution and NOM-metal binding
              phenomena.  Surface FTIR will assist in deterring sorption mechanisms, and how
              they influence fractionation.    We  believe that this project is fundamental
              to many areas of water quality research, and that we have chosen a true
              end-member natural laboratory watershed to conduct the field investigation. 
              The combination of state-of-the-art laboratory techniques listed above will
              allow us to tackle this problem in a far more quantitative, mechanistric manner
              than previously  has been possible.  Over the course of this research, new
              techniques of metal-complexation analysis will be refined, new methods of 
              STM/AFM imaging of  sorbed organic molecules will be furthered, and a new
              approach to integrating  laboratory and field investigations of NOM structure,
              composition, and reactivity will be fostered.      The proposed research will
              lay a strong foundation for a broad spectrum of additional research.    For
              example, the approach may be expanded to encompass sampling at a greater
              diversity of  watershed types, with different NOM characteristics.  We
              anticipate that this research will enable a wide range of future studies of how
              NOM fractionation influences the transport of hydrophobic and hydrophilic
              pollutants.  Finally, given the importance of freshwater wetlands, and the
              rapidity with which they are disappearing  from our landscape, we feel that
              investigations involving NOM evolution  in wetlands are crucial to further our
              understanding of such complex but fragile ecosystems.
