Title       : Adaptive Receivers for Uncertain, Time-Varying Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1996    
File        : a9628236

Award Number: 9628236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186542             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don H. Johnson dhj@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                In this research the goal is to develop a nonparametric adaptive 
              communications receiver strategy by exploiting results from the theory of 
              universal classification and data compression. Analysis based upon the 
              "typicality" of the data has become one of the primary theoretical and 
              practical concepts in modern information theory. The so-called "Type" 
              (appropriate histogram estimators of the amplitude distribution) have not  only
              been shown to be sufficient statistics for both classification and 
              compression, but have also been shown to converge exponentially fast to the 
              true underlying distribution. Because type-based detectors make no a priori 
              assumptions about the channel characteristics and measure the quantities 
              needed to provide asymptotically optimal reception, these detectors can 
              theoretically achieve the same exponential error rate as the clairvoyant 
              receiver that knows the channel characteristics perfectly and uses them 
              optimally. Measurements made during succeeding transmissions, possibly  using
              the data transmissions themselves in a decision feedback paradigm,  can be used
              to track channel variations. The approach will be extended to  deal with
              intersample dependencies and colored noise by using channel  measurements in an
              optimally effective way. Two techniques drawn from data  compression work,
              context trees and Lempel-Ziv (universal) coding, will be  examined to determine
              which represents channel-induced dependencies most  efficiently and which is
              most adaptable. By merging systems based on these  two theories, a receiver
              that adapts to unknown, time-varying channels will  be developed. It will be
              demonstrated that this receiver can be used in  multiuser channels, both
              wireless and optical fiber, with little  modification. The research will
              develop the theoretical underpinnings of  this adaptive receiver strategy, and
              will develop a complete software  implementation of the receiver, using as test
              data actual communication  channel recordings.  This work will be performed  by
              a close collaboration  of researchers from Rice University and George Mason
              University.
