Title       : RIMI: A Computational Biology Facility for Molecular Sequence and 3-D Image
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9628514

Award Number: 9628514
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134863             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Jaffe dbj@harlan.ls.utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ming-Ying Leung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Aaron Cassill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 9131      CENTERS FOR RSCH EXCELL IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     HRD     9628730   New Mexico State University   -- Bernard  J.  McNamara 
                The proposed research will (1) investigate the long term behavior and
              energetics of the low mass X-  ray binary (LMXB) Sco X-1  (2) recruit highly
              qualified minority undergraduates into the space  sciences (3) involve minority
              undergraduate science and engineering  students in two NASA  programs and (4)
              recruit two undergraduate minority students into the astronomy program at NMSU
              .  The project will use X-ray data obtained  by the Compton Gamma- Ray
              Observatory and the X-ray  Timing Explorer as well as optical data obtained at
              Cerro Tololo InterAmerican Observatory  and  New Mexico State University. The
              primary research goal is to obtain a multi-year record of  the high  energy
              flux and x-ray color of the LMXB Sco X-1 to search for expected long term
              emission  variations from this system. The high energy data sets will also be
              combined with optical data to  better understand this system s energetics.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    Abstract                                                 HRD -9628568    
                                                          University of Texas at El Paso
              ---E.Walsh                                                    This RIMI 
              project will attempt to  provide a  cladistic phylogeny of the major planktonic
              families  using  a molecular approach. The goals of the proposed research are
              to (1) isolate, amplify and  sequence  nuclear ribosomal  DNA from
              representatives of 13 families of the monogonont rotifers,  (2)  determine the
              sister group  of the monogononts by obtaining comparable data from four 
              bdelloids and a seisonid, (3) construct cladograms and develop phylogenetic
              hypotheses  using  molecular characters (4) compare these results with tree
              topologies derived from morphological  characters and (5) evaluate the
              placement of the Rotifera within the ex isting  metazoan phylogenies  based on
              18S rDNA sequences. The phylogenetic hypotheses generated by the proposed
              research can  be used to further  resolve relationships among rortifers. They
              will constitute a basis from which to  incorporate a historical component into
              understanding questions of broader evolutionary significance.  In addition, the
              relationships among rotifers and other  pseudo coelomate taxa will be explored.
                                                                                             
                                                                         ABSTRACT            
                                                              HRD-   9628726                 
                                                         City College of  C.U.N.Y. ----Moore 
                                                                               The long term
              objective of this laboratory research project is to determine mechanisms cells
              use to  maintain normal DNA function. Mutants will be studied to help determine
              these requirements. The  RIMI project will focus on the characterizations
              mutants isolated in the laboratory  on the basis of   their hypersensitivities
              to killing by ionizing radiation, H2O2 , and a radiomimetic  family of 
              chemical congeners. This approach will  acquire knowledge from interrelated
              studies at the cellular  and molecular levels, using genetic characterizations,
              molecular biology and biochemistry, DNA  sequence analyses, methodologies for
              studying DNA damage and repair / transmission  and scanning  electron
              microscopy. Cloning and characterizing the blm mutants will enable their
              relationship to  already characterized genes to be determined  and seems likely
              to add new knowledge of general  importance to fields of DNA repair ,
              metabolism and genetics. A variety of research training  experiences will be
              provided for students at all levels of education including postdoctoral,
              graduate,  undergraduate, and high school.                                     
                                                                                             
                          ABSTRACT                                                          
              HRD---9628640                                                           Meharry
              Medical College---S.Williams      This RIMI project will support the
              establishment of  a core facility in computational molecular  biology
              consisting of state of the art equipment and software ( GCG Package and
              Molecular  Simulations Protein Modeling Programs ), and provide training in
              their use. This facility will be  available to all Meharry researchers.
              Specific research projects critically dependent on nucleic acid  and protein
              analyses to be directly supported by  this initiative are (1) identification of
              motifs that  contribute to structure and function of hetero chromatin; (2)
              analysis of primary structure and folding  patterns of RNA and its effects on
              viral recombination and replication; and (3) analysis of structural  effects of
              site- directed mutations on flavin-containing monooxygenase.                   
                                                                                             
                                                       ABSTRACT                              
                                         HRD---9628388                                       
                                Howard University ---M. McKenna        Support is sought for
              the acquisition and installation of controlled environment growth chambers in 
              the biology department greenhouse. The addition of these chambers will
              significantly increase  research capabilities in plant science, aid in
              recruitment of talented undergraduates , graduate students  and new faculty,
              and provide a facility that can support precollege outreach programs designed 
              to  increase the entry of minority students in science careers. The
              installation of controlled environment  chambers will extend and enhance
              ongoing research in the areas of plant anatomy and development, 
              phytoremediation, plant ecophysiology, plant ecology , plant systematics,
              mycology, plant molecular  biology and genetics . The facility will allow the
              institution to maintain experimental plant populations  over long periods,
              maintain clones or plant families for genetic experiments , grow source
              material  for cellular and molecular experiments including tissue culture, DNA
              analysis, and phytoremediation,  maintain plants for systematic study , and
              design experiments under controlled environmental  conditions to study
              cellular, physiological or ecological processes.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                             ABSTRACT        
                                                    HRD  ----9628514                         
                                   University of Texas at San Antonio----D.Jaffe      The
              primary goal of this RIMI project is to expand the research capabilities of 
              researchers at UTSA   with a state of the art computer  facility  that will
              satisfy specific needs in molecular sequence  analysis and three dimensional
              image processing. Studies that utilize molecular biological methods  regularly
              produce data that need to be analyzed by comparison against large databases of
              existing  sequences for similarities. pattern searching algorithms are used to
              unveil nonrandom sequence  features that may be of  biological relevance. Two
              computer workstations will be used to carry out  molecular sequence analysis
              using the Intelligenetics Suite, a comprehensive molecular biology  software
              package providing access to sequence databases worldwide and a broad spectrum
              of  sequence analysis tools. The second half of the Computational  Biology
              Facility will  focus on  cellular anatomy and physiology. Characterization of 
              cellular morphology is critical, for  understanding physiological function. 
              Confocal microscopy permits the examination of cellular  morphology in three
              dimensions. In addition
