Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellows/Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and
               Engineers (PFF/PECASE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a9628992

Award Number: 9628992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Gluck   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1076,1187,9178,9296,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support to Dr. Mark Gluck under the National Science
              Foundation's Presidential Early Career Awards for Scientists and Engineers
              Program (PECASE) formerly called the Presidential Faculty Fellows (PFF)
              Program.  These programs were established at the request of the President of
              the United States to recognize and support the scholarly activities of some of
              the Nation's most outstanding science and engineering faculty members early in
              their careers.  Awards are intended to allow the scientists to undertake
              self-designed, innovative research and teaching projects, to establish research
              and education programs, and to pursue other academic related activities.  This
              award will allow the investigator to pursue his research interests in the area
              of cognitive neuroscience of human learning, using computational models of
              neural networks to relate brain mechanisms to emergent behaviors.  The unifying
              theme of his research is to better understand the fundamental mechanisms and
              principles of learning and memory from behavioral, biological and computational
              points of view.  During the five year grant, he will (1) study computational
              models of the psychobiology of learning, relating postulated brain mechanisms
              to emergent behaviors by studying how behavior is altered after functional
              mechanisms are disrupted, simulating specific kinds of brain damage; (2) study
              cognitive neuroscience, testing the predictions of the computational models by
              studying the learning capabilities of hippocampal-damaged amnesic patients, and
              relating their behavior to similar deficits seen in hippocampal-lesioned
              animals; (3) study how these memorial processes can lead to novel solutions to
              engineering problems and the design of artificially-intelligent learning
              machines.  In the area of teaching and education, Dr. Gluck is (1) creating new
              interdisciplinary undergraduate and graduate courses; (2) creating research
              internships for undergraduates, especially minority students; and (3)
              developing a multi-campus program in Neural Computation which will provide
              research training and courses in computational methods for students in
              Psychology, Neuroscience, Biology, Biomedical Engineering, and Cognitive
              Science.   Dr. Gluck is making major contributions to the understanding of
              fundamental processes of learning and memory, deriving testable quantitative
              and computational descriptions of these processes.  His contributions, which
              have already been recognized in each of the fields (psychology, cognitive
              neuroscience, psychobiology, systems neuroscience, and computer science) which
              encompass his chosen field of research, will continue over the duration of this
              award.  Also, the award will provide an opportunity for him to continue his
              innovative programs for undergraduate and graduate students interested in the
              behavioral and neural sciences.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
