Title       : Fluorinated Closo-Heteroborane Anions and Nonclassical Metal Carbonyls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9628769

Award Number: 9628769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven H. Strauss strauss@mail.chm.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Steven H. Strauss, Department of Chemistry, Colorado State   University, is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and   Organometallic Program of the
              Chemistry Division for research into the   use of fluorinated
              closo-heteroborane anions as weakly coordinating   anions (WCAs) and for
              investigations into nonclassical metal  carbonyls.   Fluorinated
              closo-heteroborane anions will be developed as a new set of   WCAs that are
              stable under a wide variety of conditions, including high   temperatures and in
              aqueous acid and base solutions. These anions will be   relatively inexpensive
              and easy to prepare and will be applied to a   variety of problems involving
              structure and bonding, materials science,   and catalysis. The WCAs will be
              used as counterions with cationic metal   carbonyls that possess little or no
              metal-ligand pi backbonding. The   structure, bonding, and chemical reactivity
              of these complexes will be   studied and applications, including Diels-Alder
              and Michael addition   catalysis and lithium ion conductivity in polymer
              blends, will be   developed.  Many important laboratory and industrial
              processes are facilitated by   metal catalysts. This research centers about a
              class of compounds in   which a positively charged metal containing fragment
              (called a cation) is   counterbalanced by a large negatively charged species
              that does not   interact strongly with the metal (These are termed weakly
              coordinating   anions or WCAs.). Since cationic metal-WCA complexes are known
              to be good   catalysts for a variety of reactions, the new WCAs, to be studied
              in this   project, are important because they will be inexpensive and stable
              under   the harsh conditions encountered in real world application. Some of the
                important industrial processes in which these compounds may be used   include
              gas purification, water gas shift catalysis, and methanol   synthesis
              catalysis. A particular application that will be studied is the  
              Cu(I)-catalyzed carbonylation of organic compounds in homogeneous   solution.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
