Title       : Phylogenetic Studies in Neotropical Vaccinieae (Ericaceae): The Systematics of
               Macleania, Psammisia, Mycerinus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1996     
File        : a9628841

Award Number: 9628841
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200019             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Luteyn jluteyn@nybg.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen A. Kron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9628841  Luteyn   A promising partnership between morphological and molecular
              specialists on the heath family, Ericaceae, is directed toward study of several
              genera of tropical montane "blueberries" in Central and South America. Dr.
              James Luteyn of New York Botanical Garden is experienced in field collecting
              and in taxonomic revisionary work, with a major interest in New World ericads;
              Dr. Kathleen Kron of Wake Forest University is a specialist in molecular
              phylogenetic analyses of plants, with interests in New and Old World
              rhododendrons and other ericads. Combined morphological and molecular (DNA)
              analyses will focus on the genera Macleania, Psammisia, and Mycerinus and their
              putative relatives in the Vaccinieae or blueberry group of Ericaceae, making
              use of newly collected  field materials and preserved herbarium specimens. The
              taxonomic revisionary work will produce full descriptions of all recognized
              species, identification keys, a nomenclator with updated scientific names,
              habitat notes, and full inventory of the geographic distribution of all the
              species. DNA sequencing will be done for both chloroplast genes and the nuclear
              ribosomal region, where nucleotide differences (mutational substitutions) are
              likely to prove phylogenetically informative between species and genera. The
              combined morphology and DNA data sets can be analyzed to construct a
              phylogenetic tree of these ericad taxa. From such a taxon genealogy, one can
              study character evolution (in floral form, for example, and fruit type) and
              infer migrational histories for the species.   The Ericaceae are species-rich
              in the Andean regions of the neotropics, and often highly localized or endemic
              in their distribution. Increasing habitat destruction adds urgency to the study
              of these and other plants. The union of morphological and molecular approaches
              is an encouraging response to the need for modern biodiversity studies of
              tropical plants. Results of the taxonomic and phylogenetic investigations will
              prove useful in ecology and evolut ion and for germplasm research and
              conservation.
