Title       : Collaborative Research: Interbasinal Applications of Newly- Resolved Middle to
               Late Cambrian Sr Isotope Stratigraphy: North American Cordilleran Margin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1997      
File        : a9628382

Award Number: 9628382
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53232              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Osleger   (Principal Investigator current)
              Isabel P. Montanez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9628382  Osleger   The proposed research has one primary objective:  to carry
              out a coordinated sequence stratigraphic and Sr isotope study of Middle to
              lower Upper Cambrian Carbonates exposed in the southern Canadian Rocky
              Mountains.  This project is a natural extension of related work on coeval
              strata in the southern Great Basin that integrated a genetic model of
              deposition with Sr isotope stratigraphy.  The Great Basin research has resulted
              in 1) considerable refinement of a portion of the most poorly-defined interval
              of the Phanerozoic Sr isotope seawater curve, 2) evidence that the highest
              seawater 87Sr/86Sr values over the past 2 b.y. likely occurred in latest Middle
              to earliest Late Cambrian oceans, 3) potential for enhanced chronostratigraphic
              resolution in this time interval, 4) suggestion of a mechanistic link between
              eustasy and seawater 87Sr/86Sr during greenhouse times, and 5) potential for
              placing constraints on the timing and magnitude of Cambrian orogenic events. 
              The ultimate goal of the research laid out in this proposal is to perform an
              interbasinal test to evaluate the possible connection between eustasy and
              seawater 87Sr/86Sr during greenhouse times.  This collaborative proposal is
              being submitted in conjunction with a parallel proposal to the VPW Program at
              NSF that lays out plans for completing and extending the temporal range of the
              research in the Great Basin.   The methods that will be used to carry out the
              proposed work involved two phases.  First, three sections with the most
              complete exposure and highest degree of biostratigraphic control will be
              measured in the southern Canadian Rockies, focusing on the Mt. Whyte through
              lower Lyell Formations.  Data from the three sections will be interpreted using
              the fundamental premises of sequence stratigraphy, with the resulting genetic
              model used to construct an accommodation history.  After all available
              biostratigraphic information is integrated into the genetic stratigraphy,
              correlations with the coeval Bonanza King Format ion will be attempted to
              assess the degree of synchroneity between accommodation events.  Of the three
              measured sections, the one section with the highest petrographic and
              geochemical analysis of collected samples.  All samples will be examined by
              plane-light, cathodoluminescence, and epifluorscence for evidence of
              recrystallization, preservation of microfabrics and microstructures,
              luminescence characteristics, and presence of noncarbonate inclusions which
              could contribute radiogenic 87Sr during sample dissolution.  Samples that meet
              petrographic criteria will be analyzed for geochemical indicators to assess
              their state of diagenetic modification as an additional prerequisite to
              selection of least-altered components for Sr isotope analysis.  Finally,
              samples will be run through pretreatment techniques that have been refined as a
              result of previous testing on samples from the southern Great Basin.   The
              ultimate goal of the proposed interbasinal project is to evaluate a new model
              that suggests a mechanistic link between eustasy and seawater 87Sr/86Sr during
              greenhouse times.  Earlier work in the southern Great Basin suggests a
              correlation between the Sr isotope stratigraphy and long-term transgressions
              and regressions that affect the amount of continental surface area available
              for weathering.  This model, as well as the secular seawater isotope curve,
              need to be tested in a completely different basin to assess their scientific
              validity.  If the results from the southern Canadian Rocky Mountains confirm
              the temporal seawater 87Sr/86Sr trend and the connection between eustasy and
              seawater 87Sr/86Sr, then an entirely new level of resolution in the Sr isotope
              curve for Paleozoic time will have been attained.  This may spur further
              research into searching for trends in the Paleozoicseawater 87Sr/86Sr curve at
              the 106 year scale that may be related to eustatic variation.  On a broader
              scale, the 87Sr/86Sr data from this integrated study will contribute critical
              information regarding the widespread Ca mbrian orogenesis associated with the
              assembly of Gondwana, Cambrian biotic radiations and extinctions, and perhaps
              about the extensive development of Cambrian passive margin depositional
              sequences.
