Title       : RIMI: Intelligent Fault Diagnostic Tools for Advanced Predictive and Preventive
               Maintenance of Manufacturing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1997   
File        : a9628685

Award Number: 9628685
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149958             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amir H. Shirkhodaie DROGERS@HARPO.TNSTATE.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammad Bodruzzaman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee State University
	      3500 John A. Merritt Blvd.
	      Nashville, TN  372091500    615/320-3131

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              HRD - 9628685  Shirkhodaie  Tennessee State University    The College of
              Engineering and Technology at Tennessee State  University proposes an
              instructional research activity to develop  intelligent fault diagnostic tools
              for advanced predictive and  preventative maintenance of manufacturing systems.
               The significant  impact of this dual purpose project is four fold.  First, it
              will  support the college's effort to implement a maintenance engineering 
              program at the graduate level.  Secondly, it will strengthen the  College's
              research capability to undertake maintenance projects of  mutual interest to
              industry, Federal Government and funding  research organizations.  Finally, it
              will expand the College's  research capabilities in one of its major core
              competencies, that  of intelligent health monitoring of structures, and 
              mechanical/thermal fluid systems.  For this purpose, a 30-month,  four phase
              project is proposed to develop and test intelligent  fault diagnostic tools for
              advanced predictive and preventative  maintenance of manufacturing systems. 
              The research goal of the  proposed project is to develop advanced predictive
              maintenance  tools which can detect a potential maintenance problem (i.e., dry 
              bearing) 25 to 50 percent sooner than traditional diagnostic  techniques.  In
              addition to detecting a potential problem, the  proposed tools will identify
              the source of the potential problem  and propose a corrective measure(s). 
              Phase 1 research will focus  on development of neural network based fault
              detection tools for  pump-motor sets found in manufacturing systems.  Phase 2
              research  objective is to add intelligent diagnostic capabilities to the 
              neural network based fault detection tools.  Artificial  intelligence and fuzzy
              logic will be incorporated to make the tool  intelligent with the capability to
              identify the source of a  potential problem and recommend a corrective
              action(s).  Phase 3  research will focus on testing the developed tools in a
              simulated,  real world, manufacturing en vironment.  This proof-of-concept 
              testing will compare fault detection and identification rates using 
              conventional techniques to that of intelligent fault diagnostic  tools.  Phase
              4 involves the concurrent modernization of the  College's Vibration Laboratory.
               It is in this laboratory that the  advanced predictive tools will be tested. 
              The proposed four phase  research project will be completed over a 30-month
              period at a cost  $150,000.00.  At the completion of the proposed instructional
               research project the College of Engineering and Technology will  have in place
              a maintenance engineering program at the graduate  level, with predictive and
              preventative maintenance as a core  instructional focus, in addition to proven
              analytical techniques  for developing intelligent diagnostic tools with a
              Vibration  Laboratory for testing the developed tools.
