Title       : RUI: Inflation Cycles of the Resurgent Dome, Long Valley Caldera, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9628115

Award Number: 9628115
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68155              (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Reid jbrNS@hampshire.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampshire College
	      West Street
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/549-4600

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9196,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Reid  9628155   Since 1979, the resurgent dome of Long Valley caldera,
              California has risen more than 50 cm apparently due to the injection of 0.2 km3
              of magma at depth.  Floodplain geomorphology suggests that the Owens River,
              that circumvents the dome, oscillates between two parallel meander belts
              depending on whether the dome is inflated or deflated, and that the current
              uplift is part of a long term inflation that may total 15-35 meters.  The
              central goal of the renewal proposal is to understand the inflation history of
              Long Valley and the nearby Inyo Crater eruptions over the past several
              millenia.  The hope is that patterns between eruptions and Owens River
              avulsions in the past will clarify the potential for future eruptive activity. 
              Efforts with NSF-RUI 91-17474 funding to determine a chronology for these
              oscillations have revealed three major findings:     (1) In dating plant
              remains in abandoned channel system, with live aquatic plant "ages" as high as
              13.3 kyr. Cation geochemistry and   13C in plants and waters suggest
              predominantly magmatic sources for the "dead" CO2 feeding these plants.  Tree
              kills at Mammoth Mountain also manifest this CO2 release (Farrar et al, 1995)  
               (2) Inyo Crater pumice fills an abandoned channel of the Owens River and
              contains charcoal apparently derived from trees charred during the pumice
              eruptions.  This suggests a connection between Owens River avulsions and
              eruptions in the Inyo Craters.  The chemical and petrographic stratigraphy of
              these pumices and the proposed AMS dates on their charcoals will allow the
              timing of past eruptions and avulsions to be determined, and estimates to be
              made of where the caldera stands today in terms of potential for similar
              activity in the future.    (3) The topography of deformed shorelines of
              Pleistocene Long Valley Lake has been measured.  The shorelines have recorded
              caldera floor deformation over longer time periods than the river channels; the
              data suggest that relatively little net uplift of the dome has occurred  over
              the life of the lake.   The proposed research seeks to complete the work that
              has been begun and includes:  (1) synoptic14C, pH, alkalinity, dissolved ion
              determinations and discharge measurements with finer resolution at sites of
              major springs to quantify the "dead" CO2 emanations entering the streams, (2a)
              AMS 14C age determinations on charcoal in the pumice to time earlier river
              avulsions and associated pumice eruptions, (2b) XRF analyses of a large suite
              of pumicies to fingerprint them as to their site of origin, and (3) completion
              of the topographic surveying of the lake shores and dating of tufa cements in
              them by U-series dating to better understand the longer history of the dome. 
              The results of this study offer valuable information about the recent tectonic
              history of Long Valley caldera, and perhaps give an indication of the caldera's
              potential behavior in the near future.  They are thus of central concern to
              residents of Mammoth Lakes, CA.  The study offers undergraduate students an
              excellent opportunity to investigate in the field and in the laboratory an
              important example of silicic volcanism.
