Title       : Multiuser Transmitter Optimization for Mobile Cellular Communications With
               Coordinating Base Stations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9628365

Award Number: 9628365
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348544             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Honig mh@ece.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                A class of multi-user transmitter optimization problems is treated in the 
              context of mobile cellular communications. THe objective is to optimize 
              transmitter pulse shapes given a variety of assumptions concerning the  channel
              model, receivers, and signaling constraints. Solutions to these  problems
              reveal optimal multiple-access strategies, given particular sets  of modeling
              assumptions. The work may also lead to adaptive algorithms for  multi-user
              transmitter optimization which enable a significant increase in  system
              capacity.  Both linear time-invariant and statistical (i.e.,  Rayleigh fading)
              channel models will be considered. Models for an isolated  cell (the
              multiple-access channel), an isolated pair of cells, and a linear  array of
              cells are presented. In the latter two cases, neighboring base  stations may
              share information (i.e., received or transmitted signals for  the reverse or
              forward link, respectively).  The multi-cell channel models  can capture
              different combinations of intra- and inter-cell multiple-access  schemes.
              Antenna diversity at the transmitter and/or receiver will also be  included. 
              Receivers include the (single-user) matched-filter, and  multi-user linear and
              decision-feedback detectors. In most cases the  transmitters and detectors will
              be optimized according to a zero-forcing or  Mean Squared Error criterion.  For
              statistical channel models, the  objective is to optimize performance averaged
              over the channel parameters.  Multi-user transmitter optimization assuming
              multi carrier signaling will  also be considered. In this case the objective is
              to maximize the size of  the rate region by allocating transmitted bits and
              power to subchannels  (independently for each user), subject to performance
              constraints. Finally,  transmitter adaptation in the presence of time-varying
              channels and  interference, and associated performance issues are studied.
