Title       : Rates of Glacial Erosion in Southern Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1999      
File        : a9628675

Award Number: 9628675
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388228             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Hallet hallet@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hallet  9628675   The research bears on an outstanding issue of broad scientific
              interest:  the rate of glacial erosion in a tectonically active area, and its
              implications for the development of mountain ranges as dictated by the
              interplay of tectonics, climate, and erosion.  The Bering Glacier section of
              the proposed study also promises to yield valuable new information on rapid
              glacial over-riding of sediments and its implication regarding the dynamics of
              glaciers and the stability of calving glaciers.  Objectives are:    to
              determine current erosion rates in the extensive (>5000 km2) and tectonically
              active region drained by Bering Glacier, including the Mt. St. Elias area with
              unsurpassed relief from sea level, by monitoring sediment accumulation in the
              proglacial Vitus Lake complex.   to examine considerable new data recently
              obtained by ACCRETE researchers in the fjords and inland passages of SE Alaska.
               These data promise to yield valuable information about Quaternary and Holocene
              sediment yields over a broad, heavily glacierized area that can be compared to
              longer term regional exhumation rates known to be high.   to compile readily
              available data from other SE Alaska glaciers to improve the definition and
              understanding of factors controlling regional rates of glacial erosion and
              sediment transfer to fjords.  to develop a quantitative framework for exploring
              the topographic and geodynamic implications of rapid glacial erosion and
              sediment transfer through a continuum mechanical model of crustal convergence
              coupled with a simple abstraction of erosion and sediment transfer by glaciers.
                The multifaceted research is deemed feasible, within the five-year proposed
              duration of the project:  it is a group effort involving four established
              researchers and is founded on considerable data already available.  It involves
              Lew Hunter of the U.S. Army Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory,
              and independently funded USGS researchers, Bruce Molnia and Paul Carslon, as
              well as principal inves tigator Bernard Hallet and research assistant Yann
              Merrand (both at the University of Washington).  All members will participate
              in field work.  The collective expertise of our team is ideally suited for the
              proposed work; it emanates from considerable field experience in fjords and
              coastal waters and on glaciers in Alaska, and from quantitative studies of
              glacial erosion and calving-margin processes, process geomorphology and
              geodynamics.   We stress that the NSF resources requested herein will strongly
              leveraged by the collaboration with the USGS and CRREL.  Salaries for Molnia
              and Carlson, and for an electronics technician to support the seismic work, are
              covered by the USGS.  Other USGS contributions include access to past
              photographic, seismic, and other records; a well equipped base camp; and
              assistance from volunteers, including undergraduate students, sponsored by the
              Merit Corp.  Limited salary for Hunter permits us not only to draw on his
              expertise and to include him as an active member of our research team, but also
              enables us to tap additional expertise at CRREL including Daniel Lawson, to use
              CRREL editorial, graphics/photography facilities, and to borrow some field
              equipment.
