Title       : Collaboraive Research: Biosynthesis of Dimethylsulfoniopropionate and its
               Precursor in Relation to Sulfur Emission from Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9628750

Award Number: 9628750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas A. Gage gage@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The two major dimethylsulfonium compounds known in higher plants and marine
              algae are S-methylmethionine (SMM) and 3-dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP). 
              SMM is widely distributed in higher plants and algae, typically at moderate
              levels; it is not clear whether SMM has any physiological function.  DMSP
              occurs only in certain higher plants and marine algae, but can reach very high
              levels, particularly in conditions of high salinity and low nitrogen.  DMSP is
              a sulfur analog of a betaine and like betaines, functions as an osmoprotectant.
               Both SMM and DMSP are known to be precursors of dimethylsulfide (DMS) gas,
              which is the predominant biological source of atmospheric sulfur.  SMM is
              probably the principal precursor of terrestial DMS emission, whereas DMSP is
              the main DMS precursor in the oceans and coastal environments.  Both compounds
              are therefore central to biogenic sulfur emission.  Despite the pivotal roles
              of SMM and DMSP in the natural sulfur cycle, until recently little was known
              about their hiosynthesis except that both are derived from methionine.  The
              overall aims of this research are to elucidate the steps in DMSP biosynthesis
              in marine algae as well as in higher plants, to understand the enzymes that
              produce and cleave SMM and how these are kept apart, and to seek the enzymes
              that convert SMM to DMSP.  The results would provide biochemical insight into
              the origin of the world's most abundant biogenic sources of atmospheric sulfur.
               This is a collaborative project with Dr. Hanson's laboratory at the University
              of Florida.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
