Title       : Toward a Molecular Understanding of Quantum Chemical Dynamics in Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1998  
File        : a9628523

Award Number: 9628523
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Barbara   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Paul Barbara is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his theoretical and   experimental research
              directed at understanding quantum chemical dynamics   in solution. Using
              femtosecond pump-probe optical spectroscopy as an   experimental tool Barbara
              will study: 1) electronically nonadiabatic   transitions in symmetric and
              asymmetric metal-metal intervalence   compounds; 2) electronically nonadiabatic
              transitions in the one and two   photon ionization of aqueous iodide solution
              and the two photon   ionization of water; 3) vibrationally nonadiabatic
              transitions in the   photodissociation, recombination, and the vibrational
              relaxation of small   strongly solvated radicals with high frequency
              vibrations; and 4) the   putative long-range coherent electron transfer between
                metallointercalators in DNA.  Theoretical studies are also proposed of  
              current quantum theoretical models for electron transfer and vibrational  
              relaxation.  Since many commercially important chemical reactions take place in
              polar   solvents such as water, it is important to understand the influence
              which   such solvents have on the reaction dynamics.  A number of effects, such
                as solvent cage effects,  vibrational relaxation and quantum mechanical  
              tunneling, which     are not present in the gas phase completely dominate  
              condensed phase chemical reactions.  It is important to develop reliable  
              theories for model chemical systems which can then be applied to   improving
              the efficiency of commercially important chemical reactions.    The work which
              is being performed by Barbara provides an important   experimental basis for
              the development of such theories.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
