Title       : Study of Feedback Congestion Control Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1996  
File        : a9628058

Award Number: 9628058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196521             (Estimated)
Investigator: Giampiero Pecelli giam@cs.uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Byung G. Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 2891,9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  Feedback-based congestion control schemes become an integral part of the 
              connectionless ABR (Available Bit Rate) service class in ATM networks. The 
              major objective of the proposed research is to build a theoretical  foundation
              to feedback congestion control schemes. The basis of the  foundation is the
              fixed-point model, which captures the feed-back feature  of ABR congestion
              control schemes in a system of delay differential  equations and produce
              fixed-point constant solutions in terms of the source  cell rates and the
              buffer lengths. lamely, we consider a broad class of  schemes which can produce
              a stable buffer length even when sources always  try to transmit at their
              maximum rates.    Analyses of the fixed point model in the context of ABR
              feedback control  schemes have generated a number of results regarding
              stabilities of  fixed-point solutions. The proposed research will first compare
              the  stability region of parameter space derived from the delay differential 
              equations with that obtained by discrete simulation techniques. We are 
              interested in effects of incorporating details of control protocols in 
              simulation on resulting changes in the stability region. Besides, the fixed 
              point model will be investigated in the environments where ABR bandwidth 
              changes in time as the number of CBR and VBR connections changes. Since the 
              fixed-point model is constructed in a general context, application of the 
              model to several control theoretic strategies (such as a proportional plus 
              derivative control) will be investigated.    When a congestion develops (either
              due to a new active ABR source or due to  a reduced ABR bandwidth), buffer
              lengths increase before they stabilize to  a new steady-state buffer length.
              Since buffer transients are inevitable,  we will investigate strategies that
              can control the buffer transients in a  predictable manner. We will first
              characterize transients in terms of  bounds: the maximum overshoot in buffer
              lengths, the rise time until the  buffer length reaches its  maximum, and the
              settling time for the buffer  length to reach its new steady-state value.
              According to the fixed-point  model, relationships between the set of
              parameters and the transient bounds  will be investigated. The relationships
              are to be studied in increasingly  complex network configurations.
