Title       : Taphonomic Tiering: Preservational Constraints on Micro- and Macrofauna
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9628221

Award Number: 9628221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally Walker   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan T. Goldstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Walker  9628221   Preservation and destruction of marine carbonate systems
              (e.g., hardgrounds, shells, reefs, foraminiferan tests) has figured prominently
              in the paleontological and sedimentological literature from the preservation of
              shelly hardparts thorough time to destruction by various physical and
              biological processes.  This area of research , carbonate production and
              destruction, is gaining more momentum in ecological and environmental fields,
              and in conjunction with paleontologists, will provide information on global
              carbon budgets both in modern environments and for the past.  A review of the
              pertinent literature in experimental field taphonomy from benthic marine
              systems focusing on two important carbonate producers (mollusca and
              foraminifera), revealed that most taphonomic work on these important organisms
              primarily concerns the processes that affect preservation at the sediment/water
              interface, and rarely are processes examined which happen below the
              sediment-water interface and deeper, within the sediments.  At this interface
              and within the sediments, skeletal hardparts are presumably degraded and
              recycled or preserved.  Little is known about the rate of degradation on micro-
              and macroorganisms that inhabit these sediments.    This proposal directly 
              addresses the need for experimental work and a reevaluation of the previously
              estimated carbonate retention rates of skeletal hardparts in shallow,
              siliciclastic settings.  This proposed research provides methods to address
              retention rates at varying depths within the sediments for molluscan shells,
              calcareous and agglutinated foraminifera and crustacean exoskeletons. 
              Additionally, little is known about how these hardparts are preserved or
              degraded in varying geochemical milieus.  Emphasizing experimental field work
              and porewater geochemistry, this proposed 3-year study will evaluate skeletal
              retention rates and preservational signatures of molluscan shells, crustacean
              exoskeletons, and tests of both calcareous and agglutinated foramin ifera
              within the "taphonomically active zone" or TAZ, of selected depositional
              settings of coastal Georgia.  Taphonomic gradients will be examined in
              conjunction with porewater analyses from the sediment surface to a depth of one
              meter to assess preservation stratification or "taphonomic tiering."   Goals of
              this proposed research are 1) document taphonomic gradients of skeletal
              preservation with increasing burial depths in the sediments, across different
              siliciclastic environments within coastal and estuarine settings.  Importantly,
              we will study how the different geomicrobial zones (using porewater chemistry
              analyses) within the sediments affect preservation of skeletal hardparts; 2)
              assess taphonomic characteristics across salinity gradients at different
              localities and depths within the sediments; 3) assess scale dependency, with
              regard to size, of taphonomic rates of degradation or preservation between
              foraminiferans and molluscs; 4) determine the effects of shell/test
              microstructure and mineralogy on preservation at different burial depths in
              these depositional settings; and 5) test our modern findings with a subfossil
              deposit to determine if geomicrobial signatures are retained on shells or
              forams in subfossil and fossil estuarine environments in light of the modern
              studies.  Experimental data on invertebrate and protist retention rates would
              greatly enhance paleoecological studies on associations from comparable
              settings preserved in the rock record.
