Title       : Nitrogen Uptake, Retention and Cycling in Stream: An Intersite N-15 Tracer
               Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9628860

Award Number: 9628860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1135057            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jackson R. Webster jwebster@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith L. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce J. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Mulholland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Webster, et al  9628860    Knowledge of factors regulating the uptake,
              retention, and cycling of nitrogen in streams is integral to understanding
              lotic ecosystem structure and function. Further, because streams serve as key
              hydrologic and biogeochemical links between upland and downstream aquatic
              ecosystems, understanding how changes in climate or land use will affect
              movement of materials across the landscape and water quality requires working
              models of controls on the structure and function of streams. Although there is
              a rich literature of process-level studies of key nitrogen transformations in
              streams, a robust model linking hydrodynamics, nitrogen cycling, metabolism,
              and food web dynamics in streams is lacking.  In this project we will use
              simulation modeling, field tracer additions and an intersite comparative
              approach to increase our understanding of controls on stream nitrogen cycling
              and develop a generalized model of nitrogen dynamics in lotic ecosystems. The
              central hypothesis we will address is:  The considerable variability among
              streams in uptake, retention, and cycling of nitrogen is controlled by key
              hydrodynamic, chemical, and metabolic characteristics that determine water
              retention, degree of nitrogen deficiency, and energyflow through food webs in
              stream ecosystems.  From this hypothesis we derive a number of specific
              predictions involving ammonium and nitrate uptake, food web transfer of
              nitrogen, and nitrogen turnover. These predictions will be tested by conducting
              an identical set of field experiments in each of 10 streams ranging in latitude
              from the tropics to the arctic and differing greatly in their hydrodynamic,
              chemical, and metabolic characteristics. The field experiments include: (1)
              short-term (several hours) injections of a conservative tracer and application
              of a transient storage model to define hydrodynamic characteristics, (2)
              short-term injections of nutrients (NH4, NO3, PO4) to determine relative uptake
              lengths of different nutrients and potential N defici ency, (3) whole-stream
              measures of gross primary productivity (GPP) and community respiration (R) to
              define stream metabolic characteristics, and (4) long-term (6 weeks) additions
              Of 'sNH4 at tracer levels to measure temporal and spatial (longitudinal)
              dynamics of nitrogen uptake, retention, and cycling rates through the stream
              ecosystem. Simulations of the 'sNH4 addition have been performed for most of
              the streams using a 15-compartment, stream nitrogen mass balance model. The
              model will be updated and rerun for all streams prior to the start of the field
              experiments to provide site-specific predictions of temporal and spatial
              distributions of '5N in the ecosystem based on current understanding. Data from
              the field N experiments will be used to test the site-specific model results,
              as well as to provide measures of N uptake, cycling, and turnover that will be
              used in intersite analyses to test predictions of relationships with potential
              controlling factors. Potential controlling  factors on N dynamics include
              stream hydrodynamics ( importance of transient storage zones), chemistry c~ 
              (streamwater N concentrations and N:P ratios, detrital C:N ratios), and
              metabolism (GPP P:R ratios).         ??
