Title       : Investigating the Individuality/Scalability Tradeoff in the Provision of
               Networked Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1996    
File        : a9628397

Award Number: 9628397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266189             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mostafa H. Ammar ammar@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Networked services are at the heart of the information revolution. This  work
              focuses on two characteristics of a networked service: 1)  scalability: the
              ability of the service to handle a large number of end  users with low per-user
              cost, and 2) individuality: the ability of the  service to deal with differing
              requirements imposed because of  heterogeneity of network paths leading to the
              end-users.  Although a  high level of both individuality and scalability are
              desirable features  of any networked service, they are normally conflicting
              goals that need  to be traded-off with each other. This research aims to
              investigate  this tradeoff from the networking infrastructure's viewpoint.     
              This project seeks to answer: 1) In services using multicast  communication, is
              it possible to add a level of individuality while  sacrificing scalability in a
              controlled manner?  2) In services using  unicast communication, is it possible
              to improve scalability while  controlling how much individuality is sacrificed?
               3) Is it possible  not to require the labeling of services as unicast or
              multicast and  move the burden of deciding the appropriate network support to a
               "generic" interface layer?  To answer these questions the research  seeks to
              develop network support mechanisms to navigate the  individuality/scalability
              spectrum, giving multicast services the  ability to be more individualized and
              unicast services the ability to  be more scalable.      The research will
              consist of investigating specific instances of adding  a measure of
              individuality to multicast services and specific instances  of making unicast
              services more scalable by sharing resources through  multicast and requesting
              batching at servers. The research will include  services such as video
              distribution, Web information delivery and  multimedia-on-demand (live and
              streamed).  The work will consider  Internet as well as ATM-style networking
              with some emphasis on Internet  over ATM architectures.
