Title       : CAA: U-Pb Geochronology of Squantum 'Tillite' and Related Rocks Around Boston,
               MA: Implications for Terminal Proterozoic Glaciation and Supercontinent Breakup
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1996      
File        : a9628520

Award Number: 9628520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret D. Thompson mthompson@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9222,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Thompson   9628520     For more than a century, geologists have congregated at
              the Squaw Head seacliff in Quincy, Massachusetts to argue over the possible
              glacial origin of the Squantum "Tillite".  Although recent sedimentological
              opinion has finally titled toward glaciomarine deposition, much remains to be
              learned by dating this rock.  Squantum age data, for example, will provide the
              first radiometric evidence for the timing of sedimentary-volcanic events
              post-dating the well known ca. 625-590 Ma Avalonian magmatic arc complex around
              Boston.  The Squantum "Tillite" will be dated in the Radiogenic Isotope
              Laboratory at MIT using methods of high precision U-Pb zircon geochronology. 
              Volcanic rock clasts as well as detrital zircons from Squantum diamictite will
              be analyzed to fix its maximum depositional age.  Volcanic flows interbedded
              with a conglomeratic Squantum sequence farther south in Houghs Neck, Quincy
              will also be dated.  This result will constrain the age of deposition, and thus
              the age glaciation in this area, more directly.  A broader view of Squantum
              provenance will be sought via detrital zircon studies.  For a Principal
              Investigator who has spent twenty years teaching undergraduates, the
              opportunity presented by this project to learn the methods of U-Pb
              geochronology in MIT's Radiogenic Isotope Laboratory represents a major career
              advancement.  Much broader and more stimulating research questions will
              certainly arise once high precision age determinations can be integrated with
              existing field, petrographic and geochemical data.  The results of such
              research will surely come full circle by returning an intellectually energized
              instructor to Wellesley classrooms.
