Title       : A Scalable Communication Integrated Optical Network (SCION) for Bandwidth Greedy
               Multimedia Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1996  
File        : a9628189

Award Number: 9628189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tatsuya Suda                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120007             (Estimated)
Investigator: Imrich Chlamtac   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal introduced an original architectural approach for a scalable 
              integrated optical network consisting of "LAN" segments with varying 
              topologies interconnected by bridges. The investigators first investigate  the
              two most promising topologies, rings and folded buses, interconnected  directly
              by a bridge. Since in each case synchronization requirements and 
              implementation issues vary, certain topologies may be preferred in  different
              areas of the interconnected network.  The investigators also  propose to
              consider a network backbone that serves as an interconnect  structure among
              dozens of subnetworks.  In each subnetwork (rings or buses)  packets are
              individually inserted into and extracted from the fiber medium,  while in the
              backbone slot routing is used to exchange information between  pairs of
              subnetworks.    The bridge architecture is one of the main foci of this
              proposal which will  be investigated covering all main options - a bridge
              without optical  buffering, a bridge with optical buffering (SDL-bridge), and
              associated  protocols for controlling the bridge operation  and contention
              resolution,  including the slot-override solution.    The node architecture of
              bridged network nodes must take into account: the  type of transceiver, the
              optical interface to the network, and the  buffer  organization at the
              transmitter. The transmitters and the receivers  can be  tunable or fixed, with
              at least one of the two devices being tunable  to  provide full connectivity
              among the nodes. These node architecture  options  will be investigated
              together with the new protocols to support  different  "sorting algorithms"
              needed to deal with bridge operation to  avoid the  creation of electronic
              bottlenecks.    The slot routing related protocols and control are a key factor
              in  the  global network performance. In order to allocate slots between local
              and  internetwork traffic a slot management protocol is necessary.  Two 
              possibilities will be evaluated: a fixed slot allocation protocol, which  
              allocates slots in a preset order, determined by expected traffic and by 
              network conditions, and a dynamic slot allocation protocol, which  allocates
              slots according to the instantaneous offered load of each  network segment.   
              Analytical models and simulation tools will be extensively used to assess  the
              performance of the different solutions.
