Title       : Isomerization Polymerizations of Allyl Ethers and Related Monomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1999    
File        : a9628664

Award Number: 9628664
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James V. Crivello crivej@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1773,9146,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9628664  Crivello  A novel metal catalyzed isomerization/polymerization 
              reaction has been developed in which readily available and  inexpensive allyl
              ethers and related compounds can be  readily and efficiently polymerized to
              give high molecular  weight polymers.  Depending on the specific metal complex 
              selected, polymerization can be spontaneous and highly  exothermic, or require
              heat or light activation.    The polymerization of simple allyl, crotyl and
              cyclic and  acyclic vinyl acetals has been demonstrated.  Typical  examples of
              these monomers will be polymerized and the  effects of the structures of the
              metal carbonyl, the silane  and the monomers on the rate of polymerization and
              the  molecular weight of the resulting polymers will be  determined.  The
              progress of the polymerizations and their  rates will be followed using NMR,
              GPC and FT-IR methods.  Further, the structures, tacticities, glass transition 
              temperatures and, where appropriate, mechanical and thermal  properties of the
              resulting polymers will be fully  characterized.  Multifunctional monomers and
              oligomers  bearing pendant and terminal allyl and crotyl ethers will be 
              prepared and characterized, then polymerized using the  optimized catalysts and
              reaction conditions.  Similarly,  monomers bearing various functional groups
              including esters,  alcohols, carbonates, ethers, urethanes and amides will also
               be prepared and their polymerizations using these novel  catalyst systems
              carried out.  %%%  One of the major aims of this project is to elucidate the 
              mechanism(s) of the isomerization/polymerizations .  Accordingly, where
              possible, the synthesis of appropriate  organometallic intermediates will be
              carried out and their  involvement in the polymerizations be determined.  Based
              on  these studies, novel and more efficient thermal and  photochemically
              activated catalyst systems will be designed  and employed.  Lastly, the
              application of this chemistry to  the preparation of linear and crosslinked
              polymers of  potential practica l and commerical interest will be  addressed. 
              Attempts will be made to prepare and  characterize films and castings of
              polymerized allyl ethers.  ***
