Title       : Hexose Transporter Genes and the Origin of Land Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1999        
File        : a9628869

Award Number: 9628869
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda E. Graham lkgraham@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee W. Wilcox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9628869  GRAHAM  Land plants, like animals, begin life by forming embryos.  Land
              plant embryos, like many but not all animal embryos, develop while attached to
              a parent from which they obtain food, especially sugars.  The genetic
              mechanisms associated with sugar transport are not well understood, especially
              in morphologically simple plants such as bryophytes (mosses, liverworts,
              hornworts), which have embryos, and charophycean green algae, which are closely
              related to mosses but do not have embryos.  In this study, Linda Graham and Lee
              Wilcox will begin an evaluation of one set of genes, the hexose transporter
              gene family, that are involved in sugar transport in plants.  They will obtain
              molecular sequence information from hexose transporter genes in charophycean
              green algae.  They will use these sequences to construct phylogenetic trees,
              and compare these trees with others derived from sequences of different genes,
              and from the morphological and anatomical features of the plants, seeking
              additional support for the hypothesis that charophycean green algae and
              bryophytes are closely related.  They will seek support for the hypothesis that
              sugar transport from parent plant to embryo is based in part upon hexose
              transporter gene products (i.e., proteins) that are derived from plants without
              embryos (charophycean green algae) but are specifically expressed at the
              junction between parent plant and developing embryo in bryophytes.  The results
              should provide significant new information on the origin, early history, and
              development of the land plant embryo, one of the most fundamentally important
              events in the life history of land plants.
