Title       : Electric Field Effects on Excited State and Electron Transfer Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1997      
File        : a9628857

Award Number: 9628857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven G. Boxer sboxer@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  
              Program supports research by Dr. Steven G. Boxer of the Chemistry   Department,
              Stanford University, for investigation of the photophysics   and reaction
              dynamics of coordination complexes in applied electric   fields.    A Stark
              spectrometer based on a step-scan FTIR will be   developed for use in obtaining
              high signal-to-noise virbrational Stark   effect spectra in the mid-IR region
              and electronic Stark spectra for the   broad transitions characteristic of
              coordination compounds.  Some of the   specific problems to be investigated by
              Stark spectroscopy include:    electronic coupling in class II mixed valence
              complexes and metal-bridged   prophyrin dimers; bond anharmonicity in carbonyl
              and C-F stretches;   degree of delocalization in push-pull polyenes (used in
              non-linear   optical devices)  imposed by large internal electric fields that
              result   from the attachment of strong electron donors and acceptors; effect of
                applied electric fields on excited state proton transfer reactions in  
              3-hydroxyflavone.  Interactions between molecular fragments separated by
              relatively long and   chemically interesting spacers will be investigated using
              Stark effect    spectroscopy.  Electronic or vibrational transitions are
              affected by   applied electric fields and measurement of this effect provides  
              quantitative information on the magnitude and direction of charge  
              displacement.  Electric fields can also be used to manipulate the rates   of
              electron and proton transfer reactions.  The results are not only of  
              fundamental interest but also potentially applicable to the development   of
              non-linear optical materials for use in the electronics industry.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
