Title       : A New Paradigm for the Analysis of Transient Saturated/Unsaturated Flow and
               Transport in Randomly Heterogeneous Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1999  
File        : a9628133

Award Number: 9628133
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283796             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shlomo P. Neuman neuman@hwr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9628133  Neuman    The objectives of this project are to develop (a) an exact
              conceptual/mathematical framework for the optimum prediction and analysis of
              transient saturated and unsaturated water flows in randomly heterogeneous
              subsurface environments, subject to arbitrary initial conditions, source terms,
              and boundary conditions; (b) a related conceptual/mathematical framework for
              the prediction and analysis of nonreactive solute transport under transient
              flow in saturated and partially saturated media; (c) associated low- and
              higher-order computational schemes for such flows and solute transport.  The
              theoretical framework and computational methodology will rely on stochastically
              derived deterministic flow and transport equations which contain both local and
              nonlocal information-dependent parameters.  In contrast to upscaled quantities
              which are often difficult to justify theoretically, or compare with
              measurements, all quantities entering into our equations will be defined on a
              scale compatible with potentially available field data (their support scale). 
              The theoretical framework will contain explicit expressions to assess
              prediction uncertainty.    When the properties of a soil vary randomly in
              space, the corresponding flow and transport equations are stochastic.  To solve
              them analytically, the equations must be linear(ized) and the soil properties
              severely restricted.  To solve them numerically by (conditional) Monte Carlo
              simulation is computationally intensive and does not usually guarantee
              convergence.  Ideally, the Monte Carlo method converges to a (conditional) mean
              solution which constitutes an optimum unbiased predictor of system behavior
              under uncertainly, and a (contional) variance which measures prediction
              uncertainly.  Our aim is to circumvent the need for Monte Carlo simulations by
              evaluating these (conditional ) moments deterministically.  For this, we
              propose to  first derive exact flow and transport equations that govern the
              space-time evolution of these moments, then solv e them numerically by
              approximation.  We expect such flow and transport equations to be
              integro-differential, hence nonlocal, non-Darcian, and non-Fickian.  We refer
              to this new solution paradigm as "smoothing".  Contrary to upscaling in which a
              grid must be defined a priori on the basis of ad hoc criteria, here the grid is
              defined a posteriori based on how smooth the moment functions are expected to
              be.  Their smoothness is controlled in part by the quanlity and distribution of
              conditioning (measurement) points in space-time.  In most cases such points are
              sparse enough to render the moment functions much smoother than are their
              random counterparts.  Hence a grid required to resolve the former is usually
              much coarser than that required to resolve the latter.  The net result should
              be a considerable saving in computer time and storage when compared to the
              Monte Carlo method.    Exact conditional moment equations have been developed
              for steady state saturated flow by Neuman and Orr (1993), and for nonreactive
              solute transport by Neuman (1993) and Zhang and Neuman (1995e).  These nonlocal
              equations involve local and nonlocal flow and transport parameters that are
              conditional on data and thus nonunique.  Though the equations are exact, their
              nonlocal parameters cannot be evaluated directly without either high-resolution
              Monte Carlo simulation or approximation; a third option is to estimate them
              indirectly by inverse methods.  We propose to extend the above nonlocal flow
              and transport theories to transient saturated and unsaturated flow conditions;
              to develop suitable approximations for the corresponding parameters; and to
              develop computational schemes for the solution of the corresponding nonlocal
              mean flow and transport equations, as well as for the assessment of the
              corresponding prediction errors.
