Title       : Paleoclimatic Reconstructions of the Eastern Margin of the Albian-Turonian
               Western Interior Basin, USA and Canada
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1998      
File        : a9628128

Award Number: 9628128
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Brenner robert-brenner@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian J. Witzke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Luis A. Gonzalez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Greg Ludvigson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Brenner  9628128   We propose to collect and interpret the stable isotopic
              paleoclimatic record of meteoric carbonates from Albian through Turonian strata
              along the eastern margin of the Western Interior Basin along a paleolatitudinal
              transect between Kansas and Manitoba (Fig.6).  Our research has shown that
              meteoric phreatic cements along the cratonic margin of the basin yield   18O
              values that are characteristic of coastal lowland environments, and are
              therefore more directly applicable to paleoclimatic reconstructions for North
              America than freshwater carbonates in the western margin facies where they are
              affected by orographic complications.  The results of this work will be used to
              construct sets of paleogeographic map consisting of 1-2 m.y. time slices that
              portray paleolatitudinal gradients of meteoric phreatic carbonate   18O values.
               These values and maps could be used by other researchers to constrain
              experimental simulations of mid-Cretaceous climate systems using an emerging
              generation of global generation circulation models (GCMs) that include
              hydrological tracers.   Ongoing biostratigraphic studies are providing a more
              refined chronostratigraphic framework necessary for the time-slice analysis in
              the eastern margin area.  The most challenging part of the chronostratigraphic
              correlations occurs within the dominantly nonmarine Albian to mid-Cenomanian
              portion of the section.  Work is underway on this portion of the section using
              a combination of palynostratigraphy and aspects of sequence stratigraphy
              modified for use in this setting.  Preliminary results are encouraging, with a
              workable palynostratigraphic framework established for western Iowa and eastern
              Nebraska.  This work is currently being extended into southeast Nebraska. 
              Additional core and outcrop samples from Kansas, Nebraska, and the Manitoba
              Escarpment will provide biostratigraphic data needed to relate nonmarine
              sequences to previously delineated marine sequences (e.g., Kauffman et al.,
              1993).   Project objectives are t o investigate mid-Cretaceous paleoclimate and
              paleogeography during a significant greenhouse period along a north-south
              paleolatitudinal transect of the eastern margin region of the Western Interior
              Basin.  The project will use an integrated approach combining biostratigraphy,
              sedimentology, sequence stratigraphy, and stable isotope geochemistry. 
              Stratigraphic analyses and samples will span the outcrop belt that extends from
              central Kansas to Manitoba and Saskatchewan, Canada (Fig. 6).
