Title       : Enhanced Nucleation of Monomer Droplets in Miniemulsion Polymerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9628783

Award Number: 9628783
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196842             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohamed S. El-Aasser mse0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              E D. Sudol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - El-Aasser - 9628783    The potential advantages of applying
              miniemulsion technology to the preparation of latexes through free radical
              polymerization of vinyl monomers have not been realized, one reason being that
              only a fraction (circa 20%) of the initial droplets (50 - 500 nm) are nucleated
              to become polymer particles.  This limits the control of the particle size and
              copolymer composition by requiring diffusion of monomers from the droplets
              which are not nucleated to the growing polymer particles.  This is a particular
              disadvantage for monomers with low water solubility which do not readily
              diffuse through the aqueous phase (e.g., macromonomers).    Recent developments
              in the miniemulsion polymerization of styrene have shown that the addition of a
              small amount of polymer to the miniemulsion droplets enhances their nucleation
              which can reach 100% under certain conditions, thereby increasing the
              polymerization rate and resulting particle number.  This phenomenon has been
              attributed to an increased rate of radical entry into these droplets which
              improves their ability to compete with the existing polymer particles for
              aqueous phase free radicals.  The mechanistic explanation for this phenomenon
              and the extension of the method to other monomer systems are the focus of this
              research.  A combination of techniques will be applied in this investigation
              including continuous measurements of the reaction rate via reaction calorimetry
              and monitoring the evolution of the number of particles through the particle
              size distribution.  The nature of the added polymer will be varied in terms of
              its molecular weight and the functionality of its end-groups in order to
              determine whether it is an interfacial phenomenon or a ObulkO phenomenon. 
              Likewise, the composition of the droplet/water interface will be varied and
              characterized.  In addition to the normal water-soluble initiator (i.e.,
              persulfate), oil-soluble initiators will be used to determine the effect of the
              origin of the free radicals (aqueous  vs. droplet phase) on particle
              nucleation.  Other monomer/comonomer systems will also be investigated.  And
              finally, mathematical modeling will be used in conjunction with the above
              findings to aid in mechanistic understanding of the miniemulsion polymerization
              process as a function of the variables chosen in these studies.
