Title       : Documenting the Early Diagenetic History of Articulate Brachiopods Using
               Transmission Electron Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1996    
File        : a9628364

Award Number: 9628364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra J. Carlson carlson@geology.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Buening  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9628364  Carlson   Paleozoic isotopic studies of paleoclimate and
              paleoceanography rely on the assumption that   18O values are obtained from
              original, unaltered brachiopod calcite.  Recently, the reliability of the
              standard tests (textural and chemical) used to detect diagenesis in low
              magnesium calcite has been questioned.  It has been suggested that the
              well-documented Paleozoic trend of depleted 18O with increasing geologic time
              may indicate post-depositional alteration rather than a primary trend in ocean
              temperatures.  As assessed by the standard tests of optical and scanning
              electron microscopic images, trace element analyses, and cathodoluminescent
              microscopy, "pristine" brachiopod calcite often exhibits signs of isotopic
              alteration.  Apparently, fine-scale dissolution/precipitation indicative of
              early diagenesis will alter the original isotopic composition without affecting
              the calcitic fabric.  Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is the only
              technique able to detect fine-scale diagenesis by imaging the crystal
              ultrastructure at an atomic level.  TEM analysis provides both optical images
              of specimens at a resolution of 0.2 nm and X-ray diffraction patterns.  X-ray
              diffraction is used to determine crystal lattice structures, whereas, TEM
              images can reveal structural features such as grain and twin  boundaries.   
              The purpose of this study is to use TEM to characterize fine-scale diagenesis
              in fossil brachiopods.  A comparison of TEM features of original low magnesium
              calcite in extant brachiopods with TEM features identified in Plio-Pleistocene
              relatives of diagenetically altered low magnesium calcite will establish
              criteria to identify fine-scale diagenesis.  Examination of fossil brachiopods
              should reveal features that characterize diagenetic low magnesium calcite such
              as increased microporosity, cross-cutting relationships at twin boundaries and
              dislocation sites, and a higher dislocation density with respect to original
              low magnesium calcite.  These criteria that typify early diag enesis will be
              compared with standard diagenetic tests and with isotopic values from extant
              and fossil brachiopods to test the reliability of the standard test to diagnose
              fine-scale diagenesis necessary to alter the original isotopic composition.  
              The significance of the research described herein is that the proposed TEM
              examination provides a direct and unique means of identifying fine-scale
              diagenesis that alters the original isotopic composition without altering the
              calcitic fabric.  The ability to successfully identify diagenetic features that
              indicate isotopic alteration should have a profound effect on our ability to
              accurately interpret isotope data from fossil brachiopods.
