Title       : Collaborative Research: Sediment Dynamics in Large Drainage Basins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1999   
File        : a9628724

Award Number: 9628724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20769              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Johnsson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bryn Mawr College
	      
	      Bryn Mawr, PA  19010    215/645-5000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9628724  Johnsson    Large drainage basins are complex systems in which sediment
              is generated, transported, stored, and, after varying amounts of time, either
              buried beyond the depth of reworking or exported to the World's oceans.  The
              rate at which sediment is generated in such drainage basins and the residence
              time of that sediment as it moves, grain by grain, down the fluvial transport
              system are poorly  known; yet measuring these rate is prerequisits to
              understanding dynamic  interactions between the solid Earth and the
              hydrosphere.    Over the past decade, advances in mass spectrometry have
              allowed reliable measurement of extremely rare nuclides such as those produced
              as cosmic rays interact with rock. Because cosmogenic nuclide abundances (when
              normalized for exposure location) reflect the residence time of material within
              the uppermost several meters of Earth's surface, simple analytical models
              (beholden to a variety of assumptions) have been used to estimate "cosmogenic"
              exposure ages and erosion rates of bedrock outcrops and boulders.    During the
              past two years, we have been funded by Hydrologic Sciences to test an
              interpretive model (Bierman and Steig, 1992, 1995; Brown et al., 1995; Granger
              et 1994a,b) which suggests that measurement of cosnogenic 10Be and 26A1 in
              sediments can be used to estimate the rate at which drainage basins erode and
              constrain the transport system, and out of the basin. Because our initial data
              (Bierman et apt, 1995, in review) and the data of others (Brown et al., 1995;
              Granger et al., l994a,b), suggest that cosmogenic nuclides are indeed useful
              tools by which to study hydrologic processes in small end moderate size
              drainage basins, we seek funding to expand our current research to larger
              scales and over longer tine frames.    The overall objective of our proposed
              research is to determine at what scale and in what fluvial regimes, cosmogenic
              nuclides remain useful tools for 1) determining basin-scale, spatially-averaged
              erosion rates and 2) placing limits on  the duration of sediment storage. In
              order to meet this objective, we seek funding for isotopic and other corollary
              measurements needed to determine the spatial variation in 10Be and 26A1
              abundances in approximately 80 samples collected from locations throughout the
              drainage networks of four tectonically and climatically distinct fluvial
              systems.: the Ganges (Himalayas), the Apure (Andean Mountains), the
              Sagavanirktok (Alaska, North Slope) and the East Alligator (northern
              Australia).    Testing the spatial and temporal variation of 10He and 26A1
              abundance in sediments of some of the World's major rivers will constrain the
              scale of applicability of existing interpretive models, a significant advance
              in Isotope Geochemistry. The data we generate regarding the relative duration
              of sediment storage and model rates of basin scale denudation will be of
              fundamental significance in the fields of Sedinentology, Hydrology, end
              Geomorphology. In the sense that we cannot anticipate the outcome of our
              measurements, some might consider our proposal "high risk science In light of
              the success we and others have had using 10Be and 26A1 to estimate erosion
              rates and constrain sediment storage times in smaller catchments (Biermam et
              al., 1995, in review; Brown at al., 1995; Granger et el., 1994a,b), and because
              of the fundamental nature of the questions we are addressing, we feel such a
              "risk" is minimal and worth taking.
