Title       : Two Dimensional parallel Signaling and Detection Techniques with Applications to
               Volume Optical Memories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1996 
File        : a9628405

Award Number: 9628405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178048             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Neifeld neifeld@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A parallel two-dimensional memory (i.e., one that stores and retrieves 2D  pages
              (arrays) of digital data) represents a fundamentally different memory 
              architecture. This 2D parallel architecture has the potential for capacity  and
              speed performance which is orders of magnitude beyond the expected  physical
              limits of traditional lD storage architectures.  A volume optical  memory is a
              system which stores data pages within a three dimensional  optical medium. 
              These systems have the potential combination of large  storage capacity (>
              10^l2 bits/cm^3), high speed random access via massless  scanning (<10 ns), and
              very large data transfer rates (> 10^10 bits/sec)  owing to the 2D
              storage/retrieval of data.. Direct application of  conventional communication
              theoretic techniques to 2D parallel memories is  complicated by the truly 2D
              nature of the data format. In addition, a  volume optical memory implementation
              typically results in a storage channel  with very complex noise and
              interference. Factors contributing to the  operating environment include (I)
              the intensity transformation and  subsequent spatial averaging of the coherent
              optical signal as a result of  optoelectronic conversion, (ii) non Gaussian
              noise sources such as shot and  speckle, and (iii) complex data dependent
              interference sources such as  inter-page crosstalk and space variant
              intersymbol interference within a  given page.  This research program is
              concerned with signaling,  equalization, and decision schemes as they apply to
              parallel 2D data  channels, with specific consideration given to coherent
              (holographic)  volume optical memory systems. One objective of this research
              program is to  develop the theoretical foundation for signaling and detection
              in 2D  digital communication systems. Another objective is the application of
              this  theory to develop robust, implementable signaling and detection
              techniques  for volume optical memory systems.  The plan for achieving these
              objectives  is based on the development of relatively simple  models of the
              volume  optical memory system to be used for development and analysis of
              specific  signaling and detection algorithms. Performance bounds for the
              optimal  detection strategies, as well as efficient algorithms for their 
              realization, will be sought in the data detection phase of the research. 
              Simple, suboptimal data detectors which exploit the 2D nature of the data 
              format will also be developed and their performance characterized relative  to
              that of the optimal detection rule. The signal design component will be 
              concerned with error correction coding for use with 2D asymmetric channels, 
              precoding techniques for combating data-dependent interference within and 
              between pages, pixel profile optimization using simple optical masks, and 
              novel signaling strategies for non-Gaussian channels. The third component 
              involves the creation of a sophisticated simulation engine for the  evaluation
              and refinement of new signaling and detection methods. This  simulation engine
              will capture the detailed physical characteristics of  volume optical memory
              systems and will facilitate measuring the performance  and robustness of these
              novel 2D approaches in a real-world environment.
