Title       : Hydrogeological-Geophysical Methods for Subsurface Site Characterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a9628306

Award Number: 9628306
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yoram Rubin rubin@arimor.ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              H. Frank Morrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9628306  Yoram Rubin     This project focuses on three issues that are
              critical to environmental management of contaminated sites:  reducing cost,
              reducing risk, and increasing the effectiveness of subsurface remediation
              schemes.  The significance of this proposal is that it addresses the issue of
              site characterization:  not only that this issue is a very significant budget
              item in the site cleanup effort, but also it is now realized that accurate and
              reliable site characterization is the key to the success of any cleanup effort.
                 Our objective is to develop the scientific basis and demonstrate
              methodologies for inexpensive high resolution imaging of natural
              heterogeneities and for relating these heterogeneities to the hydrogeologic
              parameters that control flow and contaminant transport--in effect, to develop
              methods for "imaging" hydrogeologic parameters.  Our focus is to help establish
              the scientific basis for applying shallow geophysics to hydrogeological
              problems, through (a) feasibility studies, (b) sediment-rock physics, and (c)
              improvements in the procedures for co-interpretation of geophysical and
              hydrogeological data.  An essential task will be to identify limitations,
              pitfalls, and uncertainties of these co-interpretation--i.e., to quantify the
              risks in applying shallow geophysics to hydrogeological site characterization. 
              The proposal combines theoretical modeling, analysis of laboratory
              measurements, and integration techniques.    Our approach is to use seismic and
              electromagnetic methods jointly to map the distribution to seismic velocity and
              attenuation and electrical conductivity in the the 3-D volume defined by a set
              of boreholes.  In a rough sense, both velocity and conductivity depend on
              porosity and to a lesser extent on permeability, clay content, saturation and
              nature of pore fluid.  Laboratory studies have shown these relationships in
              great detail and we now propose to refine these results to utilize them to
              interpret survey data in terms of map of the distribution of t he hydrogeologic
              properties.    This proposal is an interdisciplinary study, since it integrates
              the fields of hydrogeology and geostatistics, geophysics, and rock physics. 
              The team of researchers brings to this project a large collective experience in
              performing theoretical, field, and lab work.    In response to cuts in the
              original budget, we reduced the scope of lab testing and the variety of
              geological setting that we shall investigate under Feasibility Studies.    ??
