Title       : Paleobiology and Extinction of North American Pleistocene Proboscideans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a9628063

Award Number: 9628063
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Fisher dcfisher@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Fisher  9628063     Near the close of the Pleistocene epoch, 10,000 years ago,
              many of the largest and most impressive mammals inhabiting North America went
              extinct. Among the most conspicuous of these victims were mastodons and
              mammoths, both of which were relatives of elephants and members of the
              mammalian order Proboscidea. The cause of this "late Pleistocene megafaunal
              extinction" has been vigorously debated by paleontologist and archaeologists,
              with implications for evolutionary ecology, global climate change, and
              conservation of biodiversity. Opposing schools of thought attribute the
              extinction to climate change associated with the end of the last Ice Age,
              excessive hunting by humans , or possibly some combination of these factors.
              The project proposed here continues a relatively new approach to resolving this
              controversy, distinguished by its ability to associate clearly divergent
              predictions with the operation of contrasting extinction mechanisms. It focuses
              on the structure and composition of the tusks and molar teeth of mastodons and
              mammoths, revealing new information about these animal's growth rates
              throughout life, their individual reproductive histories, and the environments
              in which they lived.   Mastodon and mammoth tusks, like those of elephants,
              began growing shortly after birth and continued throughout life, adding layer
              upon layer of new material. Microscopic analysis of tusks cross sections
              reveals structural and compositional laminae, somewhat like tree rings,
              representing regular intervals of time (daily, fortnightly, and annual).
              Records of growth in molar teeth are shorter but otherwise comparable.
              Variations in the thickness of these layers record changes in tusks growth rate
              and indirectly reflect the animal's nutritional and reproductive status.
              Variations in composition of layers, especially with respect to oxygen
              isotopes, reflect intra- and interannual climate changes and confirm annual
              features for use in age determination. Analyses of these patterns yield data o
              n seasonal mortality, age, gender, growth rates, age at sexual maturity, and
              calving. For example, sexual maturation in males is reflected as a pronounced
              drop in growth rate caused by nutritional stress following expulsion of
              maturing males from the matriarchal family units in which they were nurtured as
              calves. Calving histories of females appear as multiyear cycles of variations
              in tusk growth rate, reflecting a tradeoff between tusk growth on one hand and
              fetal bone development and milk production on the other . Life history traits
              such as age at maturity and calving interval are sensitive indicators of the
              nature and degree of ecological stress because they show predictable patterns
              of response to altered nutritional status and/or predation pressure.
              Deleterious climate and/or vegetational change tends to retard growth and
              reproductive schedules, while overhunting tends to accelerate them.   The
              proposed research will use patterns of tusk/tooth lamination and composition to
              quantify changes in life history traits of North America proboscideans leading
              up to their time of extinction. Such trends, within species, represent a
              population's own response to changing conditions and thus comprise a sensitive
              record of the nature of local ecological stress. the goal of this work is to
              test the two major, competing causal hypotheses for the late Pleistocene
              extinction of mastodons and mammoths: overkill and climatic/vegetational
              change. In addition to contributing to the solution of a major problem in the
              history of the North American biota, the results of this study will clarify the
              nature and history of  human interaction with proboscidean in North America and
              provide new information relevant to paleoclimate reconstruction.
