Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Radiogenic Helium as a Chronologic Tracer for Younger
               Groundwater
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1998      
File        : a9628627

Award Number: 9628627
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159993             (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Kip Solomon ksolomon@mines.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thure E. Cerling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9628627  Solomon    The concentration of radiogenic 4He in groundwater that
              results from U/Th decay has been used as a dating tool over time scales of 103
              to 106 years.  Recent measurements indicate that aquifer solids in many shallow
              flow systems may be releasing 4He at rates that are much greater than U/Th
              decay, making it possible to use 4He as a groundwater dating tool over time
              scales as short as 101 years.  This proposal is to investigate the mechanisms
              leading to and the geographical extent of aquifers that are releasing 4He at
              rates greater than U/Th decay.    The primary objective of the proposed
              research is to evaluate the use of 4He as a groundwater tracer over time scales
              of 10 to several hundred years.  Specific research questions include the
              following:       (1)  What are the mechanisms controlling the exchange of 4He
              between aquifer solids and groundwater?  Can this exchange rate be predicted
              and if so what is the uncertainty?    (2)  How spatially variable are He
              release rates?  Are spatial variations correlated with variations in basic
              hydraulic properties (porosity, permeability) and/or geochemical properties
              (mineralogy, sedimentary facies, diagenesis)?    (3)  What is the geographical
              extent of shallow aquifers that are releasing 4He at rates that are
              significantly greater than U/Th decay?  Is it possible to predict the
              occurrence of high 4He release rates based on general geologic concepts?    (4)
               What are 4He release rates in carbonate and other fractured rock systems?   
              (5)  To what extent does the total 4He content of aquifer solids represent the
              paleohydrology of the aquifer protolith?  Can total 4He contents be used to
              reconstruct the hydrologic history of an aquifer?    Direct measurements of the
              4He release from aquifer solids will be compared with release rates based on
              radiogenic 4He concentrations in groundwater and direct determinations of
              groundwater age using 3H/3He and chlorofluorocarbons.  An evaluation of release
              mechanisms including potential spatial varia tions in release rates will be
              used to assess the viability of dating groundwater with 4He over the time scale
              of 50 to 500;  existing groundwater dating methods are not accurate over this
              environmentally important time scale.    Evaluating the potential impacts of
              anthropogenic practices on the quality of groundwater resources depends on an
              accurate measure of fluid velocities and travel times.  However, traditional
              hydraulic approaches are problematic due to extreme variability in
              permeability.  The utility of groundwater dating methods results from the fact
              that the groundwater age itself, at any point in a flow system, is an
              integration of the velocity field along the entire upstream flow path.  Thus, a
              single measurement of age contains memory and embodies much more information
              than a point measurement of velocity (or permeability).  Methods that provide
              accurate measures of groundwater travel times over time scales of 10 to
              hundreds of years may thus allow a characterization of flow systems at a level
              of detail that is presently not available and yet is needed to solve water
              quality as well as water supply problems.        ??
