Title       : Data Management for Wireless Communication Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1998 
File        : a9628184

Award Number: 9628184
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $508838             (Estimated)
Investigator: D C. Cox dcox@nova.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer Widom  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Data management is critical to the functioning of wide-area wireless 
              communication networks.  The communication infrastructure maintains  user 
              profiles to keep track of information for operations such as call setup and 
              delivery, subscriber authentication, and billing.  Data management deals  with
              the problem of efficiently managing the information in user profiles,  which
              may be distributed across the network.  In evaluating different data 
              management schemes, performance measures of interest are:  1) profile  lookup
              and update response times; 2) individual and global database access 
              requirements: 3) individual communication link and global signaling  bandwidth
              requirements; 4) total memory requirement; and 5)overall system  cost.   
              Information in user profiles can be classified into "system information",  such
              as current locations of subscribers and subscriber authorization  information,
              "service provider information", such as billing records, and  "feature support
              information", such as numbers for call screening or call  blocking.  These
              different categories of information have different demands  on their data
              management schemes.    One of the primary objectives of our proposed research
              is to investigate  and develop novel database architectures and protocols for
              efficiently  managing all the classes of information in user profiles. 
              Specific schemes  will be designed to meet the various data management
              requirements.  We are  especially interested in developing schemes that, unlike
              current schemes,  provide lifelong user numbers through the support of location
              independent  numbering.   Scalability and backward compatibility to existing
              standards,  IS-41 and GSM, are also important design issues.  We have conceived
              a  promising architecture that is based on a hierarchical organization of 
              databases.  Its performance will be compared with a representative set of 
              other data management schemes through extensive simulation studies using a 
              realistic software simulator that we are developing.     Another major
              objective of our proposal is to develop a realistic and  extensible simulation
              platform for studying the performance of data  management schemes.  Realistic
              user call and movement models are crucial to  our performance evaluations.  We
              will develop detailed call and movement  models and corroborate them using
              actual traffic data.  We have laid the  foundation in this area through the
              development of the first version of a  highly configurable software simulator,
              Pleiades.   Our research in user  behavior models for our simulations is
              expected to have applications in  other areas of wireless communication
              research.
