Title       : RPG: A Novel Genetic Screen for the Identification of Genes Involved in
               Streptomyces Morphogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1996    
File        : a9628767

Award Number: 9628767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15285              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanne M. Willey biojmw@hofstra.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hofstra University
	      128 Hofstra University
	      Hempstead, NY  115501030    516/560-6820

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Willey  9628767  The Streptomycete spp. are gram positive soil bacteria that
              undergo a temporally and spatially regulated cycle of morphological and
              physiological differentiation similar to that of the filamentous fungi.  During
              the streptomycete life cycle three cell types are made.  The
              substrate-penetrating vegetative mycelia give rise to the upwardly growing
              hair-like aerial mycelia.  Antibiotic biosynthesis is concomitant with the
              onset of the aerial mycelium formation.  The aerial mycelium subsequently
              differentiate into uninucleate spores.  Two classes of developmentally
              controlled genes have been identified in Streptomyces coelicolor:  the whi and
              bld genes.  The whi genes control the development of spores form the aerial
              mycelium; whi mutants thus from only the aerial mycelium.  The bld genes are
              involved in the differentiation of the vegetative mycelium into the aerial
              mycelium.  Mutations in bld genes result in the growth of colonies that form
              only the substrate mycelium; many of these mutants are pleiotropically blocked
              in antibiotic formation as well.  bld mutants are also blocked in the synthesis
              of a small morphogenetic peptide, SapB, which appears to be directly involved
              in aerial mycelium formation.  This is evidenced by the restoration of aerial
              mycelium formation by bld mutants following the exogenous application of
              purified SapB.  Additional evidence supports the notion that SapB is
              synthesized nonribosomally, presumably by a multienzyme complex in analogy with
              the peptide antibiotics.  What is the function of SapB in S. coelicolor
              morphogenesis and what is the role of nutrient sensing in the differentiation
              of the vegetative to the aerial mycelium?  This research planning grant seeks
              to address these questions by the identification of genes involved specifically
              in SapB biosynthesis and/or the nutritional regulation of aerial mycelium
              formation.  This approach is based on the observation that the addition of
              purified SapB relieved the suppression of aerial mycelium formation  in the
              morphologically wild type strain S. coelicolor J1501 when grown in LB agar
              media.  This restoration of aerial mycelium formation permits the screening of
              a genomic library expressed in high copy in S. coelicolor J1501 cells in
              attempt to overproduce genes essential for SapB biosynthesis and thereby mimic
              this phenomenon.  Plasmid from complemented colonies will be purified and
              inserts subcloned to establish the minimum size required for the selected
              phenotype.  Subcloned inserts will then be sequenced and analyzed so that a
              putative function might be assigned to specific gene products.  Complementing
              sequences might encode either i) the SapB structural gene or ii) regulatory or
              structural genes that are part of a presumed SapB peptide synthetase operon
              and/or iii) genes not directly involved in SapB biosynthesis or regulation but
              nonetheless involved in morphological differentiation.  The identification of
              such genes would then provide preliminary data on which a full research
              proposal will be based.  ***
