Title       : RUI: Predicting Transport Through Heterogeneous Facies Assemblages:
               Geostatistical Anatomy of Buried-Valley Aquifiers, II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1996  
File        : a9628299

Award Number: 9628299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66136              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Ritzi robert.ritzi@wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David F. Dominic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9189,9229,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 9628299   Ritzi      Contaminant problems have created the need to understand
              how hydraulic conductivity (K) is distributed in aquifer systems. 
              Extreme-value pathways exert a dominant physical control on contaminant
              transport, and thus the boundary between high-K and low-K materials
              (hydrofacies) must be quantified.  Although the exact geometry of the
              hydrofacies can only be determined by a prohibitive amount of subsurface
              information, stochastic methods such as conditional indicator simulation
              provide a way to compute a number of realizations of hydrofacies distributions
              that honor available data at their locations, with specified functions for the
              principal directions of spatial correlation of the hydrofacies, the scale of
              correlation in these directions, and the proportions.  Running transport
              simulations using a large number of these realizations and examining the
              central tendency and variance of simulated contaminant travel times, or the
              simulated contaminant pathways, can give insight into how contaminants will
              move through the real system.  These simulations can also be incorporated into
              a formal decision-analysis framework.  However, the field data at a specific
              site commonly are insufficient for the purpose of defining the spatial
              correlation and proportions of the hydrofacies directly.  Therefore, analog
              sites that are data rich need to be studied in order to find models for spatial
              correlation and proportions of hydrofacies that, on the basis of similar
              geology, can be transferred to data-poor sites.  Indeed, one of the research
              needs identified by the National Research Council in Alternatives for Ground
              Water Cleanup, is the development of statistical models representing common
              geologic environments, which can be used to assess the variability of aquifer
              properties and thereby improve the success of aquifer restoration (NRC, 1994,
              p. 73).        The proposed research will develop statistical models for
              aquifer properties in buried-valley aquifers, which occur across the central a
              nd western glaciated plains of North America and are vital to the water
              resources of the region.  In such glacially derived aquifers, it is common to
              have low-K facies (e.g., till or lacustrine clay) juxtaposed with high-K facies
              (e.g., sand and gravel outwash).  This is a renewal proposal.  In the prior
              phase, several locations were studied in a buried-valley aquifer system located
              in Ohio, with the successful development of models for the hydrofacies
              distribution, proportions, principal directions of spatial correlation, and
              correlation scale in these directions.  These statistical models were linked to
              the deposition processes that created the aquifer system, and therefore are
              likely to be applicable to other locations in the aquifer, and to other aquifer
              systems where similar depositional processes have operated.  However,
              hydrofacies models are most useful when based on the features of numerous
              well-studied examples.  The generality and usefulness of quantitative
              geostatistical models will likewise increase with their numbers, if more
              data-rich analogs are examined.  One goal of this renewal proposal is to
              develop new geostatistical models for a buried-valley aquifer system in
              Indiana.  However, the main focus of this work will be to critically evaluate
              methods of linking spatial correction of hydrologic parameters and geologic
              structure.  The transition probability has been shown to be an even more
              interpretable representation of spatial correlation than the variography used
              in the prior phase.  Thus the transition probability may provide a new tool for
              linking spatial correlation and deposition processes.  The innovative aspect of
              this work is that it will provide a way to test the hypothesis that generic
              hydrofacies models can be developed for a specific class of aquifers.  This
              will be the first comparison of spatial correlation of hydrogeologic parameters
              among aquifers, and is part of the longer-term goal of developing a catalogue
              of quantitative hydrofacies.   ??
