Title       : Kinetic City Cyberclub: An Episodic Web Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1998   
File        : a9628426

Award Number: 9628426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $596002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Hirshon bhirshon@aaas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Assoc For Advt Sci
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  200054707    202/326-6400

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9628426  Hirshon     The AAAS is developing and testing a pilot phase of an
              on-line website science club for youth.  Kinetic City Cyberclub will engage
              youth in episodic adventures to promote both group and independent exploration.
               Users will receive carefully crafted, paced challenges as they wind their way
              through a mystery or other related activity.  The adventures will be presented
              over time in a series of episodes that require users to use science toward
              solving an on-going mystery or problem.  Components of the on-line club will
              include:  Story Pods which set up the problem and inform users of what has been
              learned to date;  Clue Pods which include information and activities that users
              can add to their individual electronic notebooks;  Experiment Pods where users
              will be able to try out different theories to solve immediate problems;
              Discussion Pods where questions will be posed to which users are encourage to
              respond; and a Voting Pods where users get to vote on the next direction the
              science exploration should take or on possible solutions to problems. 
              Components of the web page will be updated on a regular basis with most of the
              content being changed weekly and, in some instances, daily.    The PI will be
              Robert Hirshon of the AAAS who has been the key developer of The Kinetic City
              Super Crew, the radio series on which the Kinetic City Cyberclub is based.  The
              Senior Producer responsible for developing and maintaining the website will be
              Kimberly Amaral.  Ms. Amaral previously been a writer/web developer for the
              Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution's Coastal Research Center and Sea Grant
              and she has worked as a researcher/writer for Bill Nye the Science Guy. 
              Dissemination and outreach will be a joint effort of the AAAS and the National
              Science Teachers Association.  Evaluation will be conducted by Arthur C.
              Johnson, an independent evaluator and instructor at the Harvard Graduate School
              of Education.
