Title       : A Theoretical, Empirical and Experimental Investigation of the Spatial Scaling
               and Dynamics of Braided Rivers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1999     
File        : a9628393

Award Number: 9628393
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192284             (Estimated)
Investigator: Efi Foufoula-Georgiou efi@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Paola  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victor Sapozhnikov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,1579,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9628393  Efi Foufoula    Understanding the space-time variability of the
              morphology of braided rivers is a challenging and difficult scientific problem.
               Lack of data and process complexity have prohibited quantitative studies and
              hindered this area of research.  Improved satellite technology for remote
              sensing monitoring and experimental (laboratory) production of braided rivers
              offer essential information.  The proposed theoretical, empirical and
              experimental investigations, focused on understanding scale invariances and
              scale dependencies (collectively called scale relationships) in the geometry of
              braided rivers and provide physical interpretations of these relationships.  In
              particular, the goal is to quantitatively study and characterize the spatial
              and temporal structure of braided rivers and ultimately provide a generalized
              conceptual framework under which such systems can be studied for both physical
              understanding and prediction.  The specific objectives of the proposed research
              are:    Study scale relations in the morphology (planforms) of braided rivers. 
              Study and statistically characterize the evolution of planforms and spatial
              patterns of braided rivers.  Study the connection of the spatial and temporal
              structure of braided river morphology to underlying physical mechanism via
              experimental work and computer simulation.    The experimental facility for the
              laboratory production and monitoring of braided rivers will be used by and
              interdisciplinary research team consisting of a geologist, a hydrologist and an
              experimental/theoretical physicist.  The main theoretical innovations will be
              (1) development of a mathematically rigorous frame-work to address questions of
              scale-invariances and scale-dependencies of complex systems,     
              (2)integration of spatial and temporal scaling ideas under a single framework,
              and (3) use of a simple braided river model to investigate physical mechanisms
              responsible for observed spatial and temporal structures in the morphology of
              braided rivers.  The fr amework for analysis and interpretation of these
              complex dynamical systems will incorporate notions of multiscaling,
              self-organized criticality and deterministic systems with complex behavior.    
               Finding can be applied in (1) prediction of the evolution of braided rivers
              for hydraulic engineering and environmental studies and (2) scale relationships
              in geometric characteristics of braided rivers of different size for
              transferability studies.
