Title       : Interguild Interactions in Communities of Benthic Stream Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1996    
File        : a9628969

Award Number: 9628969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen B. Heard stephen-heard@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9628969  Heard  The goal of this research is to test some long-standing but
              poorly supported hypotheses about interactions among invertebrates inhabiting
              temperate streams.  Communities of bottom-dwelling stream invertebrates include
              organisms with several different feeding strategies.  "Shredders" feed on large
              pieces of organic detritus, such as dead leaves and twigs.  "Collectors" feed
              by filtering small organic particles from the water.  Because shredders process
              larger organic material to small particles as they feed, it has been widely
              assumed that their presence benefits collectors (increases growth and/or
              survival).  However, recent theoretical work suggests that this is only one
              possibility.  Processing of detritus produces particles in the short term, but
              also removes material that could yield particles later; therefore, the presence
              of shredders might be detrimental to collectors, particularly over longer time
              scales.  In the present study, experimental manipulations of shredder densities
              in natural and artificial streams will be conducted to determine the nature of
              the shredder-collector interaction in a small stream in eastern Iowa.  These
              will be the first complete, direct field tests of the shredder-collector
              facilitation hypothesis.  A third group of invertebrates, called "grazers",
              feed by scraping algae from surfaces in streams.  These animals also produce
              particles as they feed, and it has also been assumed that grazers facilitate
              collector growth or survival.  This hypothesis will be tested with grazer
              manipulations in parallel with the shredder experiments.  Understanding
              interactions among stream invertebrates is important because these organisms
              have ecological and economic importance beyond the local stream reach.  For
              instance, the study organisms are food resources for aquatic and terrestrial
              animals including birds, bats, and economically important fish species such as
              trout and salmon.  Some collectors (blackflies) are important pests and disease
              vectors for wildlife  and livestock.  Finally, these invertebrates are widely
              used in assessing and managing stream water quality.  Results from this study
              will increase understanding of interactions among species that are central to
              this important natural community.
