Title       : Extensive Readvance of Late Pleistocene (Younger Dryas?) Alpine Glaciers in the
               North Cascades, Washington, Following Retreat of the Cordileran Ice Sheet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9628624

Award Number: 9628624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96251              (Estimated)
Investigator: Don J. Easterbrook dbunny@cc.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Easterbrook  9628624   This proposal is for mapping and dating late Pleistocene
              moraines that represent abrupt climatic reversals in the North Cascades of
              Washington that are equivalent in age to the Younger Dryas, using both 14C and
              10Be methods.  Among the objective of this proposal are: (1) to identify, map,
              and date these late Pleistocene moraines, (2) determine if a significant lag
              time occurred between these climatic changes on the west coast, controlled by
              cyclonic weather systems of the Pacific Ocean, and climatic reversals in the
              North Atlantic Ocean on opposite sides of North America, and (3) to establish
              possible correlations with similar events in the Rocky Mts.  Among the moraines
              that will be mapped and dated are (1) nine apparent YD (?) moraines of alpine
              glaciers in the North Cascades of Washington that readvanced 20-50km downvalley
              from their sources following disappearance of the Cordilleran Ice Sheet from
              the maximum moraine and recessional moraines of the Okanogan lobe of the
              Cordilleran Ice Sheet on the east side of the Cascade Range.   Because the YD
              event was first recorded and dated in Europe and Greenland, it has been
              attributed to changing conditions in the North Atlantic.  Despite evidence for
              a late-glacial readvance of the Cordilleran Ice Sheet in northwestern
              Washington at about the time of the YD, the apparent absence of evidence for
              the YD in eastern and central North America led to a generally-held belief that
              such an event did not affect North America.  If the YD cooling of the North
              Atlantic simultaneously affected the west coast of North America, reflecting
              climatic changes in the North Atlantic.  Until recently, no YD alpine glacial
              advances had been recognized in the Cascade Range, but, new evidence for an
              extensive system of alpine valley glaciers younger than the Cordilleran Ice
              Sheet and of much greater extent than the YD glacial readvance in the Rocky
              Mts. has recently been discovered in the Nooksack drainage of the North
              Cascades, just south of the mora ines of the Sumas readvance of the Cordilleran
              Ice Sheet.   One of the greatest problems in assessing the validity of events
              in the North Atlantic as causing the climatic reversals of the YD is that
              moraines of this age rarely have organic material suitable for 14C dating, so
              their ages remain speculative.  However, not only is organic material available
              for dating of YD moraines in the North Cascades, but large erratic boulders on
              moraines are also available for 10Be dating.  A multi-pronged approach is
              proposed for this project:   (1) Identifying and dating moraines that represent
              climatic reversals during late Pleistocene deglaciation:  The accuracy of 14C
              and 10Be will allow the distinguishing of late-glacial pulses and demonstration
              of whether or not a consistent pattern is present in western North America.  At
              present, "suspected" YD moraines are known in the Pacific Northwest, but they
              are not well dated--a problem that can be resolved by 14C and 10Be dating. 
              Recognition of a persistent post-late-glacial-maximum pulse in widely separated
              localities will be a big step forward in our understanding of global climatic
              changes.   (2) Demonstrating the synchroniety (or lack of it) of late glacial
              moraines in northwestern North America and the Rocky Mts.  To establish
              correlations with the YD moraines in the Rocky Mts. and elsewhere, comparison
              of atoms per gram of  10Be from boulders on moraines, rather than calculated
              ages, will be used to minimize accuracy problems related to 10Be production
              rates.  In addition, 26Al will  be measured, newly developed corrections
              factors for geomagnetic flux variations will be used, and calculated 10Be ages
              will be compared with 14C ages from organic material.   The results of this
              investigation will then be used to establish correlations with dated moraines
              in the mid-continent Rocky Mts. and events in the North Atlantic.  If
              synchroneity of ages can be demonstrated, they will have significant
              implications of the validity of events in the North Atlantic as  the cause of
              abrupt climatic changes.
