Title       : Development of Reliable Distributed Protocols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9628400

Award Number: 9628400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mukesh Singhal                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130654             (Estimated)
Investigator: Moshe Y. Vardi vardi@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the verification aspect in the  development of reliable,
              fault-tolerant, distributed  protocols.  High-performance computing technology,
              such as distributed real-  time systems, high-performance memory systems,
              wide-band I/O  systems,  modular operating systems, high-speed network 
              interfaces, commodity workstation clusters, and the like, is  reliant on an
              underlying layer of distributed software (often  implemented in hardware),
              which consists of suites of protocols  for check-pointing, communication,
              coordination, data  distribution, recovery, and synchronization of distributed 
              components.  These protocols provide a critical software layer  for
              high-performance computing systems. Having such a  standardized layer is
              crucial to interoperability,  portability,scalability, and reusability of
              existing software.  Unfortunately, developing reliable software for distributed
               environments is a notoriously difficult task.  Here reliability  refers  to
              pre-committed real-time performance, dynamic  reconfigurability, security,
              robustness, and high assurance.  The  difficulty in producing reliable
              distributed software is twofold.  First, designing reliable distributed
              software is extremely  challenging.  Not only does the software have to be free
              from  programming errors, but it also has to be resilient against  hardware and
              software faults.  Second, because of the  nondeterministic behavior of
              distributed environment, it is very  difficult to verify that the software
              meets its desired  specification.   The focus of this project is on the study
              of  algorithms and data structures applicable to the verification of  programs.
               It draws upon ideas and results from logic, graph  theory, and automata
              theory, combining both theoretical and  experimental aspects.  ***
