Title       : The Geochemical Carbon Cycle: A Vadose-Hydrologic Study of the Effect of Plants
               on Chemical Weathering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1996      
File        : a9628296

Award Number: 9628296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149999             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Kent Keller ckkeller@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1325,1579,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9628296  Keller      Carbon dioxide (CO2) is a greenhouse gas.  One avenue to
              understanding the relationship of atmospheric CO2  concentration to climate, is
              to study that relationship over geologic time.  This requires that we
              understand the processes affecting atmospheric CO2 on long time scales.  The
              principal pathway for long-term transfer of CO2   from Earth's atmosphere to
              its crust is (a) dissolution or "chemical weathering" of common minerals in
              soils, subsoils, and groundwater systems, followed by (b) transport of the
              dissolved material to the oceans in continental drainage, where (c)
              precipitation and deposition onto the ocean floor occur.  This sequence effects
              transfer of CO2  because mineral dissolution consumes CO2 -containing acids and
              entrains the product bicarbonate in drainage waters, which is later deposited
              in the oceans as carbonate minerals.  In the geochemical carbon cycle, this
              process is countervailed by the return of CO2  from subducted and buried
              carbonate minerals to the atmosphere by volcanism and metamorphism.  The
              relative rates of these processes determine the masses of CO2 in the atmosphere
              and lithosphere at any one time and, in the process, affect Earth's climate. 
              It is therefore important to understand the factors controlling the rates of
              various steps in the cycle.  One such factor is the effect of plant
              communities, and their evolution over geologic time, on the rate of chemical
              weathering.     Plants could enhance chemical weathering--relative to
              unvegetated conditions--by raising subsurface concentrations of acids,
              facilitating the exposure of fresh mineral surfaces, and binding mineral grains
              into water-retaining structures characteristic of soils.  The actual extent of
              weathering enhancement by these mechanisms is, however, poorly understood
              because of the difficulty of factoring other variables out of comparative field
              studies.  This study takes advantage of ongoing long-term, field-scale
              experiments in plant nutrient cycling.  The experimental plots  were designed
              for monitoring of drainage water, and a ten-year database now exists.  An NSF
              Small Grant for Exploratory Research has been awarded to fund the
              (just-completed) installation of an extensive network of vadose pore-water
              samplers to observe how solution chemistry (the chemical weathering "load")
              evolves with depth and time in soils and subsoils beneath the various plots. 
              This proposal is application for funds to continue the work, i.e., to do the
              geochemical and hydrologic research which these facilities can now support. 
              The results will facilitate testing of hypotheses regarding the relative
              importance of weathering-enhancement mechanisms.  ??
