Title       : Efficient Fair Queuing and Load Balancing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1999  
File        : a9628190

Award Number: 9628190
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284587             (Estimated)
Investigator: Subhash Suri   (Principal Investigator current)
              George Varghese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 2891,9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  Internet traffic is growing rapidly due to the immense popularity of the 
              World Wide Web and new multimedia services such as video-conferencing.  The
              increased traffic volume requires higher speed (Gigabit/sec or higher)  links,
              while some of the new traffic varieties (such as audio and video)  also demand
              quality-of-service guarantees.  This proposal addresses the  problem of
              providing high speed links by combining multiple low speed links  and
              performing load balancing.  It also address the problem of providing  quality
              of service guarantees for high speed links through the design of  efficient
              fair queuing algorithms.    The proposal is concerned with the design,
              evaluation, and implementation  of new and efficient fair queuing and load
              balancing algorithms.   Although  these two problems may look quite different
              at a first glance, the Pis show  that fair queuing algorithms can be converted
              into load balancing  algorithms using a time-reversal argument.    Existing
              mechanisms for fair queuing either are computationally expensive,  or they fail
              to provide the necessary service guarantees  (e.g., good  bounds on latency and
              throughput) required by many applications.  The PIs  develop a new fair queuing
              scheme called Tandem Clock Fair Queuing, which  offers quality-of-service
              guarantees comparable to those of the best  previous schemes (such as Weighted
              Fair Queuing), and yet appears to admit  efficient implementations.    Existing
              methods for load balancing provide inadequate load sharing in the  presence of
              variable length packets, and may result in non-FIFO delivery of  data if packet
              headers are not allowed to be modified.  The PIs describe  new load balancing
              schemes that solve these two problems by transforming  fair queuing schemes
              into load balancing schemes, and by using the twin  mechanisms of logical
              reception and sender simulation.    The investigators propose to refine and
              extend these new directions in fair  queuing and load balancing algorithms into
              complete and workable schem es  that can be deployed in the Internet and other
              real networks.  They plan to  evaluate and refine our schemes using a
              combination of mathematical  analysis, simulations, and actual implementation
              using a testbed.
