Title       : Collaborative Research: Distribution and Evolution of Geomorphic Process Zones
               in Large Mountain Ranges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1996 
File        : a9628737

Award Number: 9628737
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96196              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Dunne tdunne@bren.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dunne  9628737   Large mountain ranges exhibit striking regional scale
              morphologic heterogeneity which is reflected in the dominance of different
              geomorphic processes in different parts of the range. The spatial and temporal
              distribution of these processes and affects the rate and manner in which
              sediment is evacuated from the range, which feeds back on tectonic processes
              and affects the behavior of rivers beyond the range front, where human
              populations are often concentrated. The objectives of the proposed study are to
              document and mechanistically explain major downstream, inter basinal, and
              temporal trends in morphology and geomorphic process within a large, important
              mountain range: the Eastern Cordillera of the Bolivian Andes.   Fluvial
              incision creates relief, which strongly modulates the type and rate of
              geomorphic processes acting on hillslopes, and the relative ability of a river
              to transport its sediment load governs loci of incision and deposition,
              behavior of the river, and therefore morphology of the valley. Understanding
              spatial and temporal patterns of morphology and geomorphic process in large
              mountain ranges therefore requires the ability to quantitatively  describe
              fluvial incision into mountain ranges, as well as to link hillslope and fluvial
              characteristics resulting from incision to specific geomorphic processes. These
              requirements dictate the methodology to be employed in this study, which
              involves four major steps.   First, the modern pattern of geomorphic regions
              must be documented within two large drainage basins, the Beni and Pilcomayo, in
              the Eastern Cordillera. These basins share similar rocktypes and general 
              tectonic histories, but north-south variation in precipitation and total
              shortening (and therefore fluvial incision history) has produced strikingly
              different morphologies. Regions dominated by particular hillslope and fluvial
              geomorphic processes will be identified from field observations and image
              interpretation. Each region will be characterized morphometrical ly to
              determine: 1) which indices best reflect the occurrence of particular
              processed; and 2) what general trends characterize large mountain drainage
              basins.   The second major task of the study is to develop and apply a channel
              network incision model calibrated with field data to illustrate how channel
              slopes vary and relief is generated through time. In this model, downcutting
              rate is proportional to stream power, and the spatial and temporal pattern of
              uplift is constrained by regional structural geology studies, paleoelevation
              studies, and a geodynamic model.   Third, information derived from the fluvial
              incision model will be used in "off-line" calculations to determine 1) how
              hillslopes change shape and local relief grows and diminishes through time; and
              2) where incisional and depositional regimes occur and how fluvial regime
              affect valley morphology. For example, the geometry and rate of hillslope
              lowering by deep-seated, bedrock landsliding will be calculated using
              successive Culmann wedge stability analyses on steep hillslopes produced by a
              known rate of fluvial incision. Calculations will be made at selected times
              during a fluvial incision model run and at selected places down the network.  
              Finally, the fluvial incision model and the predictions made in off-line
              calculations will be checked with several sources of independent data. The
              general geomorphic patterns and morphometric characteristics of simulated
              landscapes will be compared to those of the modern Beni and Pilcomayo basins.
              Predicted long-term surface lowering rates will be compared with exhumation
              rates determined from fission track analysis of igneous and metamorphic rocks
              from both basins, while predictions of the rates determined from fission track
              analysis of igneous and metamorphic rocks from both basins, while predictions
              of the net rate of sediment export from drainage basins of various sizes will
              be compared with rates obtained from analysis of cosmogenic isotopic abundance
              in alluvium.    The proposed study has  many applications ranging from defining
              the nature of local geologic hazards to anticipating shifts in gobal erosion
              and sedimentation patterns due to climatic change.
