Title       : Fast and Numerically Accurate Algorithms for Matrices with Displacement
               Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1996      
File        : a9628117

Award Number: 9628117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79180              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Kailath tk@isl.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Numerous applications in sciences and engineering, as well as in  computational,
              applied and pure mathematics give rise to problems  involving matrices with
              Toeplitz, Hankel, Toeplitz-plus-Hankel,  Vandermonde structures,
              controllability, observability, Cauchy,  Loewner, Pick, Schur-Cohn,
              Routh-Hurwitz matrices, Bezoutians,  along with many other patterns of
              structure.  standard  mathematical software tools (e.g., MATLAB, MathCad, Maple
              V, NAG  library, LAPACK), are based on standard (structure-ignoring)  methods,
              and therefore their use is often not appropriate for  obtaining a satisfactory
              solution.  Here are two major reasons.  First, ignoring the structure
              artificially squares the size of  the data, which requires unnecessary storage
              and an extremely  large amount of CPU time.  Secondly, many structured
              matrices,  e.g. Hankel, Pick, Hilbert, Vandermonde, are extremely ill- 
              conditioned, which means that all available standard methods  often fail to
              produce even one correct digit in the computed  solution.  The theme of this
              project is the study of several theoretical and  computational problems related
              to Cauchy and Cauchy-like  matrices, which arise in many applied areas,
              including signal  processing, system Theory H-infinity control.  Use of the
              concept of displacement structure suggests that  algorithms for Cauchy-like
              matrices can be used to  design  efficient practical algorithms for many other
              important kinds of  structured matrices, such as Toeplitz, Hankel,
              Toeplitz-plus-  Hankel, Vandermonde, Chebyshev-Vandermonde matrices, etc.  In 
              fact, all these matrices can be transformed into Cauchy-like  matrices just by
              applying a few fast Fourier, cosine of sine  transforms.  It is planned to
              extend the results to develop fast  and numerically accurate algorithms for new
              classes of structured  matrices.  ***
