Title       : Collaborative Research: The Late Ordovician Extinction and Concurrent
               Perturbations of Global Earth Systems: Paleontological, Sedimentologic, and
               Geochemical Records...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1996    
File        : a9628167

Award Number: 9628167
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28987              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter C. Sweet   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sweet  9628167   An exceptional Upper Ordovician-Lower Silurian stratigraphic
              section was recently discovered in outcrops of the Vinini Formation in the
              Roberts Mountains of Nevada.  It is the only section known anywhere in the
              world where an investigation can be carried out that relates carbonate  13
              changes to biotic extinctions and re-radiations to sea-level changes.  In
              addition, the paleontological, sedimentological, and geochemical records of the
              deep-marine, lower slope to continental rise depositional facies of the Vinini
              Formation can be compared closely to those of a coeval stratigraphic succession
              at Copenhagen Canyon in the Monitor Range of Nevada that represents a much
              shallower, outer shelf to shelf margin depositional setting.  This project
              marks the first time that very different Late Ordovician facies within the same
              depositional basin may be directly compared using extensive and diverse
              stratigraphic records.  It provides the opportunity to address the question of
              whether or not fluctuations in biological productivity and potential changes in
              atmospheric pCO2 coincided with the beginning and end of the Late Ordovician
              glaciation interval.  It is a remarkable opportunity for a diverse scientific
              team to explore fundamental relationships in global earth systems.     Because
              the Vinini Creek section has a thick cover of scree, a trench will be excavaed
              through the section by bulldozer.  Then a team of scientists and students will
              log, describe, study, and sample 100 meters of section bed by bed.  Various
              co-P.I.s, consultants, and students will sample for graptolites, conodonts,
              organic-walled microfossils, lithologies, stable isotopes, and paleomagnetism. 
              The Copenhagen Canyon section has excellent surface exposures, but is mush less
              fossiliferous.  Parts of it have been well sampled for fossils, but the
              potential for additional discoveries will be pursued.  In addition, the section
              will be thoroughly samples for stable isotope analysis. Results will allow for
              the direct correla tion of  13C excursions to the biostratigraphies of
              graptolites, conondonts, and organic-walled microfossils and to distinct
              sedimentological records of sea-level changes that represent the waxing and
              waning of Gondwanan glaciation.  Precise determination of the temporal
              relationships of paleontological, sedimentological, and geochemical signals
              between the Vinini Creek and Copenhagen Canyon sections and to others worldwide
              should provide definitive insights on causal relationships between profound
              global climatic, oceanographic, and biotic perturbations during the Late
              Ordovician.
