Title       : SGER: History of Biology Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1996     
File        : a9628885

Award Number: 9628885
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Garland E. Allen   (Principal Investigator current)
              John Beatty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Maienschein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dibner Institute for the H
	      Dibner Building
	      Cambridge, MA  02139    617/253-8721

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9179,9237,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under this `Small Grant for Exploratory Research,` (SGER) Professors Allen of
              Washington University, Beatty of University of Minnesota, and Maienschein of
              Arizona State University are trying to determine how hands on experience in
              biological labs and participation in field research affect the learning of
              graduate students and young faculty members in Science and Technology Studies. 
              Every summer, these principal investigators (PI's) assemble a team of natural
              and social scientists, historians and philosophers of science to examine
              various aspects of the history of contemporary biology.  Reading of original
              sources, however, does not really get at the heart of biology for biology is
              founded on experimental work in the laboratory and the field.  In order to
              appreciate how biology develops, they hypothesize, one must undertake the
              experiments the scientists performed in order to see how these scientists
              actually saw nature.  This SGER grant allows the PI's to determine how
              incorporation of a lab and field component to the course affects understanding
              of the science being examined.  This practical hands-on component will bring
              into focus the practical aspects of scientific work.  They expect thereby to
              improve the training and to create a valuable model for work in the history and
              philosophy of science more generally.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
