Title       : Collaborative Research: Tropical Taphonomy and Porewater Geochemistry:
               Comparative Analysis of Molluscan Preservation in Siliciclastic and Carbonate
               Sediments, Western Carribean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9628345

Award Number: 9628345
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Kidwell skidwell@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9628345  Kidwell   The post-mortem fate of molluscan carbonate is influenced by
              processes of biological and geochemical recycling, but little is known about
              the rates and selectivities of these processes in the tropics, nor what their
              net effect on the surviving fossil record might be.  Understanding these
              phenomena is pre-requisite both in using taphonomic damage to reconstruct
              paleoenvironmental conditions (e.g. taphofacies criteria) and in controlling
              for bias in paleoecologic, biogeographic, and evolutionary analyses.  These
              issues also have geochemical significance, because Sr isotope compositions of
              shell material may be affected by compositional changes driven by organic
              matter respiration and by carbonate and silicate mineral dissolution in pore
              waters.   This proposed collaborative field study of tropical siliciiclastic
              and carbon sediments of the western Caribbean will focus primarily on the San
              Blas Archipelago of Panama, and secondarily on the Los Cochinos shelf of
              Honduras; it builds on a successful taphonomic pilot study in the Bocas del
              Toro area of Panama, and extensive pore-water work in carbonate sediments of
              Florida Bay.  This research will produce the first information on taphonomic
              patterns and processes in tropical siliciclastics, which constitute about half
              of modern shelf areas in low latitudes, and will permit the first test of
              carbonate reactivies and pore-water evolution in both Fe-rich (siliciclastic)
              and Fe-poor sediments (carbonates) within a single region.  The research will
              quantify:  1. post-mortem damage on dead bivalve shells as a function of
              physical environment (e.g., water depth, grain size, sedimentation rate as
              determined by Pb-210), including frequency of boring, encrustation, rounding,
              surface degradation, and fragmentation;  2. post-mortem damage as a function of
              pore-water chemistry, particularly carbonic acid, major and minor element, and
              sulfur system parameters that govern rates of carbonate dissolution and
              recrystallization; samples will also permi t determination of stable isotope (C
              & S) and 87Sr/86Sr compositions in pore-waters to assess how pore-water
              chemistry influences the isotopic signatures of shell material with and without
              microstructural alteration;  3. selectivity in taphonomic destruction as a
              function of taxonomy, life habit, mineralogy and microstructure of bivalves,
              and the importance of these factors relative to environmental forces in
              determining geographic variation in death assemblage condition and bias;  4.
              environmental variation in scales of time-averaging, stratigraphic disordering,
              and relationships between shell damage and shell age-since-death (i.e., test
              for a taphonomic clock), especially as a function of sedimentation rate,
              dissolution rate, composition of local shell input, and other environmentally
              arrayed variables; and   5. rates and pathways of shell degradation under
              specific conditions, using experimental arrays of shells deployed over periods
              up to 3 years; this a corroborative means of testing for selecitivities in and
              controls on shell destruction, with implications for compositional fidelity of
              fossil assemblages.
