Title       : Theoretical Studies of Vortex Dynamics in Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1996       
File        : a9628926

Award Number: 9628926
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan T. Dorsey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9628926  Dorsey  This research will focus on the theory of vortex dynamics in 
              superconductors, an area of great scientific and  technological relevance.  The
              first part of the grant  involves projects aimed at understanding vortex
              dynamics in  thin films.  In particular, it has recently been observed  that
              when a thin superconducting film is placed in a  sufficiently strong magnetic
              field, the field enters in the  form of "magnetic dendrites."  To understand
              this phenomenon  we will study the propagation and dynamic stability of 
              interfaces between a vortex liquid and the Meissner phase,  in both the
              time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau theory and a  hydrodynamic theory of
              superconducting vortices.  The second  part of the grant is a study of the
              effect of order  parameter symmetry on vortex dynamics in the mixed state; 
              this work is motivated by the possibility that the order  parameter in some of
              the high temperature superconductors  may have a d-wave character. 
              Time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau  theories for d-wave superconductors will be
              developed and  used to study the longitudinal and Hall conductivities, as  well
              as the Nernst effect, in the mixed state.  Since there  are some features of
              the transport properties which are  beyond this description, we will develop
              quasiclassical  Green's function techniques for d-wave superconductors.  These
              methods will be used to calculate the Hall effect and  the Nernst effect in the
              mixed state, two quantities which  have displayed anomalous properties in the
              high temperature  superconductors and which have eluded a consistent 
              theoretical description.  %%%  Theoretical research will  be conducted on a
              variety of  problems related to the motion of magnetic vortices which  form in
              the high temperature superconductors.  These  vortices and their response to
              magnetic fields are important  in technological applications of
              superconductors.  They are  also of great fundamental interest.  ***
