Title       : Collaborative Workshop on the Mission and Design of a National Organization for
               Biodiversity Information, Spring 1996, at the San Diego Supercomputer Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1998     
File        : a9628764

Award Number: 9628764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98786              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard Krishtalka   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter W. Arzberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julian M. Humphries  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9628764  Krishtalka  Currently, there is no single institution, agency, society
              or group with the mission to assist biological collections with the task of
              making biodiversity information freely and seamlessly available to science and
              society. this mission will require technical expertise, political leadership
              and scientific vision, but particularly the determination and will for the
              community to undertake this effort together. The compelling need for such a
              national biodiversity information enterprise has been established in numerous
              national and international reports. The purpose of this workshop award is to
              hold a planning and development meeting for the biological collections based
              community and related disciplines. IN an earlier workshop, the group proposed
              the establishment of the US Organization for Biodiversity Information with the
              following mission statement, "Create or enhance the infrastructure and tools
              necessary to organize information derived from biological collections and
              associated biodiversity enterprises into a maximally accessible form to meet
              the needs of society and science." Funding for this award will allow
              participants to consider the promise of such a community-based organization to
              achieve this mission, the changing nature of information, the technologically
              powerful solutions that can unite the community's vast biodiversity information
              and link it with other disciplines, and the issues and protocols of such an
              organizations structure, function, and funding.   This workshop is important
              for the development of the US-OBI goals, as well as the eventual effort to make
              accessible the vast quantity of information in the world's specimen based
              collections. In addition, this effort is important to gather a broad based,
              community endorsement of the goals of US-OBI.
