Title       : Biotic Diversity and Vertebrate Evolution in Late Devonian Non-Marine Ecosystems
               (Catskill Formation: Eastern North America)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9628163

Award Number: 9628163
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil H. Shubin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9628163  Shubin   The Late Devonian was an important interval in the history of
              non-marine ecosystems because it contains the evolutionary diversification of
              most major groups of jawed fish, the development of ecologically modern floral
              assemblages, and the invasion of land by vertebrates.  Most of the higher taxa
              that first appear at this time are to dominate the composition of the world's
              biotas for over 350 million years.  Recent discoveries in the Late Devonian of
              Pennsylvania reveal well-preserved, highly diverse vertebrate assemblages that
              occur in close stratigraphic proximity to macrofossil plants, palynomorphs,
              arthropods, and bivalves.  The biotic diversity provides the basis for global
              syntheses on the phylogeny and biogeographic distribution of basal vertebrates
              as well as an understanding of the ecosystems in which they evolved.   This
              proposal seeks funds to both document and interpret the biotic diversity of the
              non-marine facies of the upper portion of the Catskill Delta (Late
              Devonian-Early Mississippian, eastern North America).  The first major goal is
              to investigate the phylogenetic affinities and stratigraphic position of known
              fossil assemblages; these combined data allow both intraformation and global
              comparisons of biotic diversity.  Assessment of intraformational stratigraphic
              relationships enables an understanding of the biotic diversity in different
              portions of the Catskill Delta system.  Strontium isotope geochemistry and
              sedimentological analysis are used to infer life habits of Devonian
              vertebrates.  The goal of these approaches is to reconstruct the environments
              in which the earliest tetrapods lived and assess the barriers that affected the
              dispersal of Devonian vertebrates.  These data, when integrated with both
              phylogenetic and geographic data of  Devonian vertebrates.  These data, when
              integrated with both phylogenetic and geographic data of non-marine organisms,
              will provide new insights on the biotic composition of Devonian continents as
              well as the evolutionar y diversification of early tetrapods and fish.   This
              analysis will inform:  1) higher level phylogenetic hypotheses of gnathostome
              vertebrates, 2) biogeographic analysis of the distribution of the tetrapods and
              jawed fish, and 3) paleobiological analysis of the elaboration of terrestrial
              and freshwater ecosytems.
