Title       : Dissertation: Postclassic and Colonial Political Boundaries and Market Systems
               in the Yautepec Valley, Morelos, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1996      
File        : a9628648

Award Number: 9628648
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Smith mesmith@csc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Michael Smith Mr. Timothy Hare will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will complete an archaeological survey of the
              Yautepec Valley which is located in Central Mexico and will conduct typological
              and chemical analysis on the materials collected. Over its long prehistory, the
              region saw the rise of a village way of life, evolution to independent
              city-states, the emergence of expansionary conquest-states and finally conquest
              and incorporation into the Aztec and finally Spanish empires. Mr. Smith wishes
              to understand how interaction among local intra-regional groups changed during
              this process and to reach this goal he will collect and analyze spatial data
              which sheds light on changing relationships over time. Under the guidance of
              Dr. Smith he has participated in a survey of the region to locate, date and map
              surface sites. With this NSF grant he shall complete the process. With the
              assistance of a Geographic Information System Mr. Smith shall examine changing
              site distributions over time. He shall collect ceramic materials which will
              then be subjected to both stylistic, petrographic and neutron activation
              analysis. On this basis it will be possible to identify production centers and
              trace movement of materials across the entire region. He shall also conduct
              compositional analysis on obsidian (volcanic glass which was used to make stone
              tools) to identify source areas and trace movement patterns. With these data it
              will be possible to identify local production units and study the interaction
              among them.  Archaeologists wish to understand how complex societies arise and
              Central Mexico is a particularly important area because the whole process from
              village through state can be observed in a single region. Mr. Smith focuses on
              how the relationship between local units changes over this course and the
              relationship between regional and extra-regional forces. In the early part of
              the Yautepec sequence external factors are of relatively little importance
              while in the later period Aztecs and Spanish had a major influence.  This
              research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to
              many archaeologists. It will shed new light on the development of complex
              society and will contribute to the training of a promising young scientist.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
