Title       : Using 238 U-Series Disequilibrium to Constrain Time-Scales of Rhyolite
               Generation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1998   
File        : a9628486

Award Number: 9628486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark K. Reagan mark-reagan@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9628486  Reagan  It is important from a volcanic hazards mitigation point of
              view to understand the length of time needed to generate silicic magmas and for
              them to accumulate into significant volumes.  Radiometric dating of mineral
              separates from magmas can directly provide information about the history of
              mineral phases, which in turn can provide information about the history of the
              magmas.  The requested funding will be used to complete ongoing studies of the
              rates of rhyolite generation and accumulation for the Crater Lake and Mount
              Katmai-Novarupta volcanic centers by analyzing whole volcanic rocks and mineral
              separates for U-series disequilibrium and Th isotope ratios.  About half of the
              is project will focus on the Crater Lake magmatic system.  Andesitic and
              rhyolitic tephras associated with the climactic eruption will be analyzed for U
              and Th concentrations and isotopic compositions.  The rest of the effort of
              this project will focus on the Mount Katmai-Novarupta magmatic system, which
              ejected rhyolite, dacite, andesite, and lithic tephra, and a rhyolite dome in
              1912.  To determine the residence times of the three 1912 magmas and to
              formulate a better understanding of their genetic interrelationships, whole
              rocks and mineral separates from the three magma types erupted in 1912 and some
              associated lavas will be analyzed for U, Th, and Ra nuclide abundances and Ba
              concentrations.  To properly determine the time-scales of evolution for the
              silicic magmas studied here, numerical techniques will be developed to model
              U-series and Th isotope values in magmas, suspended minerals, and
              crystal-liquid mushes.  These techniques will be designed to acccount for
              crystal fractionation, magma mixing, assimilation of old country rock
              (including incomplete dissolution of crystals), and assimilation of crystal
              fractionation products from the same magmatic system, with parameters adjusted
              as appropriate based on U-series data, petrography, and whole rock and phase
              composition data available from other stud ies.
