Title       : EROC: Ecosystem Feedbacks to Climate Changes: Extending Results from an
               Ecosystem-Warming Experiment to the Landscape Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1998     
File        : a9628819

Award Number: 9628819
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449650             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Harte jharte@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                I    Abstract  9628819    Predictions of global climate change resulting from
              the buildup of greenhouse gases in the  atmosphere are based on models that
              largely ignore climate-ecosystem interactions. Yet such interactions have the
              potential to generate large positive or negative feedbacks to the climate
              system, thereby either enhancing or alleviating the magnitude of climate
              change. To quantify these feedbacks, a detailed and mechanistic understanding
              of climate-ecosystem interactions on the scale of experimental plots is needed,
              along with reliable methods for extrapolating knowledge obtained from ecosystem
              experimentation to the landscape scale.  A widely used technique for acquiring
              landscape-scale understanding of ecosystem responses to climate change is to
              develop from data acquired at sites across the landscape a set of correlations
              between the local ecosystem variable in question and the local climatic
              conditions. These correlations can then be used to generate predictions of
              response to climate change, but the value of such predictions hinges on the
              assumption that ecosystem variables track changing climate in the same way that
              such variables now track climate differences over space. Climate manipulation
              experiments provide a more mechanistically-based approach to forecasting
              responses to climate change, and can identify the most important contingent
              factors (such as interannual climate variability) that influence those
              responses, but practical difficulties preclude carrying these out at many sites
              over many landscapes. Moreover, the existence of contingent factors influencing
              ecosystem response to climate change precludes scaling up by simply assuming
              that information learned on experimental plots at one site will apply in a
              straightforward manner to all the similar habitat (based, say, on a
              vegetational classification) over a landscape.  This project will combine
              manipulations with elevational transect studies to 1) deepen understanding of
              the mechanisms and contingent factors that  shape climate-ecosystem feedbacks,
              and 2) evaluate and improve the use of transect studies for extrapolating
              results about ecosystem response and feedback to the landscape scale. The focus
              will be on two linked ecosystem responses to climate variation that have been
              observed over four years of an experimental simulation of climate warming in
              mixed shrub/ grass/forb habitat in Colorado: 1) a heating-induced net outflow
              of carbon dioxide from the ecosystem and 2) a shift in dominant vegetation from
              forbs to shrubs. Because carbon dioxide is a greenhouse gas and because a shift
              in vegetative cover will alter energy and water exchange with the atmosphere,
              these responses to warming, on a larger scale, could be a source of significant
              feedback to the climate.    ??
