Title       : DNA Variability and Natural Selection in House Mice and Humans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1998      
File        : a9628942

Award Number: 9628942
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Nachman nachman@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9628942  Nachman  A central goal of population genetics is to understand the
              forces that determine the amount and distribution of genetic variation in
              natural populations of organisms. The primary goal of this project is to look
              for evidence of natural selection in patterns of DNA sequence variation in
              populations of mice and humans.  The second objective is to determine the
              relative importance of two forms of selection:  the spread of new beneficial
              mutations,  and the elimination of deleterious mutations from populations. 
              Recent improvements in molecular techniques and statistical analyses will be
              used to sequence and analyze patterns of DNA variation, in 20 genes in house
              mice  (Mus domesticus) and 10 genes in humans, as well as in two species of
              mice (Mus spretus and Mus caroli) closely related to the house mouse and in two
              primates (Orangutan and Common chimpanzee) closely related to humans.  Genes
              from the X chromosome and from several other chromosomes will be sequenced.  An
              important aim of this work is to determine the relationship between the amount
              of genetic variation at each gene and the rate of recombination (the amount of
              genetic mixing between the two copies of a gene in individuals).  Work in fruit
              flies and preliminary work in mice suggests that genes with more recombination
              are more variable.  This has important implications; for example, conservation
              biologists interested in estimating genetic variability in a species will need
              to sample genes with both high and low recombination rates.  This project will
              provide insight into the processes affecting the amount and distribution of
              genetic variation in nature.  This is essential not only for conservation
              biology but also for understanding the genetic basis of evolutionary change in
              any organism.  Moreover, the work on humans will document the amount of genetic
              variability within and between different regions of the world and will provide
              important clues to the origins and migrations of modern humans.
