Title       : SBIR Phase II: A 3-D Image Matrix Processor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1997   
File        : a9628968

Award Number: 9628968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jolyon A. Browne   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ARACOR
	      425 Lakeside Drive
	      Sunnyvale, CA  940864704    408/733-7780

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2845,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9628968  Browne  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is a
              key part of an ARACOR initiative to develop a practical volumetric computed
              tomography (CT) scanner for three-dimensional (3-D) imaging applications.  In
              the Phase I program, a high-level design for a specialized hardware
              accelerator, an Image Matrix Processor (IMP), was developed.  The IMP is
              capable of performing, low-cost, high-speed 3-D reconstruction's with the
              principal reconstruction algorithms:  VOIR, Grangeat, and Feldkamp.  The truly
              innovative aspect of the IMP is its ability to perform both 2-D and 3-D
              reconstruction's with a single design.  This is a significant technological
              innovation, eliminating the major technical obstacle to the progress of
              commercial 3-D CT:  the exceedingly long reconstruction times required to
              process volumetric data.  The goal is to build upon the successful Phase I
              effort by demonstrating the practicality of an IMP-based workstation, where
              practicality is defined in terms of speed and affordability.  In particular,
              the technical objectives of the Phase II study are to refine the IMP design;
              assess its performance through detailed, gate-level simulations of the custom
              integrated circuits (ICs) which lie at the heart of the IMP; produce and test
              enough ICs to build one IMP circuit board; and characterize and benchmark the
              workstation with the power to reconstruct 10243 images in about an 2 hours (at
              today's CPU speeds) can be constructed for an order of magnitude less cost than
              a multiprocessor workstation capable of similar performance.  This workstation
              of comparable power, will, for the first time, make it feasible for emerging
              medical, industrial and scientific applications requiring the creation and
              visualization of large volumetric images, to be within the domain of an
              ordinary desk-top environment.   The commercial benefit of the IMP could prove
              to be extremely significant for America's industrial, medical, and scientific
              markets.  The advent of practical volumetric indust rial CT systems will usher
              in a new era in manufacturing that will embody emerging concepts such as
              reverse engineering, rapid prototyping, and solid freeform fabrication.  In the
              medical and scientific communities, and high resolution 3-D CT instrument will
              be an indispensable tool for in-vitro study of bone samples for osteoporosis
              research, for in-vivo study of small laboratory animals for oncology and other
              research, and novel 3-D visualization technologies such as surgical planning
              and 3-D modeling.
