Title       : Iterative Least Squares Estimation of Binary Choice Models: A Semi-Parametric
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1994      
File        : a9321103

Award Number: 9321103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44412              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wieren Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mai Zhou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321103  Wang  Existing semi-parametric methods for binary choice models face 
              two major disadvantages: namely, computational difficulty and  multiple local
              maxima, especially for models with multiple  explanatory variables or large
              sample sizes.  Another problem is  that some existing semi-parametric methods
              need a very large size  to obtain the benefits promised by asymptotic theory. 
              These  problems are so severe that there is hardly any empirical  application
              of semi-parametric methods for binary choice models  available in the
              literature although these methods have been  developed for a while.  This
              project proposes a computationally  convenient semi-parametric estimation
              method for binary choice  models based on a semi-parametric interpretation of
              the EM  (Expectation and Maximization) principle and the least squares 
              approach.  Preliminary Monte Carlo studies show that this new  method has no
              problem of multiple local maxima (especially for  large sample sizes) and is
              computationally much less time  consuming than other estimators.    This
              project studies the theoretical properties of the new  estimator of binary
              choice models, including large sample  properties and the use of resampling
              methods for estimating the  variance of the estimator.  The use of optimal
              weighted least  squares estimators instead of Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) will
               be investigated as a means of improving efficiency.  Extensive  simulations
              will be conducted in order to compare the performance  of various
              semi-parametric estimators.  This method will be  applied to an important
              empirical economic problem, the early  retirement decision.  To facilitate the
              application of the  proposed method, the project will develop efficient and 
              convenient computer programs for the new estimator.  These  programs will be
              easily incorporated in standard econometric  computer packages, such as SAS,
              GAUSS and LIMDEP.
