Title       : Continuing Research on International Comparisons of Outputs and Prices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1995      
File        : a9321471

Award Number: 9321471
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226093             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Heston aheston@econ.sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Summers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9321471  Heston  This grant provides continued support for the development of a 
              system of real national accounts that extends the national  accounting system
              of each country to make possible comparisons  across space as well as time. 
              The data for this system is  collected under the auspices of the United Nations
              through  benchmark studies in which prices of identically specified goods  are
              collected in many countries.  The benchmark studies started  in 1970 and are
              conducted in five year intervals.     The benchmark results so far available,
              though valuable for  studying individual benchmark years, are not at all
              satisfactory  for intertemporal analysis.  The contribution of this project 
              comes in three areas.  First, due to differences in method over  the 25 years
              of benchmark studies as well as major revisions in  the underlying national
              accounts, this project has to recast the  original benchmark studies with
              respect to uniform procedures,  category headings, and national accounts inputs
              to make them  directly comparable.  In addition, the project monitors the 
              original benchmark expenditure and price data for unreasonable  numbers.  Along
              with the monitoring, the investigators have  actively contributed to the
              development of benchmark methodology.   Second, since the benchmarks cover only
              selective years and  countries, there is a need for information about countries
              and  years not covered in the benchmarks.  The investigators  extrapolate the
              benchmark cross-section data to obtain a table  covering an expanded list of
              150-odd countries and a long time  span of 35-plus years.  The resulting very
              large, internationally  comparable data set, termed the Penn World Table (PWT),
              contains  less detailed information but provides long time series with much 
              more complete worldwide coverage.  Third, the project estimates  important
              analytical variables not included in the conventional  national accounts data
              sets.  These include the capital stock,  estimates of real Research &
              Development, Defense  expenditures,  and estimates of output quantities of
              services vs. commodities  and tradables vs. non-tradables.
