Title       : Gas Phase NMR Studies of Conformational Kinetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9321079

Award Number: 9321079
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy S. True   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry   Division,
              Prof. Nancy S. True of the Chemistry Department of the   University of
              California at Davis will pursue a research program to   determine if the
              kinetics of simple conformational processes in the gas   phase is significantly
              influenced by restricted intramolecular   vibrational energy redistribution
              (IVR).  To this end the fall-off curves   (i.e. unimolecular rate constants vs.
              pressure) will be determined under   experimental conditions that will help
              address this question.    Calculation of the energies, symmetries, and
              anharmonic coupling   constants for vibrational states above the threshold
              energy will be used   to develop models for the IVR process in the critically
              energized   molecules. These models will be used in fall-off calculations
              employing a   relaxation matrix approach which explicitly includes competition
              between   IVR and decay.  The studies are a first attempt to relate the  
              experimentally determined shape of the fall-off for conformational   processes
              to a kinetic model containing a description of the IVR process.    Experimental
              fall-off curves will also be compared to those calculated   using standard RRKM
              theory in order to test its realm of validity in   transition state chemistry. 
              The experimental techniques to be used in   this work include high pressure gas
              phase  NMR.  Methyl nitrite,   cyclohexane, and sulfur tetrafluoride, as well
              as processes involving the   internal rotation dynamics in amides and
              substituted ethanes,   trimethylsilyl group rotation in
              tetramethylsilylcyclopentadiene,   pseudorotation in fluxional inorganic
              molecules and ring inversion in   unsaturated six-membered rings will be
              investigated.    The intramolecular redistribution of vibrational energy is at
              the heart   of theories of chemical reaction  dynamics and equilibrium. 
              Several   theories have ben proposed to account for such redistribution
              processes,   the most prominent of which is that proposed by Rice, Rams perger,
              Kassel,   and Marcus, which is known under the acronym RRKM theory.  This
              theory is   based on a statistical model of energy flow and recent
              spectroscopic   experiments have indicated that not all intramolecular energy  
              redistribution can be accounted for by it. The research performed in this  
              project, using different experimental techniques,  will provide   additional
              data which will help delineate the range of applicability of   the RRKM theory.
