Title       : Dissertation Research: Recruitment in a Large-Seeded Tropical Tree
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1994     
File        : a9321553

Award Number: 9321553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Levey dlevey@zoo.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 5926,9179,9197,ENVI,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9321553  lLevey       Plant recruitment is the process by which plants produce 
              offspring (seeds) to replace themselves and thus produce a self-  regenerating
              habitat.  Seed dispersal is the process that allows  plants to "move" by
              distributing the seeds throughout the  surrounding area.  Most plants produce
              many more seeds than can  survive because after dispersal, mice and other
              rodents eat (and  therefore kill) many of the seeds.  Sometimes, if seeds are 
              abundant, rodents may store some extra seeds to be eaten later in  the year.  A
              few of these stored seeds may be forgotten and may  germinate, in which case
              the rodents are acting as "secondary"  dispersers.  Those seeds that survive
              and germinate face many other  dangers, such as plant-eating insects and
              mammals, mold and  disease, and falling branches and trees.  Thus, plant
              recruitment  is a complicated process of many stages and involves interactions 
              with many other species.  In tropical forests, which are being  rapidly
              destroyed, we know very little about plant recruitment, and  therefore we lack
              the information necessary to make recommendations  about how to save and
              restore these forests.%%%       Ocotea endresiana (related to avocados) is a
              common tree in  the mountain forests near Monteverde, Costa Rica.  The large
              fruits  are eaten and the seeds dispersed by relatively few species of  birds. 
              Despite several studies on seeds dispersal of some related  trees, the
              post-dispersal fate of these seeds is not well  understood.  In this study,
              recruitment of O.endresiana seedings  will be examined to determine the
              importance of primary dispersal,  secondary dispersal, and seed predation on
              seedling  establishment.%%%       This research will provide some of the first
              information on  the degree of complexity involved in the seed dispersal
              process.    Such information will prove useful to wildlife managers who hope to
               rebuild -- or even simply to maintain -- natural habitats.  The 
              interrelationships among a complex array of seed dispers ers and  predators
              will be examined.  Each one plays a role in determining  plant survival -- the
              question is, how critical is that role?  If  the roles of various primary and
              secondary dispersers are known,  then one can predict the effects of animal
              extinctions on seed  dispersal.  Increasing knowledge of seed dispersal and
              plant  recruitment will provide another piece in the puzzle of  understanding
              how tropical forests "work."***
