Title       : Settlement Archaeology at Xunantunich, Belize, Central America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1996 
File        : a9321503

Award Number: 9321503
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199124             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy A. Ashmore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321503  Ashmore    With National Science Foundation support Dr. Wendy Ashmore
              and  her colleagues will conduct two field seasons of archaeological  research
              in the Belize river valley, Belize Central America. Work  will center in the
              vicinity of Xunantunich, a Mayan civic center  which was occupied from
              approximately 650 to 1000 AD. Two field  seasons have been completed at the
              center itself and Dr. Ashmore  will now conduct archaeological and
              geomorphological  investigation beyond the area of monumental architecture to 
              document the distribution of local population in time and space. 
              Archaeological survey and test excavation will be conducted to  document the
              nature and variability of local economic production,  consumption and general
              standard of living at the homestead  scale. Extensive excavation at one elite
              residential cluster will  provide insight into organization at this social
              level.  Geomorphological research will document changes in the local  landscape
              itself, especially the evolving human use of alluvial  soils and how changing
              hydrological regimes affected preservation  and detection of archaeological
              remains.    Archaeologists wish to understand how Mayan peoples achieved a 
              high level of social complexity which allowed for the production  of monumental
              architecture and the support of large populations  in a difficult and harsh
              tropical lowland environment. Recent  data indicate that Mayan prehistory was
              turbulent and  characterized by abrupt changes in political order and
              settlement  organization.  Because the site of Xunantunich spans much of this 
              period and underwent several such shifts, it provides an  excellent context to
              examine this question. Dr. Ashmore  postulates that a great deal of
              independence and continuity  existed at the household level, that these units
              provided the  basic building blocks of Mayan society and that they remained 
              relatively unchanged during major political upheavals. Data  produced by this
              research will allow her to examine this issue.    This  research is important
              for several reasons. It will provide  data of interest to many archaeologists.
              It will provide new  insight into the development of complex society and shed
              light on  methods of organization adapted to tropical lowland environments. 
              ***
