Title       : A Multimedia Database Model for STS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  1995  
File        : a9321296

Award Number: 9321296
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory R. Crane gcrane@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Crane is undertaking a case study of how electronic tools can  not only help
              researchers in Science and Technology Studies perform  traditional tasks more
              effectively, but can also make possible non-  traditional avenues of inquiry
              and can even open up bodies of  evidence to whole new groups. The case study he
              is using as a model  for the this field is Greek science.  He and his
              colleagues aim to  make more tractable and comprehensible to practicing
              scientists and  general historians the complexities of what is a very
              different, in  many ways alien, culture. Conversely, the scientific issues are 
              often equally obscure to those who are most familiar with the  culture.  They
              plan to exploit images, animations, notes, and the  general flexibility of the
              electronic environment so that the  cultural experts will be better able to
              come to grips with the  technical issues of such fields as biology, astronomy,
              and  mathematics.  They are thus designing an environment that  integrates more
              fully and naturally scientific and humanistic  issues.  By showing how science
              can be made accessible to humanists  and how the cultural context can be made
              accessible and  understandable to scientists, Dr. Crane promises to
              revolutionize  STS.  The aim is ultimately to transform the sources for Greek 
              science into a dynamic, readily updatable networked resource open  to any
              researcher on the electronic network.
