Title       : Elucidating the Heterogeneous Chemistry of Nitrogen Containing Species Involving
               Aqueous Droplets, Ice Crystals and Gas-to-Particle Conversion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1996      
File        : a9321660

Award Number: 9321660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $635000             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. W. Castleman awc@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   There is increasing evidence that heterogeneous  processes involving cloud
              droplets, ice particles, and  aerosols play an important role in global
              tropspheric  chemistry.  As a contribution to unraveling the many complex 
              phenomena involved, the PI proposes to undertake  investigations of a wide
              range of reactions pertaining to  the chemistry of nitrogen containing species
              of atmospheric  importance.  The details of the molecular processes will be 
              investigated through three major activities.   The first  will involve
              contribution to unraveling the complex  chemistry associated with oxides of
              nitrogen, nitric acid  and nitrosyl sulfuric acid, and ammonia in the
              troposphere.  The second phase of the work will encompass thermochemical 
              measurements which will provide information on the  energetics of the
              reactions, and particularly on the  stability of complexes which are likely to
              be important in  the condensation of nitrogen containing species and in their 
              gas-to-particle conversion.  The third area of  study will  comprise
              investigations of the structure, growth and  nucleation of aqueous phase
              clusters and ice-like crystals.  The overall aim of the work is to provide
              complementary data  which will serve to elucidate a number of the physical and 
              chemical phenomena at the molecular level, through an  investigation of
              reactions which have been proposed to be of  particular importance on the basis
              of modeling calculations,  atmospheric measurements, and other laboratory
              studies.  The  approach is to study clusters of ever increasing degrees of 
              hydration that serve to bridge the regime from the small  cluster domain to the
              macroscopic particle state.  Recent  advances in out laboratory enable us to
              investigate  transformations over this entire range of particle size.
