Title       : 3He-Superfluid-4He Mixtures: Convection, Anomalous Thermal Conductivity, and
               Boundary Resistance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9321791

Award Number: 9321791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Behringer bob@phy.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Technical abstract:   This project will address two scientific 
              issues: anomalous heat flow in  very dilute superfluid helium  mixtures, and
              convection in superfluid helium mixtures.  The  objective of the anomalous heat
              flow study is to understand  experimental observations of a finite thermal
              conductivity of  superfluid mixtures as the helium 3 concentration goes to
              zero.  These observations conflict with theory that predicts that the  thermal
              conductivity approaches infinity as the helium three  concentration goes  to
              zero.  The work will use alternating current  techniques in order to separate
              fluid and other heat flow paths,  providing information on the boundary
              resistance. The objective of  the convection study  is to characterize
              convective flows in  superfluid mixtures. The experimental techniques will
              yield pattern  and heat flow data which pertain to a broad range of Prandtl 
              numbers. The issues to be investigated concern  Rayleigh-Benard  convection
              patterns and spatio-temporal chaos, instabilities of  pattern forming systems,
              and chaotic states.    Non-technical abstract:  Convection and heat flow will
              be  investigated in mixtures of helium 3 in superfluid helium 4.  Superfluid
              helium 4 is interesting from a technical viewpoint,  because its effectively
              infinite heat conductivity makes it an  outstanding fluid for extracting heat
              from cooled electronic  devices.  It is aimed to potentially reduce limits to
              heat flow in  this system caused by the naturally present helium 3.  It is also
               planned to characterize nonlinear dynamics and chaos in convecting  helium. 
              Convection occurs in the environment (atmosphere, ocean,  technical processes),
              and it is an outstanding system for studying  the broader topic on nonlinear
              dynamics and pattern formation.  Superfluid mixtures have similar properties to
              liquid metals and  semiconductors, and a better understanding of the convection
              in  helium is potentially relevant to purifying these materials.
