Title       : Dissertation Research: The Spatial Distribution of Abundance: Analysis of the
               Geographic Range
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1994      
File        : a9321481

Award Number: 9321481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Brown jbrown@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9321481  Brown   This dissertation research will use the North American Breeding
              Bird Survey (BBS) to quantify the distribution of abundance across the
              geographic range of a species. Two models of the distribution of abundance,
              differing in the position of low abundance sites, are proposed that can be
              tested with this data. Specific patterns either predicted in the literature or
              arising as corrollaries of these predictions will be tested: (1) abundance is
              highest toward the range center, (2) sites of highest abundance should be close
              together in space, (3) sites of low or zero abundance should increase in
              frequency near the range edge, and (4) the change in abundance from the center
              to edge of range will be steeper near continental than interior edges. Temporal
              stability of the distribution of abundance will be evaluated by examining
              abundance through time at sites throughout the range. Several models of the
              large-scale expansion and contraction of geographic ranges are proposed and
              tested with data from species whose distribution and abundance are known to
              have changed in the past 30 years. The magnitude of the effect of the
              environment on variance in population growth rate will be quantified and
              related to population size and position in the range in order to separate out
              these two simultaneously acting factors.  %%%  This research will provide a key
              linkage between species distribution-abundance relationships, ecology, and
              biogeography. The results will provide vital information regarding the
              abundance of declining populations of breeding birds. Such information is
              essential to developing a conservation strategy to help mitigate the increasing
              loss of bird species in North America.  ***
