Title       : Prehispanic Alpaca and Llama Production on the South Coast of Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9321377

Award Number: 9321377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane E. Buikstra   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane C. Wheeler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321377  Buikstra    With National Science Foundation support Drs. Jane
              Buikstra, Jane  Wheeler and collaborators will study archaeological camelid 
              remains recovered from a number of sites in Southern Peru.  Because of the
              excellent preservation characteristic in the dry  desertic environment, the
              mummified remains permit examination of  hair and stomach contents and the
              extraction of DNA. The sites  span several centuries and the camelid remains
              were recovered in  clear cultural contexts since the animals were in fact
              purposely  buried and not consumed as food. The research team will conduct a 
              number of specialist analyses which will shed light on the degree  of
              domestication of these animals, clarify species  identifications and illuminate
              the role domesticates played in  prehistoric Peruvian society.    Several
              camelid species, including llama and alpaca, were  domesticated in the New
              World and played a central role for  prehistoric peoples of the region. They
              served as sources of  transportation, of fiber for both utilitarian clothing
              and highly  valued woven objects and as food. The rise of complex societies 
              both worldwide and in the Andes is closely tied to the  development of domestic
              plants and animals. Howevep because the  skeletons of different camelid species
              look much alike and  because it is difficult to separate domestic from wild
              animals,  archaeologists have found it hard to determine when camelids were 
              domesticated and how they were used. The proposed research which  examines
              mummified remains from a variety of scientific  perspectives will help to
              answer this question.    Camelids play an important role in many areas of
              highland South  America today. An understanding of their prehistoric use may
              help  to devise more efficient herd management practices.
