Title       : Scientific Practice and Scientific Politics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 13,  1994   
File        : a9321305

Award Number: 9321305
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69401              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Jo Nye nyem@ucs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321305  Nye  Scientists, among the most highly educated citizens in any 
              society, have often seen that they carry a special responsibility  to address
              the problems of the world around them.  Professional  societies such as the
              AAAS and APS give special awards to those  scientists who make significant
              contributions to humanity.   Professor Nye is examining how our views of the
              social  responsibility of scientists have developed in the contemporary 
              Anglo-American world.    During the 1930's British scientists and intellectuals
              debated  economic, social, political, and philosophical issues, as never 
              before, among themselves and before the public.  Because their  scientific work
              was taken to exemplify reason, objectivity and  progress, many British
              scientists wondered whether they had a  special responsibility to turn their
              talents directly to the  troublesome dilemmas of their time.  The essential
              questions  which they debated focused on what came to be called the "social 
              responsibility of science" and included concerns about the social 
              determination of science, the nature of scientific method, the  applicability
              of scientific theories to social problems, the  organization and control of
              science, and the role of scientists  in political corridors of power.    It may
              safely be said that these questions remains controversial  ones.  As in the
              historical past, individual men and women  continue to respond to these
              questions indifferent, and sometimes  equally convincing, ways.  Dr. Nye is
              reexamining and reanalyzing  these questions about scientific practice and
              scientific  responsibility through a detailed study of two scientists who 
              answered social questions in radically different ways whose  responses carried
              considerable weight among scientific,  philosophical and political circles in
              England.    As close personal friends, faculty colleagues during 1937-53, and 
              directors of scientific laboratories, the physicist P.M.S.  Blackett and the
              physical chemist Michael Polanyi were leading  scienti sts in Great Britain in
              the decades from the 1930's to the  1950's.  A close study of their scientific
              work, their social and  philosophical epistemologies, and their political lives
              is a  means to better understanding the complicated relationships among 
              scientific practice, knowledge of the natural world, and  improvement of the
              human condition.  ***
