Title       : Prediction and Analysis in Electron Propagator Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1996      
File        : a9321434

Award Number: 9321434
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. V. Ortiz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project in molecular electronic structure theory is supported by the   NSF
              Theoretical and Computational chemistry Program.  Ab initio electron  
              propagator theory (EPT) is applied to the computation of ionization  
              potentials, electron affinities, and related properties.  Improved   computer
              codes for EPT computations will be developed using algorithms   adapted from
              other areas of ab initio theory.  These include the   computation of second and
              third-order quasiparticle and renormalized   self-energy for large molecules
              using direct generation of   electron-repulsion integrals,  density basis sets,
              and elimination of   energy denominators using Laplace transform techniques. 
              These methods   will be implemented in parallel code for a small cluster of
              workstations.    The theory will be applied to multiply charged carbon cluster
              anions and   to organometallic radicals.    Like all ab initio methods for the
              calculation of the electronic   structure of molecules, electron propagator
              theory (EPT) is based on the   fundamental equations of quantum mechanics.  
              The EPT equations provide a   more direct route to the rigorous calculation of
              electron excitation   energies and thus of spectroscopic excitations,
              ionization energies, and   electron affinities.  The emphasis in this project
              is on the development   of improved computational methods and their
              implementation on parallel   computers, particularly, on clusters of
              workstations.
