Title       : Atmospheric Methyl Bromide: Agricultural Source, Atmospheric Amounts and
               Variations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1994    
File        : a9321867

Award Number: 9321867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375801             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph J. Cicerone rjcicero@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1309,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                   Methyl bromide (CH3Br, or MeBr) is important in atmospheric  chemistry as
              the single largest source of Br atoms for the  stratosphere and probably as the
              largest carrier of Br atoms in the  free troposphere.  Sources of atmospheric
              MeBr include both natural  and industrial processes, but the proportions are
              not clear.  Of  human MeBr usages, agricultural pre-plant fumigation is the
              largest  application and it is growing world wide but national and 
              international bans on further usage are being considered so as to  limit
              ozone-layer damage.  The goals of this research are to obtain  quantitative
              information on atmospheric MeBr - its sources, its  atmospheric amounts and
              variations.  Through field measurements,  fumigation of agricultural fields
              will be investigated as a  potential source.  Fluxes of MeBr escaping from
              these soils will be  measured through the use of static chamber, while vertical
              profiles  of gaseous MeBr will be measured in the soil form zero to 90 cm 
              depth.  These field-fumigation studies will be performed as part of  actual
              commercial fumigations; several such experiments will be  performed yearly so
              as to span a range of practices in California,  a large MeBr-using state.      
              Atmospheric amounts will be measured against a new absolute  NIST calibration
              standard (independent of previous standards).  Two  California sites and Cape
              Grim, Australia will each be sampled  twice biweekly so as to determine the
              north/south ratio of MeBr,  its seasonal variations and differences from the
              Pacific Coast  through an agricultural valley.  Flame-ionization gas 
              chromatography will be used in field-fumigation measurements and a  GC mass
              spectrometer will be used for high-precision atmospheric  measurements.  Low
              resolution global atmospheric models will also  be used to investigate surface
              source and mixing ratio patterns and  the roles of hypothesized sources and
              sinks.  Model calculations  will be performed with an extended 2D model and
              with a 3D model.         The results of this  research are expected to improve
              the basis  for MeBr regulations (or the lack of them) and to contribute 
              significantly to our understanding of atmospheric bromine cycling.
