Title       : Dissertation Research: Tiwanaku Interaction and Land Use
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1993  
File        : a9321605

Award Number: 9321605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8980               (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc P. Bermann bermarc+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321605  Bermann    Under the direction of Dr. Marc Bermann, Mr. Alvaro
              Higueras-Hare  will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct
               archaeological survey and excavation in two areas of the Cochabamba  Valley
              which is located on the subtropical eastern slopes of the  Bolivian Andes.These
              valleys include distinct ecozones, some with  significantly higher agricultural
              potential than others. Mr.  Higueras-Hare will select two which vary along this
              axis and  compare their land use over time. To accomplish this he will  conduct
              a regional survey noting both differences in agricultural  potential and the
              distribution of archaeological sites over time.  With the use of GIS techniques
              he will map variations in  agricultural potential and then compare the
              archaeological  trajectory of high and low producing areas. In particular he is
               interested in the transition from pre-Tiwanaku to Tiwanaku times.   
              Archaeological evidence indicates that large scale prehispanic  states
              developed in the Andean region. Empires repeatedly expanded  and incorporated
              smaller adjacent entities. This process occurred  on a worldwide basis but is
              particularly interesting in the Andes  because of the strong attitudinal
              zonation in the region. Given the  need to obtain products from different
              ecological zones, what  strategies did groups employ to accomplish this? What
              economic and  political mechanisms were thus developed? Many models have been 
              proposed. The Tiwanaku empire had its origin in highland Bolivia.  Although
              it's influence was widely felt, it is unclear just how it  interacted with
              important outlying regions. The Cochabamba Valleys  constitute such an area and
              through study of subregions of both  high and low agricultural potential, Mr.
              Higueras-Hare hopes to  learn how the Valley was tied into the Tiwanaku
              subsistence net.    This research is important for several reasons. It will
              increase  our understanding of the interaction between human societies and  the
              environment in which they exist. It  will shed new light on the  growth of
              complex societies and assist in the training of a  promising young scientist. 
              ***
