Title       : Primate Numerical Competence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1994 
File        : a9321090

Award Number: 9321090
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George W. Uetz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28312              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah T. Boysen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              IBN 9321090    Boysen      Linguistic, numerical, and some other cognitive
              capacities have long been believed to be uniquely human, but recent studies of
              animal behavior have revealed some surprising parallels.  In order to
              understand how and why our ancestors developed these capacities, it is
              important to find out how widespread such abilities are in the animal kingdom
              and to learn what roles these abilities play in the natural lives of the
              animals that have them.  Procedures developed for studying these abilities in
              animals have been put to use in the training of people with brain injuries and
              developmental disabilities.    Dr. Boysen has been successfully studying
              numerical capacities of chimpanzees.  Now she will explore number-related
              skills of capuchin monkeys with procedures that parallel her previous work on
              counting by chimpanzees.  Capuchins are known to use tools in their natural
              habitat, such as rocks to pound nuts until they open and sticks to extract sap
              and insects.  Because of this demonstrated expertise, capuchins are excellent
              candidates for exploring complex conceptual abilities such as counting and
              other number-related skills.  The monkeys' training and testing will be
              completed using a computer touch-frame system that will permit them to make
              responses directly to a computer screen, automatically recording all data. 
              Each monkey will first be trained on matching one, two, or three marks to an
              array of the same number of candies.  Once the monkey can do that, the marks
              will be replaced with Arabic numerals, and the monkey must select the numeral
              that corresponds to the number of candies presented.  Number comprehension will
              also be tested by showing the monkey a numeral on the computer monitor and
              having it choose an array composed of the same number of items.  These phases
              of training directly parallel Dr. Boysen's earlier studies with chimpanzees,
              and thus will permit a direct comparison of the abilities of monkeys and apes
              with the emergence of numerical competence and cou nting in young children.
