Title       : Significance of Solar Ultraviolet Radiation in Arctic Waters: Effects on
               Phytoplankton and Ichthyoplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1998       
File        : a9321736

Award Number: 9321736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292105             (Estimated)
Investigator: Osmund Holm-Hansen oholmhansen@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell D. Vetter  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,1318,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321736  Holm-Hansen  The effects of increased ultraviolet (UV) irradiance on 
              planktonic ecosystems have been studied in some detail for  Antarctic waters
              but comparable studies have not been carried out  at high northern latitudes. 
              Recent evidence has documented a  thinning of ozone over Arctic seas,
              suggesting the potential for  similar UV effects in northern waters.  In this
              proposal we will  determine the effects of present-day ultraviolet radiation,
              as  well as the potential effects of increased UV irradiance, on  phytoplankton
              and ichthyoplankton in high Arctic latitudes.   Studies of Arctic
              phytoplankton, to be conducted in Norway, will  focus on (i) the effects of UV
              radiation on photosynthetic rates  and the effect on overall rates of primary
              production, (ii) the  extent to which cells can decrease their sensitivity of
              UV  radiation by synthesis of UV-absorbing compounds, (iii) species-  specific
              differences in UV resistance, and (iv) DNA repair  capacities which are unknown
              for northern plankton communites.   Studies of UV damage to ichthyoplankton
              have not been conducted  at either pole.  Recently developed methods allow us
              to measure  the amount of UV induced DNA damage in individual free-living  eggs
              and larvae.  The results of these studies, done at temperate  latitudes, have
              shown that the diel cycle of damage and repair,  the pre-exposure conditions,
              and interspecific differences  greatly effect the susceptablility to UV damage.
               The present  study will be the first attempt to measure the impact of UV on 
              early life-stages of important polar fisheries species.  The  proposal brings
              together the investigators' skills in measuring  UV damage together with the
              unique location, collaborators and  technical capabilities of the laboratories
              in Tromso, Norway.
