Title       : Predictability and Variability of the Present Climate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1998       
File        : a9321354

Award Number: 9321354
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4579220            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jagadish Shukla shukla@cola.iges.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Straus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Kinter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin K. Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Global Environ Soc
	      401 Powder Mill Road, Suite 302
	      Beltsville, MD  20705    301/595-7000

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1324,4444,5928,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9321354  Shukla, Jagadish  Schneider, Edwin K.  Kinter, James L. 
              Straus, David M.  Institute of Global Environment and Society, Inc.  Title:
              Predictability and Variability of the Present Climate    This research
              encompasses a number of closely related projects  which are aimed at
              understanding the low frequency (monthly to  decadal) variations of the coupled
              climate system consisting of the  atmosphere, hydrosphere, land biosystems,
              oceans and ice, primarily  in the present climatic regime.  Goals include both
              the ability to  simulate these low frequency variations with complex numerical 
              models of the individual and coupled systems, and to estimate the  degree to
              which these variations are predictable.  The methods to  be used will involve
              extensive experimentation with existing  numerical models and schemes to couple
              them, and extensive  diagnosis and analysis of observational data from both
              existing  records and from the retrospective assimilation of atmospheric data 
              planned by the major operational centers of the world for the near  future.  In
              addition to the intrinsic importance of understanding  and predicting the low
              frequency variability of the climate system,   this work will help to define
              the accuracy and coverage  requirements for current and future climate
              observing systems in  order to adequately monitor the current behavior of the
              climate  system.         1. Predictability of the coupled ocean-land-atmosphere
              system.   The predictability of this system on both the seasonal and 
              interannual time scales will be systematically explored, the former  by a large
              number of seasonal atmospheric simulations, and the  latter from integrations
              of the fully coupled system.         2. Land-surface-climate interactions.  The
              importance of  vegetation change, albedo feedback and the global boundary 
              conditions in the Sahel drought will be explored.  The potential  impacts of
              man's activity on climate through the (hypothetical)  doubling of the world's
              deserts, global deforestati on and the  desiccation of the Aral Sea region will
              be addressed.         3. Climate diagnostics.  Diagnostics of the planned 
              reassimilation of atmospheric data includes a detailed examination  of the
              hydrological cycle, and global energy cycle and the critical 
              tropical-extratropical interactions.  These efforts will be aided  by the
              availability of consistent estimates of the subtle  quantities of divergence,
              specific humidity and diabetic heating.         4. Simulation of the present
              climate.  To test the ability of  numerical models to simulate the observed low
              frequency anomalies,  the PIs plan an integration of the atmospheric model for
              about 100  years using observed boundary conditions.  Similarly, they will 
              integrate the coupled climate system model for several hundred  years in order
              to test the realism of its overall statistical  behavior.         5. Climate
              observing system simulation.  The PIs will estimate  the sensitivity of the
              atmospheric circulation to many types of  changes in the boundary conditions. 
              They will "observe"  numerically modelled climate system using methods similar
              to the  current (and future) observing systems for the real climate to  explore
              their sampling and accuracy characteristics systematically.    This research is
              important because it seeks to enhance knowledge  about climate processes and
              improvements in predicting climate  variation and change.    Part of this
              research is funded under the USGCRP CMAP project.
