Title       : Science and Popular Culture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1998       
File        : a9321061

Award Number: 9321061
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Eamon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321061  Eamon  The history of science is largely the history of "great men" who
               develop the "great theories" or make the most exciting discoveries.   Numerous
              biographies have been written about Isaac Newton, Charles  Darwin and Albert
              Einstein. Their papers are published; theories--  indeed, even scientific
              revolutions--are named after them.  While  the general public certainly knows
              of these great men, they hardly  ever understand the theories which they
              presented.  Instead, they  embrace such popular theories as astrology,
              creationism, and the  occult.  Legislatures in the United States pass laws to
              support the  presentation of creationism in the schools while whole cultures 
              consult astrologers about appropriate times for important events.   Even the
              first lady of the United States consulted one in order to  determine when her
              husband should hold summit conferences.  What is  the relationship of science
              and this popular culture?  If we are to  understand the role of science and
              technology in our society, we  must examine how scientific theories that we in
              the scientific  community accept as correct relate to theories that capture the
               attention of popular culture.  It is this relationship that  Professor Eamon
              is examining.    Specifically, Professor Eamon is examining the relationship
              between  scientific and popular cultures in Italy, focusing on the life, 
              career, and intellectual milieu of the Italian surgeon and natural  philosopher
              Leonardo Fioravanti.  Fioravanti appropriated ideas and  practices from both
              scientific and popular cultures, and developed  an empiricist natural
              philosophy that reflected both.  He  popularized his "science of experience in
              a series of eight widely  read books on medicine, natural philosophy, and
              social criticism.   By showing how Fioravanti understood (and sometimes
              misunderstood)  academic science and medicine, and how he integrated it with
              his  experiences, Professor Eamon hopes to explore the dynamics of  cultural
              appropriation of science and the crea tion of "popular  science" that mirrors
              in a very distorted sense the theories of the  leading scientists of his day. 
              ***
