Title       : Ground-Based Measurements of Sulfate Production in Marine Clouds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1995   
File        : a9321113

Award Number: 9321113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39887              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean A. Hegg deanhegg@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Zoller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1309,9237,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              Hegg       Because the precipitation of clouds is low, sulfate particles  go
              through several cloud condensation-evaporation events before  they are removed.
               This processing within the cloud, involving the  absorption of gaseous SO2
              into cloud droplets and subsequent  oxidation to SO4, has two important
              effects.  First, initially small  particles gain mass during cloud
              condensation-evaporation cycles  and are thus able to reach activatable size at
              lower cloud  supersaturation.  This enables them to impact a much wider range
              of  cloud type, e.g. the low supersaturation marine stratus clouds that  are so
              important climatically.  Second, an increase in mass occurs  even for larger
              particles (r 0.1 um) that have served as cloud  condensation nuclei (CCN)
              during several could cycles.  These  particles grow into the Mie scattering
              regime and become more  effective light scatters.  In summary, the aqueous
              phase production  of sulfate in clouds (followed by evaporation) potentially
              produces  aerosols that are better CCN and more efficient light scatterers.    
                In this SGER study, an attempt is to be made to quantify in-  cloud sulfate
              production in marine stratiform clouds at the Cheeka  Peak Research Station on
              the Olympic Peninsula in Washington state.   The consequences of the amount of
              sulfate production observed for  direct and indirect radiative forcing of
              climate will then be  examined.  This will be done both through diagnostic
              modeling  studies to relate the observed sulfate production to changes in CCN 
              activity and light-scattering, and by comparing the results with  those of
              colleagues who will be simultaneously measuring the  particle size
              distribution, and light-scattering properties of the  sulfate aerosols.
