Title       : Approaches to Improved Synthesis Design: Mechanistic and Synthetic Studies on
               New Annelation Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9321676

Award Number: 9321676
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $485000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Wender wenderp@leland.standford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                            The focus of this research is the implementation
              of new and undeveloped reactions, with an  emphasis on organometallic
              chemistry, photochemistry, and reactive intermediates, which  provide
              significantly simplified and efficient solutions to general problems in
              synthesis, which  allow for the advancement of the fundamental understanding of
              the theory, mechanism,  structure-reactivity relationships, and selectivities
              of these processes, and which provide access  to new materials of structural
              and/or biological importance.  The research addresses three major  areas. 
              First is the development of arene-alkene meta-cycloadditions, including the
              first studies  on asymmetric cycloaddition and the application to the synthesis
              of crinipellin, the most complex  tetraquinane known, as well as a novel
              approach to new materials incorporating the fenestrane  ring system.  The
              second area is the development of new transition metal mediated reactions, 
              including systematic studies of specific natural products.  The third area is
              an investigation of  radical facilitated rearrangements, and as yet undeveloped
              and potentially general concept of  synthetic and mechanistic significance. 
              Further significance of this program derives from the  enormous potential of
              photochemistry and organometallic chemistry in development of more 
              environmentally acceptable processes, as these methods provide little or no
              reagent derived  waste.    With this Renewal award, the Synthetic Organic
              Program is supporting the research of Dr. Paul  A. Wender of the Department of
              Chemistry at Stanford University.  Professor Wender will focus  his work on the
              design and development of fundamentally new reactions, reagents, and strategies
               for organic synthesis.  The emphasis of the research is on the implementation
              of new or  undeveloped reactions which provide significantly simplified and
              structural and/or biological  importance.  Fu rther significance of this
              program derives from the enormous potential of  photochemistry and
              organometallic chemistry, central themes of this project, in the development 
              of more environmentally acceptable processes, as these methods provide little
              or no reagent  derived waste.
