Title       : RUI: Proyecto EK Balam Archaeological Research Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9321603

Award Number: 9321603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251075             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Ringle biringle@davidson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George J. Bey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Davidson College
	      102 North Main St.
	      Davidson, NC  28035    704/894-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321603  Ringle    With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Ringle, Bey
              and  colleagues will conduct two seasons of archaeological research at  Ek
              Balam, a Mayan site located in the Yucatan peninsula of  Mexico. Ek Balam was
              occupied during the height of prehistoric  Mayan development and is one of the
              half-dozen largest sites in  this region. Settlement size is paralleled by
              architectural  investment and the largest mount measures 165 by 65 meters at
              the  base and rises 31 m in height. Drs. Ringle and Bey wish to  understand the
              internal organization of the city, how the core  area of monumental
              architecture relates to more outlying regions  and how Ek Balam itself
              interacted with other such entities. To  accomplish these goals they will carry
              out four related  activities. They will continue past mapping work at the site 
              center and survey and record architecture. Surface materials such  as ceramics
              will also be collected. Secondly, excavation at the  site center will be begun.
              Stratigraphic excavations will provide  information on ceramic chronology,
              architectural style and the  sequence of building construction. Third, a survey
              will be  conducted of Ek Balam's hinterland - the region within 10-12 km.  of
              the site - and both architectural constructions and associated  agricultural
              fields will be noted. Finally a preliminary  reconnaissance will be made within
              a 20 km wide corridor between  Ek Balam and the large site of Chichen Itza. The
              results,  hopefully, will shed light on the relations between these two  large
              Mayan cities.    In the Yucatan peninsula and adjacent regions of Central
              America  Mayan peoples were organized into units which approached state  level
              in size and thousands of people subsisted in areas which  are only sparsely
              inhabited today. Large sites such as Ek Balam  served as centers and
              populations arrayed themselves around such  places. Over the last several
              decades archaeologists have gained  much understanding of how these "centers"
              and associated  hinterlands fun ctioned. However how such units were organized
              -  or not organized - on a larger scale has been little investigated  and is
              little understood. Drs. Ringle and Bey wish to examine  this issue. Because Ek
              Balam is located in the region of Chichen  Itza, another large center it will
              be possible to study the  interaction between the two.    This research is
              important for several reasons. It will provide  data of interest to many
              archaeologists. It will increase our  understanding of how, at a regional level
              large scale societies  emerge and interact. The project will also help to
              foster  research at an undergraduate institution and actively involve 
              undergraduates in the work.  ***
