Title       : Atomic and Electronic Properties of Surfaces and Interfaces of Wide Band Gap
               Compound Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1995   
File        : a9321826

Award Number: 9321826
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antoine Kahn kahn@ee.Princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9321826  Kahn    Technical abstract:  This study will focus on the structural, 
              chemical, and electronic properties of surfaces and metal  interfaces of wide
              band gap zinc-selenide and III-V nitrides  (gallium nitride, indium nitride,
              aluminum nitride).  The validity  of the Schottky barrier models developed for
              narrower gap  semiconductors will be tested for these materials.  The nature of
               electronic surface states, their impact on the surface band bending  and their
              role in the formation of metal-semiconductor barriers  will be determined.  The
              project will also investigate the  occurrence of negative electron affinity
              which has been reported  for aluminum nitride surfaces.  Formation of
              metal-zinc-selenide  and metal-nitride barriers will be investigated in order
              to  establish the limits of the dependence of Schottky barriers on  these
              materials.  The thermal stability of interfaces, especially  important for high
              temperature applications (gallium nitride) will  be investigated.  This will
              include a search for diffusion and  chemical reaction barriers (e. g.,
              titanium-gallium nitride).   Finally, the difficult problem of making ohmic
              contacts to these p-  doped semiconductors will be addressed.  These contacts
              are crucial  for the development of light emitting devices.  Two techniques
              will  be studied:  combination of high p-doping and large work function  metal
              (platinum) for p-gallium nitride, and high electronegativity  polymeric and
              metallic (poly sulfur nitride) contact on p-zinc-  selenide.    Non-technical
              abstract:  This project will investigate the  structural, chemical and
              electronic properties of interfaces of two  important types of semiconductors: 
              zinc selenide and the Group  III-V nitrides (gallium nitride, indium nitride,
              and aluminum  nitride), which have applications in optoelectronics (emission in
               the green-blue for the II-VIs, blue-ultraviolet for the nitrides)  and high
              temperature electronics (nitrides).  The proposed work  will begin to establish
              for these materials a  solid understanding  of their interface properties for
              future technological  developments, as well as to test the validity of
              interface concepts  and metal-semiconductor barrier models developed for
              narrower gap  semiconductors.  The formation of ohmic contacts will be 
              investigated, since these are crucial for the operation of high-  performance,
              reliable, light-emitting devices.  For example the  chemical stability of these
              contacts will be modulated via  preparation of diffusion barriers which should
              lead to interface  engineering of these materials.  ***
