Title       : Combined Particle and Fluid Simulations of the Magnetosphere, Its Boundary
               Layers and Current Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1996       
File        : a9321665

Award Number: 9321665
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204518             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Winglee winglee@geophys.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard S. Steinolfson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9321665  Winglee  MHD is one of the main tools used to model the dynamics of the
               magnetosphere.  We show both analytically and numerically that the  resistive
              Ohm's law on which MHD is based is not appropriate for  the magnetosphere
              because much of the plasma and energy transport  occurs across thin boundary
              layers  and as a result gives an  incomplete description of the magnetospheric
              current system.  We  are able to identify for the first time the intrinsic
              particle  effects that control (i) the structure of magnetospheric boundary 
              layers, (ii) the dissipation in current sheets needed for  reconnection and
              (iii) the currents that map into and out of the  dayside and nightside auroral
              regions.  These effects are  determined from particle/two fluid simulations
              that provide an  advancement over single fluid MHD by removing ambiguities
              arising  from the imposition of anomalous resistivity and by resolving the 
              mapping of the region 1 nd 2 auroral currents.  The proposed work  seeks
              development of (i) regional particle simulations in both 2-D  and 3-D to
              identify the structure, current system, and properties  of the particle
              distributions within the magnetopause, LLBL and  magnetotail, (ii) modified
              two-fluid simulations in 3-D to provide  full global mapping of the currents
              emanating from these regions  into the auroral region and their effect on the
              global dynamics  through the dissipation they produce on the magnetopause and 
              magnetotail current sheets, and (iii) cross-calibration between the  particle
              and fluid simulations with the Tsyganenko model to test  the accuracy of the
              modeling and, more importantly, to aid in the  construction of a model that
              predicts the average response of the  magnetosphere and the auroral currents. 
              The 3-D global simulations are to be based on a modified set of  two-fluid
              equations that have been test calibrated against particle  simulations.  It
              uses a modified version of the generalized Ohm's  law and incorporates an
              additional equation describing the electron   motion responsible for the
              dayside and nightside auroral currents.   The particle simulations will
              incorporate a new finite-difference  algorithm for the field solutions that can
              enable variable grid  spacing and thereby enable large scale regional modelling
              of  kinetic processes.  The proposed work will have important applications to 
              magnetospheric physics by providing global mapping of both magnetic  field
              lines and currents into and out of the magnetosphere, and by  identifying the
              structure and particle distributions associated  with critical boundary layers.
               It has the potential of providing  a direct link between ground-based
              observations of magnetic field  perturbations and the motion of the auroral
              oval with in-situ  spacecraft observations of magnetic field perturbations and
              the  motion of the auroral oval with in-situ spacecraft observations of 
              energetic particles.  In addition, through the comparison with the  Tsyganenko
              model we will be able to construct an average  magnetospheric model that can be
              used to predict the magnetospheric  activity as determined by Kp for prevailing
              solar wind conditions.   All these applications meet important objectives of
              NSF's  Magnetospheric Program.  ***
