Title       : Support to Facilitate Collaboration of U.S. Scientists with European Scientists
               Participating in the European Science Foundation's GISDATA Programme
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1997    
File        : a9321119

Award Number: 9321119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Goodchild good@ncgia.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,5914,5980,9139,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321119  GOODCHILD       The development and use of geographic information
              systems  (GISs) for the collection, storage, analysis, and presentation of 
              spatial data has had powerful and productive impacts on geography  and related
              disciplines in recent decades.  The importance of  this new technology and the
              advancement of analytic methods that  employ GISs has been given considerable
              attention within the  private and public sectors.  In 1988, the National
              Science  Foundation (NSF) provided support that led to the establishment  of
              the National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis  (NCGIA), a
              consortium dedicated to research, education, and  outreach with respect to the
              advancement of geographic  information science.  Although the United States
              initially was  the locus of activity regarding GISs, scientists and 
              practitioners from other nations increasingly have engaged in  activities aimed
              at advancing the capabilities and uses of GISs.  In 1993, the European Science
              Foundation (ESF) started a  scientific program in Geographic Information
              Systems Data  Integration and Data Base Design (GISDATA).  This program is 
              designed to foster international collaborative research.  In  order to
              integrate the efforts of scientists from the U.S. with  the developing network
              of European scientists, this award will  support the efforts of the NCGIA to
              coordinate research  activities in the U.S. with those taking place in Europe. 
              In  particular, the participation of U.S. scientists in crucial  GISDATA
              meetings will be supported, as will the involvement of  more than a dozen
              early-career researchers in a summer institute  to be held in Europe in 1996. 
              These activities will be matched  by the ESF, which will send leading European
              scientists to  important U.S. meetings and funds participation of younger 
              European scientists at a 1995 summer institute sponsored by the  NCGIA in the
              U.S.  Other federal agencies and private-sector  firms are expected to
              complement NSF's support of this project.       Throu gh this award, the NCGIA
              will involve more U.S.  scientists in activities that will understand and
              remove  impediments to integration of geographic information from  different
              disciplines and from multiple national and regional  sources.  These activities
              also will develop improved methods for  database design, especially those
              currently inhibited by problems  in data integration.  The award also will
              facilitate  collaborations among U.S. and European scientists in a  partnership
              that is more than the sum of its parts, and it will  test new forms of mutual
              support between NSF and a major European  counterpart.
