Title       : Dissertational Improvement: Water and Energy Balance Constraints on the Nesting
               Ecology of Tropical Seabirds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1995  
File        : a9321759

Award Number: 9321759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5616               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Ricklefs   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Sievert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321759  Ricklefs    Both energy  and mass constraints are continually
              interacting to  influence the ecology of organisms. No where is this more
              clearly  demonstrated than in nesting tropical seabirds where there is  strong
              selection to store energy for the incubation shift and  also to maintain water
              balance in this hot, harsh, environment.  In the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands,
              Wedge-tailed Shearwaters  compete for nesting burrows, and those without
              burrows (44% of  the population) must nest on the ground surface. If these
              sites  have little protection from solar radiation, only 5-11% will  produce
              chicks. In contrast to shearwaters, both Sooty Terns and  Brown Noddies
              regularly nest in the open sun and 85% of the nests  produce chicks. To better
              understand this disparity in ability to  nest in a hot environment, the PI has
              constructed a conceptual  model that links energy and material balances so that
              their  interactions can be clearly understood. Since 1990, the PI has  been
              collecting data to build this model and hopes to finish it  this year by
              determining the total body water, water flux, and  daily energy expenditure of
              shearwaters, terns, and noddies at  nest sites varying in amount of shade.
              These determinations can  be made by laboratory analysis of blood samples
              collected in 1991  from birds injected with deuterium or doubly-labeled water.
              In  addition, the PI hopes to analyze the composition of meals, nasal 
              secretions, urine and feces previously collected from the above  relative
              importance of various energy and water balance  variables. Some characteristics
              that may prevent shearwaters from  successfully nesting in hot microclimates
              are long incubation  shifts (9 days), infrequent drinking of seawater, and the 
              formation of stomach oils that reduce the amount of gastric space  available
              for water. The model of interacting balances, formed in  this study, should be
              easily modified to evaluate the effect of  other types of competing  balances
              on the ecology of organisms.  ***
