Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows: Time-scales and Analytical Units:
               Identifying Patterns of Variability and Change in the Late Pleistocene
               Archaeological Record
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1994      
File        : a9321410

Award Number: 9321410
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie L. Hartzell leslieh@bishopmuseum.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321410  Hartzell      This award is under the International Junior Investigator
               and Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S.  scientists and engineers
              to conduct three to twelve months  of research abroad at research centers of
              proven  excellence. The program's awards provide opportunities for  joint
              research, and the use of unique or complementary  facilities, expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.    This award will support a twelve-month
              postdoctoral  research visit by Dr. Leslie L. Hartzell to work with Prof.  Jim
              Allen, Drs. Richard Cosgrove and Nicola Stern at La  Trobe University in
              Bundoora, Australia.    This research will examine the long-term record of 
              Pleistocene Human foraging patterns through the  chronostratigraphic analyses
              of archaeofaunal remains  excavated from three Pleistocene cave sites in
              southwest  Tasmania, occupied ca. 30,000-14,000 years ago.  Data on non 
              cultural and cultural site formation processes affecting  each cave, its
              geochronologies and patterns of association  between the faunal remains and
              other categories of  archaeological data will be used to investigate the 
              structure and time resolution of these assemblages.  Sites  will be compared at
              similar temporal scales on the basis of  the analyses of their site formation
              processes, radiocarbon  chronologies and faunal assemblages.    This research
              has  particular consequences for discussions of Australian  archaeology where
              the rapidly expanding Pleistocene record  across the continent is forcing
              researchers to rethink views  of the past as representing a continuity with the
               ethnographic present and to direct attention to the more  difficult task of
              exploring spatio-temporal cultural  variability within long-term archaeological
              records.  Collaboration with preeminent Australian archaeologists  exploring
              questions related to the construction of time  scales and explanations of
              change in the  Pleistocene/Holocene archaeological record will enhance the 
              interpretive strategies presently being b rought to bear on  the North American
              record. ***
