Title       : Estimation of Semiparametric Limited Dependent
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1994     
File        : a9321024

Award Number: 9321024
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49763              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bo E. Honore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9321024  Honore    This project contributes to our understanding of the
              properties  of statistical models that are widely used in economic research.  
              The research will provide whole new classes of econometric  estimators that are
              not subject to some of the limitations of  existing methods.  The results from
              this project will be  especially useful for a more thorough analysis of
              economic panel  data such as the survey data from the Panel Study of Income 
              Dynamics and for the econometric analysis of the duration of  unemployment.   
              More specifically, the project continues research on the  estimation of
              semiparametric models in three areas.  The first  part of the project shows
              that it is possible to modify the large  battery of estimators for the censored
              regression model in the  econometrics literature in such a way that they can be
              applied  when the censoring points are random and not known for all 
              individuals.  The advantage of this approach is that the  resulting estimators
              will make weaker assumptions than the  proposed in the literature.  For
              example, the investigator will  be able to construct estimators that require
              only conditional  symmetry or quantile independence of the errors rather than 
              independence between the errors and the regressors.  The second part of the
              project concerns the estimation of  discrete choice panel data models.  It is
              known that a  conditional logit approach can be used to estimate panel data 
              logit models when all the explanatory variables are exogenous or  when the only
              explanatory variables are lagged variables.  Thus  far, it is not known how to
              estimate such models when the  explanatory variables consist of lagged
              dependent variables as  well as exogenous variables.  The approach taken in
              this project  will be used in a logit as well as a semiparametric setting.  The
              third part continues work on econometric duration models.   The investigator
              demonstrated that it is possible to modify his  estimators of the parameters of
              a mixed Weibull distribution i n  such a way that rates of convergence
              arbitrarily close to root-n.
