Title       : New Developments and Applications in Coupled Clusters and Density Dependent
               Electronic Structure Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1996   
File        : a9321297

Award Number: 9321297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294810             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gustavo E. Scuseria guscus@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This research is supported by the NSF theoretical and computational  
              chemistry program.  Coupled-cluster and density functional  methods in  
              molecular electronic structure theory will be studied and compared to   search
              for an ab-initio-derived-functional for density functional theory.    An
              improved scheme will be explored for computing the triples   perturbative
              correction in Brueckner doubles theory.   These   computational methods will be
              applied to the study of transition metal   systems and combustion processes.   
              In principle, the physical and chemical properties of  molecular systems   can
              be obtained from either the many-body wavefunction (traditional ab   initio
              theory) or from the electronic charge density (density functional   theory). 
              There presently exist highly developed computer programs for   applying either
              of these two theories to any of a wide variety of   chemical problems.  Ab
              initio equations, particularly those of coupled   cluster theory, may require
              very heavy computations using supercomputers,   but these equations are firmly
              based on well established mathematical and   physical principles.  The
              equations of density functional theory offer   significant computational
              advantages, but serious questions remain   concerning the precise form of these
              equations.  The present comparative   study of ab initio and density functional
              methods attempts to develop   improved computational methods for molecular
              electronic structure   computations which combine the strengths of these two
              different   formalisms.  The development of such an improved density functional
                theory is currently a hot topic in  modern theoretical chemistry.   A  
              breakthrough in this area  will greatly extend the size of molecular   systems
              for which reliable theoretical predictions can be made using   modern
              computers, and will almost certainly find wide and immediate   application.  
              The proposed test calculations on transition metal   compounds constitute the
              initial steps toward the rational design  of new   industrial catalysts.
