Title       : A Process of Tracing Study of Information Search and "Rational" Decision Making
               in Elections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1994     
File        : a9321236

Award Number: 9321236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125018             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard R. Lau ricklau@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9321236  Lau    The vote decision is made in the context of a dynamic ever- 
              changing information environment, and yet the chief methodology  with which
              political scientists study elections, surveys, is a  static one.  This
              investigation explores the information  acquisition and choice strategies
              employed by voters during  political campaigns with a new research technique, a
              dynamic  process tracing methodology, that allows the vote decision to be 
              studied while it is being made.    The essence of this methodology is to
              provide information about  (fictitious) candidates in a manner that allows the
              researchers  to record and study the way in which that information is 
              gathered.  This is accomplished by the use of modern, multi-media  computer
              technology.  Information about candidates (e.g., policy  positions;
              background/personal characteristics) is stored in the  computer; however, only
              brief "labels" for this information  (Smith' stand on issue "A") are visible
              and the information must  be physically "accessed" (by clicking a mouse) for it
              to be  learned.  The labels "scroll" down the computer screen so that  only a
              limited amount of information is available at any given  time.  This scrolling
              emulates the dynamic, ongoing nature of  political campaigns.      The
              implications of this research for models of the vote decision  and for basic
              theories of democracy are significant. A new  methodology is developed that,
              for the first time, will allow a  direct assessment of how voters, with more or
              less personal  resources (i.e., expertise), gather information about candidates
               involved in political campaigns in more or less demanding  situations.  With
              this methodology scientists can explore how  expertise and broad campaign
              strategies affect the ways  information is gathered and combined into a
              decision, and how  those factors affect the normative "correctness" of the vote
               choice.  These are new questions for political scientists, and  this
              methodology promises to open many new fertile research  qu estions for study. 
              ***
