Title       : Dissertation Research: Population Differentiation in Migratory Raptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1994     
File        : a9321656

Award Number: 9321656
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8842               (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Thompson dthompsn@ccmail.nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brett R. Riddle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9321656  Thompson       Many species of North American birds of prey (raptors)
              breed  in northern North America and fly along several migration routes to 
              wintering areas in the southern United States and Mexico.  It is  hypothesized
              that because birds show a strong tendency to return to  their breeding grounds
              and because migratory habits seem to be  heritable, North American raptor
              species are composed of  populations which are geographically distinct from one
              another.  If  populations from different geographic areas use separate
              migratory  routes, it can be postulated that raptors using different migration 
              routes will be genetically and morphologically divergent.  The  current
              research will investigate morphological and mitochondrial  DNA (mtDNA)
              characteristics of four species of raptors which use  three migration routes. 
              Possible differences might stem from  unique predatory habits, differences in
              migratory requirements, or  individual responses to the local environment. 
              Mitochondrial DNA  provides an excellent tool for investigating differences
              between  populations within a species because it is a quickly evolving 
              molecule and can reflect genetic uniqueness which may evolve in  populations
              that are partially isolated from one another.  Little  is known to date of
              mtDNA relationships within and between raptor  populations especially as they
              relate to the geographic  distribution of species.%%%         This study will
              uniquely combine statistical analysis of  morphology with mtDNA relationships
              for four species of raptors  using the same migration routes.  This study will
              establish to what  degree raptors from different geographic areas in North
              America  have evolved unique morphological and genetic characteristics.  An 
              understanding of the differences between raptor populations within  species is
              essential to an understanding of the ecology of these  top predators and to
              further our knowledge of conservation and  evolutionary biology.***
