Title       : Dissertation Research: A Comparative Analysis of Two Orthopteran Hybrid Zones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1994  
File        : a9321453

Award Number: 9321453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9035               (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Futuyma futuyma@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9321453  Futuyma   Hybrid zones are areas in which two genetically distinct
              groups (e.g., "species") successfully reproduce with each other to at least a
              limited extent.  The study of hybrid zones allows us to learn about the
              mechanisms of reproductive isolation and their evolution, an understanding of
              which is critical to our understanding of speciation.  According to the most
              widely accepted species definition, two groups of organisms that are not
              interfertile belong to two different species.  Hybrid zones represent an
              intermediate stage of speciation, with limited gene flow between the "species":
              the two groups are neither completely interfertile nor completely
              reproductively isolated.  This intermediate situation provides a unique
              opportunity for biologists to apply analytical techniques developed for the
              study of single species population--techniques that cannot be used in the total
              absence of gene flow--to improve our understanding of how new species develop. 
               This study will take the nearly unique approach of comparing two
              geographically well separated hybrid zones involving the same two " species". 
              Patterns of variation in behavior, morphology, proteins, DNA, and chromosomes
              will be compared across the hybrid zones.  By combining this information with
              information about the differing ecology and history of contact between the two
              "species" in each zone, this research will improve understanding of how ecology
              and history may influence patterns of interactions between incompletely
              isolated taxa.  The research will also produce insight into the circumstances
              under which hybridizing groups may evolve into reproduc tively isolated
              species.  In addition to such inferences that may emerge from this study (which
              would then require testing in other contact zones), the basic information
              gathered to describe the hybrid zones will permit detailed studies addressing a
              variety of questions in the future, as well as the tracking of the two zones
              through time.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                             U   W                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     U   E   G   I   K   M   O   Q   S   U   W                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                !         !         !              F                                         
                                 W         W     (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial     
               j   j         j       j   "             h      # EL* eL* e  u   #            
              7        Crystal Blackshear Crystal Blackshear                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
