Title       : Automating Guidance and Response for Group Decision-Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1994      
File        : a9321018

Award Number: 9321018
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin A. Cantor                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110557             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marshall Scott Poole   (Principal Investigator current)
              Salvatore March  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerardine DeSanctis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0512003   Collective Decision-Making              
              80        Social Sciences                         
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Current advances in computer and information technologies suggest  a growing
              opportunity to combine automated systems and other  management arrangements
              such as self-managed groups and teams.    This project explores the
              possibilities of constructing an  automated computerized group decision support
              system (GDSS) to  help groups manage their decision-making processes more 
              effectively.  Ideally such a system would provide guidance for a  group,
              diagnose problems and opportunities and have response and  intervention
              capabilities.  Current theory and research provide a  body of rules and
              findings, but no integrative framework or model  to underpin such an effort. 
              This study develops a formal  representation of group decision-making
              processes.  Using this  representation, the project identifies cues which
              discriminate  between effective and ineffective decision-making processes for 
              different types of decision tasks.  The study also addresses the  impacts of
              GDSS guidance and response on group decision making  and its comparative
              advantages to facilitation or other "human"  forms of guidance.  Data to
              develop and test the model come from  laboratory experiments and a large set of
              recorded team meetings  from two organizations.  An obvious extension of this
              effort is a  prototype GDSS; however, the more immediate contribution of the 
              project is basic knowledge about group decision making using an  inclusive
              theory of group processes which emphasizes key content  and process variables
              and their interrelations.
