Title       : SGER: Effects on Record Precipitation Inputs on Soil-Plant Nitrogen
               Relationships in Tallgrass Prairie
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1994     
File        : a9321592

Award Number: 9321592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Blair jblair@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clarence L. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1325,9237,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9321592  Blair  Our conceptual understanding of the structure and function of
              tallgrass ecosystems is based on the central role that an extremely variable
              climate, particularly precipitation, plays in this system.  Previous research
              has documented the importance of seasonal water deficits, and longer-term
              droughts, on nutrient cycling processes and plant responses.  However, much
              less is known about the impacts of excessive precipitation inputs on plant
              communities and ecosystem-level responses in tallgrass prairie.  At the Konza
              Prairie LTER site we are currently experiencing the wettest consecutive
              one-year period since local weather data collections began in 1890.  This
              "100-500 year event" has presented us with an unique opportunity to examine the
              effects of excess precipitation on soil and plant processes in tallgrass
              prairie, a system adapted to moisture deficits.  We expect excess precipitation
               inputs to alter soil-plant N relationships and to increase N losses and N
              limitations, with greatest subsequent impacts occurring on the upland sites of
              annually burned watersheds.  We request funding which will allow us to (1)
              quantify the immediate effects of record precipitation inputs on annual
              production of forbs and grasses on upland and lowland sites of annually burned
              and long-term unburned watersheds that are not currently measured with core
              LTER funds, (2) evaluate changes in soil nutrient pools, with emphasis on
              patterns on patterns of N availability and plant responses in the short term
              (end of this growing season and the year following excess precipitation), and
              (3) provide a basis for evaluating longer-term interactions of elevated annual
              precipitation and fire frequency on N-limitations and plant responses.  SGER
              funding will provide for more detailed measurement of responses over two
              growing seasons(1993 and 1994), and provide a baseline for longer-term
              monitoring by the Konza LTER program.  We will establish a series of paired
              experimental plots in both upland and lowland areas of  annually burned and
              long-term unburned watersheds, consisting of control and N fertilized plots. 
              Response variables to be measured will include above-and below-ground plant
              biomass, N losses to fire next spring, rates of N mineralization and patterns
              of N availability in the next growing season, annual above-ground NPP, and
              plant community composition.
