Title       : Dissertation Research: Energetic Demands of Production of Young in the
               Chiropteran species, Phyllostomus hastatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1994     
File        : a9321745

Award Number: 9321745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Kunz kunz@bio.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9321745   Kunz       In nature, the energy an adult devotes to reproduction will
               affect not only the survival of a particular litter, but its  ability to
              produce future offspring.   Pregnancy and lactation  place especially high
              energy and nutrient demands on the female,  which may increase her
              susceptibility to starvation or disease.   Thus, energy devoted to pregnancy
              and lactation must be  counterbalanced against the female's future reproductive
              potential.   Compromise must also be reached in balancing length of gestation 
              against duration of lactation.  Gestation is relatively inexpensive  compared
              to lactation, as nutrients can be  transferred directly to  the developing
              young and thermoregulatory costs are minimal.   However, transport of the
              growing fetus can impede normal daily  activities and increase risk of
              predation.  Patterns of energy  expenditure during pregnancy and lactation
              should thus reflect the  costs of maintaining and transporting a fetus versus
              feeding and  caring for developing young.%%%       The goal of the proposed
              research is to conduct a series of  field and laboratory experiments to measure
              the cost associated  with pregnancy in an omnivorous tropical  bat,
              Phyllostomus  hastatus.  Daily energy expenditure and allocation will be 
              quantified by measuring field metabolic rate (using doubly-labeled  water) and
              body composition (through isotope dilution) of females  at progressive stages
              of pregnancy.  Nocturnal time-budgets of  foraging females will be constructed
              using radio-telemetry to test  the hypothesis that foraging time is a trade-off
              between supplying  the growing needs of the fetus and minimizing the cost of 
              transporting a developing embryo.  Diet composition and nutritional  content
              will be analyzed to determine how diet composition  correlates with the cost
              imposed by pregnancy.  Completion of these  projects will be integrated with
              comparable data in the same  species to provide important insights into the
              costs and  compromises associated with reproduc tion in an omnivorous volant 
              mammal.***
