Title       : Workshop on the Assembly of Gondwana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1993     
File        : a9305276

Award Number: 9305276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Rogers   (Principal Investigator current)
              Raphael Unrug  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohamed I. Sultan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The concept of a supercontinent, named "Gondwana, "has stirred            
              the imaginations and stimulated the research of geoscientists since            
              the first suggestion of the possibility of continental drift.  The             
              Mesozoic-Cenozoic fragmentation of Gondwana is now reasonably well             
              understood, but the original of the supercontinent is still largely            
              a matter of speculation.  Because Gondwana constituted                         
              approximately one half of the world's continental crust, the                   
              history of assembly of Gondwana is a large part of the history of              
              assembly of "Pangea" near the end of the Paleozoic.  Furthermore,              
              the age and sequence of accretion of fragments to Gondwana place               
              important constraints on efforts to decipher the configuration and             
              history of fragmentation of a middle-to-late-Proterozoic                       
              supercontinent ("Rodinia").                                                    
                                                                                             
                   The principal investigators wish to study the assembly of                 
              Gondwana by organizing coordinated research projects that                      
              investigate geographic areas and use techniques that are regarded              
              as particularly useful.  As a start, they will hold a workshop to              
              identify problems that are both  important and require a                       
              coordinated approach.  They have assembled an international group              
              of scientists with expertise in various geographic areas and                   
              geoscience disciplines and will bring them together in the spring              
              of 1993.  The primary purpose of this workshop will be to prepare              
              a proposal for further coordinated research projects.
