Title       : SEM and Electron Microprobe Analysis of Etruscan Amphoras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1993      
File        : a9305144

Award Number: 9305144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15933              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Dietler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael Dietler will             
              conduct chemical analyses on a series of ceramic samples of                    
              Etruscan amphoras collected from well dated sites in Southern                  
              France. Using techniques only recently applied to ceramics he will             
              conduct combined scanning electron microscope (SEM) and electron               
              microprobe examination. On this basis he will determine the                    
              chemical composition of the constituent clays and hopefully                    
              separate the amphorae into distinct groups. He will then compare               
              these groupings to those derived from stylistic analysis of such               
              attributes as vessel shape and size. In this first step of a longer            
              term project Dr. Dietler hopes to either confirm or revise the                 
              topology developed by archaeologists over many years. In the next              
              stage he will attempt to use similar chemical analysis to tie these            
              classes to places of origin in Etruscan Italy. Surprisingly,                   
              although archaeologists know that these amphorae were made by                  
              Etruscan peoples in Italy, most recovered examples come either from            
              shipwrecks or sites in southern France. Very little information is             
              available from their points of origin. These vessels were used to              
              carry wine to France and were ultimately discarded there.                      
                                                                                             
              The underlying issue which Dr. Dietler wishes to examine concerns              
              neither wine nor amphorae per se, but rather cultural, political               
              and economic relations between political entities at different                 
              stages of development. During Etruscan times, from approximately               
              the 7th to 3rd millennia BC state level societies developed in                 
              Italy while in northern and western Europe people still lived at a             
              less complex tribal stage of organization. Dr. Dieter wants to                 
              understand the strategies employed by the Etruscans in the                     
              interactions with their less developed neighbors and how groups in             
              southern France reacted and underwent partial, selective                       
              acculturation.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              In addition to the knowledge this research will provide about                  
              European prehistory, it is important because of the methodological             
              contribution it will make. Although the combined SEM electron                  
              microprobe technique is currently used in geological studies it has            
              not been applied in archaeological contexts. If it is successful,              
              it may greatly simplify ceramic analysts' work. Dr. Dieter's                   
              research constitutes a first practical test and the methodological             
              implications are considerable.
