Title       : Function of Yeast Clathrin Heavy and Light Chains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1996       
File        : a9305287

Award Number: 9305287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra K. Lemmon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9305287  Lemmon    The clathrin light chains (LC's) have been implicated in
              various  aspects of clathrin assembly and disassembly; however, there is 
              little in vivo evidence supporting any of these roles for the LC in  clathrin
              function.  In this laboratory, preliminary in vivo  evidence has been obtained
              that the LC is important for the  stabilization of the clathrin heavy chain
              (HC) in Saccharomyces  cerevisiae.  This is a novel function for LC's, which
              will be  examined in more detail by taking advantage of the moleuclar  genetic
              approaches available in the yeast system.  The specific  aims are to: 1,
              examine the importance of the clathrin light chain  in stabilization of the
              heavy chain; 2, determine whether  overexpression of HC's can suppress the
              phenotypes caused by LC-  deficiency (if true, this would suggest that HC's can
              function in  the absence of LC's); 3, determine whether LC's are involved in 
              trimerization of HC's; and 4, localize the region of the LC that is  required
              for HC stabilization.  %%%  In eukaryotic cells, clathrin-coated membranes are
              involved in the  selective transport of receptors during endocytosis and
              sorting of  newly synthesized secretory proteins at the trans region of the 
              Golgi apparatus.  The clathrin triskelion, which forms the  polyhedral lattice
              found in clathrin-coated membranes, is composed  of three heavy chains of
              approximately 180 kD and three light  chains of 25-30 kD.  Much information
              concerning the components  that regulate clathrin-mediated vesicular transport
              has come from  in vitro biochemical analysis or studies in animal cells.  In
              this  laoratory, clathrin is being studied in the yeast Saccharomyces 
              cerevisiae because of the unique opportunities to apply molecular  and genetic
              methods to the analysis of vesicular transport.    Suppression studies
              analyzing the effect of overexpression of  clathrin light chains in yeast
              suggest that light chains are  important for stabilization of clathrin heavy
              chains.  This  function for light chains, whi ch has not previously been 
              documented, will be analyzed in vivo using the molecular and  genetic
              approaches available in the yeast system.  These studies  may lead to practical
              applications in the area of biotechnology,  particularly in terms of
              genetically engineering yeasts or other  cell types for improved secretion
              characteristics.  ***
