Title       : Acquisition of a Rheometer and Materials Processing Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1993 
File        : a9305286

Award Number: 9305286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61415              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen I. Winey winey@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9165,
Abstract    :
              9305286  Winey    Rheometry is the most common and reliable technique for
              measuring  viscoelastic properties of materials.  This rheometer, a 
              Rheometrics Solids Analyzer, satisfies the sample configuration  requirements
              of many researchers on campus, in that it can  accommodate molten polymers,
              glassy thin films, fibers,  concentrated solutions, rubber, and composites. 
              The processing  equipment, includes a melt mixer for combining a variety of 
              components and a small extruder to form samples for subsequent  structural and
              mechanical evaluation.    Throughout the School of Engineering and Applied
              Science and the  School of Arts and Sciences, this new equipment will
              compliment  the experimental techniques currently used by Penn faculty.  In 
              our research laboratories we prepare copolymer/homopolymer blends  by using a
              volatile solvent, a practice which is avoided by  industry, and evaluate the
              morphology and phase behavior using  transmission electron microscopy and small
              angle x-ray  scattering.  With the proposed equipment, blends will be prepared 
              without using a solvent and our extensive morphological studies  will be
              related to new rheological studies.  In another example,  preceramic polymers
              are currently studied at Penn by using  synthetic techniques elemental and
              thermal analysis, and wide  angle x-ray scattering.  The new equipment will
              provide a means  of fabricating fibers, using the extruder, and studying the 
              mechanical properties of the preceramic polymers, using the  rheometer.  Other
              research projects include: relating the percent  crystallinity and conductivity
              of a conducting polymer with the  viscoelastic properties of the materials,
              comparing the molecular  motion in polymer blends as measured by both diffusion
              and zero  shear viscosity, and testing theoretical models of ionomer  solutions
              by neutron scattering and rheology.    An important goal of this project is to
              make the research at Penn  more relevant to industrial concerns by using
              similar processing  techniques and g iving more emphasis to the interdependence
              of  microscopic structure and macroscopic properties.  ***
