Title       : Tyrosine-Phosphorylated Annexin I Binding to SRC Homology Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1993  
File        : a9305458

Award Number: 9305458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1993  
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36651              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry T. Haigler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9305458  Haigler  Growth factors such as EGF stimulate cell replication by
              binding to  transmembrane receptors with inducible protein-tyrosine kinase 
              activity.  The activated receptors undergo autophosphorylation,  then
              phosphorylate tyrosine residues of other regulatory proteins.   Recent studies
              indicate that non-catalytic src-homology 2 (SH2)  domains mediate these
              interactions by binding to phosphotyrosine  residues located within specific
              amino acid sequences.  The focus  of this research is the possible role in
              cellular signal  transduction for Annexin I, a substrate for the EGF
              receptor/kinase  whose biological function is unknown.  The proposed function
              of  tyrosine-phosphorylation of Annexin I is to promote binding to the  SH2
              domain of phospholipase C (PLC)-gamma-1 and perhaps other  regulatory proteins.
               The model is supported by the following:  1)  the amino acid sequence around
              the phosphorylation site of Annexin  I matches the consensus sequence of the
              site to which the SH2  domain of PLC-gamma-1 is known to bind; and 2)
              preliminary  experiments showed that Annexin I phosphorylated on tyr-21 (P-tyr-
               Annexin I) by the EGF receptor/kinase bound with high affinity to  a fusion
              protein containing SH2 and SH3 domains from PLC-gamma-1.   Hypothetical
              functions of P-tyr-Annexin I binding to regulatory  proteins include modulation
              of their catalytic activity or  shuttling to the plasma membrane via the
              calcium-dependent  phospholipid binding activity of Annexin I.  Planned
              experiments  will characterize the SH2/SH3 binding properties of Annexin I in 
              vitro.  The binding of 32P-labelled P-tyr-Annexin I to fusion  proteins
              containing SH2 and/or SH3 domains from PLC-gamma-1 and  other regulatory
              proteins will be measured to delineate the regions  which contain the binding
              sites, the dissociation constants of the  interactions and binding
              specificities will be determined.  In  vitro assays will determine whether
              P-tyr-Annexin I binding to PLC-  gamma-1 modulates its catalytic activity and
              wh ether binding to  PLC-gamma-1 changes the calcium and phospholipid binding 
              characteristics of P-tyr-Annexin I.  %%%  Growth factors such as epidermal
              growth factor (EGF) stimulate cell  replication by binding to transmembrane
              receptors.  The activated  receptors then act as enzymes to add phosphate
              groups, first to  themselves, and then to specific amino acids of other
              regulatory  proteins.  The focus of this research is the possible role in 
              cellular signal transduction for "Annexin I", a member of a family  of
              calcium-binding proteins which is also a target for addition of  phosphate
              group by the EGF receptor enzyme.  The calcium binding  Annexins have been
              identified in many cell types, and it has been  widely supposed that they are
              important cellular regulatory  molecules, but until now, no one has obtained
              convincing evidence  as to their real physiological function.  The preliminary
              results  on which this project is based provide the first solid clue as to  a
              biological function of Annexin I.  This research, thus, will help  to define
              the function of this class of regulatory molecules and  the interaction of
              regulatory proteins involved in the signal  transduction pathway by which
              epidermal growth factor stimulates  cell division.***
