Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Changes in River Morphology and Habitats
               Resulting From Construction of Flow-Control Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1996     
File        : a9305191

Award Number: 9305191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9500               (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Pitlick pitlick@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   From an ecological perspective, some of the most important                
              environments in freshwater streams are "backwaters," which                     
              usually are found at sites where water decelerates, such as at                 
              the downstream end of a bar or in a partially filled side                      
              channel.  The character of these backwaters as habitats for fish               
              and other fauna are strongly influenced by the timing, duration,               
              and magnitude of flows.  Construction of dams and other flow-                  
              control devices along streams have serious impacts on flow                     
              regimes and therefore on sediment transport, rates and forms of                
              channel adjustment, and growth of riparian vegetation.  Some                   
              research has been conducted on how changes in flows affect the                 
              character of stream channels, but many important questions remain              
              unanswered.  This doctoral dissertation research project will                  
              examine a 53-km  reach of the Colorado River in western Colorado               
              to quantify changes over the last half century in the abundance                
              and distribution of backwaters; to correlate these changes with                
              changes in water-use, land-use, and precipitation patterns; to                 
              study flow and sediment transport in backwaters; and to develop a              
              model of the evolution of backwaters.  The study will consist of               
              the analysis of information from aerial photographs, public                    
              records, and field measurements of flow and sediment transport.                
                   This project will contribute to more general knowledge about              
              the processes operating within and along streams, thereby                      
              expanding understanding of how changes in flow affect other                    
              characteristics of a stream and river dynamics and improving                   
              capabilities for predicting how proposed changes in flow regimes               
              will affect habitats downstream.  Because a number of endangered               
              species occupy backwaters in the study area, this project will                 
              provide important information to help protect the environments                 
              occupied by these fish.  As a doctoral dissertation improvement                
              award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising              
              student to establish a strong independent research career.
