Title       : Regulation of Eukaryotic mRNA Meeting. Conference to be held at Cold Spring
               Harbor Laboratory from Sept. 1-5, 1993.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1993      
File        : a9305264

Award Number: 9305264
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Winship Herr   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Tjian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keith R. Yamamoto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              The meeting on Regulation of Eukaryotic mRNA Transcription will be             
              an open international meeting.  This meeting follows on the success            
              of two previous meetings on the same topic in September, 1989 and              
              August, 1991.  The need for a meeting devoted to the topic of                  
              Regulation of Eukaryotic mRNA Transcription is evidenced by the                
              rapid advances being made in this field during the last years.                 
              This meeting will ensure that the most recent results and                      
              methodologies are exchanged and discussed in an atmosphere of face             
              to face contact.  This will lead to enhanced progress in this                  
              rapidly moving field.  The meeting will be open and attendance will            
              only be limited by the facilities available to 425 participants.               
              Oral presentations by invited speakers will raise the general                  
              interest of the meeting by ensuring that the leaders in the field              
              present their latest results.  These invited presentations will be             
              complemented by oral presentations selected from submitted                     
              abstracts and three separate poster sessions.  The areas to be                 
              covered by the Regulation of Eukaryotic Transcription Meeting                  
              include studies on 1) general transcription factors and initiation             
              complexes including mammalian, yeast, and Drosophila systems; 2)               
              transcription elements and factors involved in tissue-specific                 
              expression; 3) inducible transcription factors and nuclear                     
              signalling events; 4) steroid receptors; 5) the structure and                  
              function of transcription factors; and 6)transcription of                      
              developmentally regulated genes.  In addition, there will be                   
              representative lectures on transcriptional control mechanisms in               
              prokaryotes so that fruitful comparisons can be made.                          
              %%%%                                                                           
              The meeting on Regulation of Eukaryotic mRNA Transcription is an               
              international meeting.  Rapid advances have been made in this field            
              during the last two years.  This meeting will ensure that the most             
              recent results and methodologies are exchanged, which will lead to             
              enhanced progress in this rapidly moving field.  The cost of the               
              meeting as requested in direct grants and fees paid by participants            
              is modest compared to the expense of operating even a single                   
              research laboratory, yet the benefits of free exchange of                      
              information will compensate for this expense many times over.                  
              Invited oral presentations will be complemented by other                       
              presentations selected from submitted abstracts for three separate             
              poster sessions.
