Title       : Zeolite '93: 4th International Conference on the Occurrence, Properties, and
               Utilization of Natural Zeolites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1993      
File        : a9305102

Award Number: 9305102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick A. Mumpton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Brockport
	      
	      Brockport, NY  14420    716/395-2211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Zeolite '93, the 4th International Conference on the                      
              Occurrence, Properties, and Utilization of Natural Zeolites will be            
              held in Boise, Idaho, June 20-28, 1993.  The Conference will be                
              sponsored by the International Committee on Natural Zeolites and               
              the State University of New York, College at Brockport.  Between               
              200 and 250 participants are expected from more than 30 countries.             
              Zeolite '93 will bring together geologists, mineralogists, surface             
              chemists, crystallographers, mining engineers, sanitary engineers,             
              agricultural engineers, petroleum engineers, chemical engineers,               
              agronomists, horticulturalists, animal scientists,                             
              aquaculturalists, and marketing specialists to discuss the latest              
              scientific findings and activities in the growing field of natural             
              zeolites.  The Conference will comprise four days of technical                 
              sessions, a mid-week, all-participant field excursion to a major               
              zeolite deposit in southwestern Idaho, and a three-day, post-                  
              conference optional field trip to important zeolite deposits in                
              eastern Oregon.  Invited symposia will be held each morning on the             
              most significant areas of zeolite research, followed by afternoon              
              poster presentations of all submitted papers, unopposed by other               
              technical activities.                                                          
                                                                                             
                   Zeolite '93 will treat all scientific and technological aspect            
              of natural zeolites--their diagenesis in volcanogenic sedimentary              
              formations, their occurrence in pore spaces in petroleum                       
              reservoirs, their basic crystal structure and mineralogical                    
              character, and their structure-controlled ion-exchange, adsorption,            
              hydration-dehydration, and catalytic properties.  The basic science            
              behind many of the recently developed applications for these                   
              materials will be discussed, including their use as slow-release               
              carriers of nitrogen for plant growth; as dietary supplements in               
              animal nutrition; as filters of ammonium from potable water and                
              municipal, industrial, and agricultural wastewaters; as                        
              demineralizes for radioactive cesium and strontium in nuclear                  
              effluents and spills; as barriers in nuclear-waste containment; as             
              exchangers to remove lead, cadmium, and copper from drinking water,            
              industrial effluents, and mining and milling wastes; as ammonia                
              sorbents for pet litters and feedlot manures; as deodorizers in                
              refrigerators and medical facilities; and as substrate in soilless             
              agriculture, so-called zeoponics.
