Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Quasiconformal and Quasiregular Mappings and Elliptic
               Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1993       
File        : a9305742

Award Number: 9305742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36817              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick W. Gehring   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Postdoctoral funding through this award provides support for              
              mathematical research on problems concerning boundary values of                
              quasiconformal mappings and weighted Sobolev inequalities                      
              associated with quasiregular mappings.  The problems addressed in              
              the project contribute to the understanding of the interplay                   
              between analytic and geometric aspects in the analysis of these                
              mappings.  By quasiconformal mappings one understands univalent                
              mappings between Euclidean spaces of the same dimension in which               
              the distortion or dilatation of the mapping is bounded.                        
              Quasiregular mappings satisfy the same conditions but are not                  
              required to be univalent.  Both reflect a natural outgrowth of                 
              the study of analytic functions of a complex variable.  Work                   
              will be done examining the derivative of quasiconformal mappings.              
              It had been thought that these functions always had powers which               
              were locally integrable.  This is not the case.  However, a                    
              recently advanced notion of average derivative suggests that it                
              is this function which will ultimately have the right power                    
              integrals (for conformal maps this average and conventional                    
              derivatives agree).  Also to be examined are the radial boundary               
              values of average derivatives in terms of the distance to the                  
              boundary.  Other work focuses on changes in elliptic equations                 
              when composed with quasiconformal and quasiregular maps and on                 
              Sobolev mappings with integrable dilatation.  In the latter, the               
              fundamental question is one of showing that if powers of a                     
              derivative of an arbitrary map are bounded by the Jacobian times               
              a bounded function then the mapping is open and discrete.  The                 
              results has been validated in the two-dimensional case.
