Title       : RUI: Immunobiologic Studies of a Marsupial
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1994      
File        : a9305401

Award Number: 9305401
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Stone   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  782123104    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,
Abstract    :
              9305401  Stone    The overall objective of this project is to initiate molecular
               immunobiologic studies of the marsupial, Monodelphis domestica, the  gray,
              short-tailed opossum.  It has already been found that  Monodelphis exhibits a
              typical primary immune response but an  atypical secondary response.  Other
              recent results suggest that the  typical eutherian isotype switch from
              immunoglobulin M to  Immunoglobulin G is lacking in this species.  Further
              studies will  compare Monodelphis immune responses with the mouse, a typical 
              eutherian organism.  In collaboration with other laboratories,  molecular
              approaches will be used to study the major  histocompatibility system and the T
              cell receptor.  This research  will continue to involve bright, young
              undergraduate students.  %%%  The mammalian immune system is the subject of
              much research in the  context of human health, and much is known about immune
              function in  the mouse and man.  In contrast, very little is known about the 
              analogous mechanisms of self recognition and defense in other  animals.  The
              overall objective of this project is to characterize  the immune response of
              the marsupial, Monodelphis domestica, the  gray, short-tailed opossum.  This
              species is the only laboratory-  adapted marsupial in America.  Because
              marsupials separated from  eutherian mammals about 130 million years ago,
              knowledge of their  immune system may shed light on the origin of the mammalian
              immune  system.  Studies will be carried out at the cellular and  biochemical
              levels and molecular immunobiologic studies will be  initiated.  With prior NSF
              support it has been found that  Monodelphis exhibits a typical primary immune
              response.  Further  studies will compare Monodelphis immune responses with the
              mouse,  a typical eutherian mammal.  In collaboration with other  laboratories
              molecular approaches will be used to identify MHC  genes, and study the T cell
              receptor.  This research will continue  to involve bright, young undergraduate
              students.  ***
