Title       : Effect of the Nest Environment on Survival by Embryonic and Neonatal Turtles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9305875

Award Number: 9305875
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary C. Packard packard@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kirk Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9169,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9305875  Packard    Embryonic turtles survive to hatching in some nests but not
              in  others.  Moreover, hatchlings from some of the successful nests  are large
              and robust whereas neonates from other successful nests  are small and weakly. 
              Why does survival by embryos vary?  Why do  hatchlings differ so much in size
              and vigor?  Does the variation  in vigor of hatchlings affect their ability to
              survive once they  have emerged from the nest cavity?  Research outlined in
              this  proposal first will test the hypothesis that survival by  embryonic
              turtles is affected by the physical environment in  their nests (as well as by
              maternity).  The contents of natural  nests of both snapping turtles (Chelydra
              serpentina) and painted  turtles (Chrysemys picta) will be manipulated so that
              effects of  the environment on hatching success can be clearly distinguished 
              from genetic and nongenetic effects related to maternity.  The  physical
              environment will be measured in these same nests so that  strong inferences can
              be made concerning the specific causes of  embryonic mortality.  The program
              next will test the hypothesis  that substantial variation in size and vigor of
              hatchlings is  induced by the environment during incubation, and that this 
              environmentally-induced variation affects the survival by turtles  during the
              neonatal period.  The program of study will document  critical links between
              the environment encountered by developing  embryos, survival by embryos to
              hatching, phenotypic variation in  hatchlings, and survival by hatchlings
              during the neonatal  period.  The findings consequently will have important
              bearing on  conservation programs that entail captive propagation and "head- 
              starting" for several kinds of sea turtles.  ***
