Title       : Structure and Function of the Inner Dynein Arms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1996     
File        : a9305217

Award Number: 9305217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Porter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9108,9161,9181,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The long term goal of the proposed research is to understand the             
              mechanisms that regulate the dynein ATPases and generate                       
              microtubule-based motility.  The dynein motors provide the driving             
              force for ciliary and flagellar motility and contribute to                     
              microtubule-directed transport inside cells.  Although much is                 
              known about dynein polypeptide composition, little is understood               
              about the mechanisms that target the dyneins to their appropriate              
              cargoes or regulate their activity.  This proposal will capitalize             
              on the well-characterized structural organization of the flagellar             
              axoneme and the numerous motility mutants available in                         
              Chlamydomonas to ask how a single cell controls the assembly and               
              activity of its multiple dynein motors.  Preliminary studies have              
              identified a family of genes that are thought to encode several                
              inner arm dynein isoforms.  The size and expression of the                     
              corresponding transcripts will be analyzed to determine if these               
              clones encode flagellar proteins or cytoplasmic variants.  Gene                
              specific probes will be used to identify dynein heavy chain                    
              mutations by RFLP mapping procedures.  The biochemical and                     
              structural phenotypes o the dynein mutants will be examined to                 
              analyze the physical relationship between various dynein isoforms              
              and toe determine their distributions within the axoneme.  Specific            
              antibody probes based on domains of unique sequence will be used to            
              address similar questions.  These studies will establish the                   
              organization of the dynein motors within the flagellar axoneme.                
              %%%                                                                            
              Chlamydomonas is a unicellular green alga which swims in its                   
              natural habitat by waving and rotating its flagella, which are long            
              slender cellular extensions containing a highly organized system of            
              microtubules and other proteins which are specialized for this                 
              purpose.  Flagella (and their homologous shorter structures, cilia)            
              are the cellular organelles responsible for swimming motility (and             
              the movement of a cell's aqueous environment around the cell) in a             
              broad variety of eukaryotic cell types, ranging from the  Protists             
              (unicellular organisms) to human cells (e.g., spermatozoa and                  
              pulmonary airway epithelia).  As such, a detailed understanding of             
              how flagella function at the molecular level is of fundamental                 
              importance to biology.  In addition, these remarkable inventions of            
              nature are of great interest in terms of potential commercial                  
              applications, either as biomolecular materials whose properties can            
              be harnessed through biofabrication, or as model systems for                   
              biomimetic reverse engineering and nanofabrication.  This project              
              will advance our understanding of the motor molecules of flagella,             
              through a combined approach using genetics, biochemistry, and                  
              morphological analysis in a well-defined and highly tractable model            
              system.
