Title       : Study of the Interaction Between Gene Flow and Selection in a Test System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1996     
File        : a9305897

Award Number: 9305897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Riechert sriecher@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9305897     Riechert       This research project is concerned with an important 
              evolutionary question---the degree to which population mixing can  limit
              adaptation.  Resolution of this question is important to the  maintenance of
              biodiversity and the conservation of rare and  endangered species.  The study
              will be completed on a desert spider  system which shows evidence of high
              levels of mating between  populations that inhabit markedly different selective
              environments  (i.e., abundant prey and high predation vs low prey and low 
              predation).  Interpopulation mixing (gene flow) and selection  (predation
              pressure by birds) will be manipulated in a series of  experiments to
              investigate the nature of the interaction between  them.  Transplant
              experiments will also be completed to determine  the degree to which different
              behavior types from the respective  populations suffer when introduced to a
              foreign habitat.  The  movement and assortative mating patterns of the
              different  behavioral types recorded in the study will be quantitatively 
              compared with the predictions of an individual-based simulation  model of the
              system.%%%       Spiders, by their nature, have proven to be excellent tools 
              for study of this and other ecological and evolutionary problems.   They are
              readily and adequately sampled because they are present in  large numbers and
              are not disturbed by the human observer.  They  also can be easily manipulated
              without disruption of their  "natural" behavior.  This is a major problem when
              using the higher  animals.  Finally, spiders perform many of the behaviors and 
              exhibit adaptations characteristic of these higher animals, but in  a less
              complex, and thus, more analyzable form.  It is from model  systems such as
              this one, that science has traditionally drawn to  unravel the most complex
              mysteries of the biotic universe.***
