Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Rigorous Results on Statistical Mechanics of Interacting
               Particle Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1994      
File        : a9305904

Award Number: 9305904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glen H. Swindle swindle@pstat.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research is divided into two categories.  The                
              first pertains to the hydrodynamic description of self-organizing              
              systems. Self-organizing automata or particle systems are open                 
              driven stochastic systems which evolve to a stationary                         
              distribution characterized by the nontrivial scaling behavior (as              
              a function of system size) known as self-organized criticality.                
              We have previously established that many of these systems near                 
              equilibrium can be described in certain limits by nonlinear                    
              diffusion equations, with a diffusion coefficient which has a                  
              singularity at a critical value of the local density.  Scaling                 
              arguments suggest that the validity of this hydrodynamic                       
              description for the open (nonequilibrium) self-organizing                      
              automata depends on the size of the fluctuations in the local                  
              density in comparison to the rate at which the system converges                
              to the critical density as the system size diverges. The purpose               
              of this research is to rigorously investigate the validity of the              
              singular diffusion description for the open systems, with the                  
              goal being general conditions for when fluctuations destroy the                
              diffusion description.                                                         
                   In the past several years there has been a  considerable                  
              amount of activity in a number of scientific communities                       
              regarding self-organized criticality.  Recent activity has                     
              focused on relatively simple systems, which, when simulated on                 
              the computer show broad distributions which change in a                        
              nontrivial way with the size of the system.  The purpose of this               
              research is to look at mathematical models which describe these                
              systems.
