Title       : University-Firm Linkages for Industrial Innovation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1993      
File        : a9305591

Award Number: 9305591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard L. Lederman                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71785              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dianne Rahm   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a multi-stage study of university-firm linkages for                    
              industrial innovation.  A survey instrument designed and sent to               
              the target population of 1600 units within the top 100 research                
              universities.  Surveys will be sent to directors of offices of                 
              patents and technology licensing as well as department chairs and              
              selected researchers within disciplines of importance to industry              
              and commanding sizable R&D resources (Biology, Chemistry, Computer             
              Science, Electrical Engineering, and Physics).  The survey data and            
              information permit an empirical analysis of the extent and nature              
              of university-industry interactions.  Using these findings, a                  
              subset of approximately 12 selected participating university-firm              
              groups for detailed case studies.  The case studies consist of site            
              visits to these units.  Structured interviews conducted with firm              
              managers, industrial researchers and technicians, university                   
              officials, faculty and research assistants, and staff personnel.               
              Additionally, several non-participating like-firms identified and              
              visited to determine why they do not involve themselves with the               
              university.  This stage of the study will have several primary                 
              foci:  to define what participating firms and universities mean by             
              "success", to assess the perspective of firm and university                    
              participants, to understand why like-firms decide not to create                
              linkages with universities, to isolate specific factors identified             
              as contributing to success or lack of success of university-                   
              industry interactions, and to increase our depth of understanding              
              concerning how universities contribute to industrial innovation.               
              A final report will be written which profiles university-firm                  
              interactions and presents students and decision makers with a                  
              systematic and generalizable analysis of success factors.
