Title       : Mechanisms and Control of MRNA Selection for Translation in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1995      
File        : a9305713

Award Number: 9305713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cecelia Webster   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Responses in plants to many environmental stresses include                     
              selective synthesis of proteins which enhance cell tolerance.  The             
              synthesis of these proteins is in part regulated at the level of               
              mRNA translation.  Selection of specific mRNAs for translation is              
              likely to depend on the amounts and activities of the initiation               
              factors which bind to the 5'-cap structure of mRNAs, and on the                
              recognition of unique structures or sequences in the 5'-                       
              untranslated regions of the mRNAs which are selected.  This                    
              proposal focuses on factors which bind to the 5'-untranslated                  
              region of mRNA, elF-4A, 4F and (iso)4F, and will explore how                   
              changes in factor modifications and interactions affect protein                
              synthesis.  Maize factors will be studied to determine: 1) the site            
              at which elF-4F is phosphorylated in vivo, 2) if phosphorylation of            
              elF-4F, 4F, or (iso)4F affects mRNA selection or translation                   
              efficiency in vitro, and 3) how phosphorylation patterns fluctuate             
              in response to environmental stress.  These experiments will yield             
              basic information on the mechanisms of protein synthesis and                   
              translation control in higher plants, and are an essential first               
              step in achieving our long-term goals of elucidating the importance            
              of initiation factor phosphorylation in response to the environment            
              and to other aspects of plant structural development.                          
              %%%                                                                            
              Responses in plants to many environmental stresses (e.g., flooding,            
              drought, heat, wounding) include selective synthesis of proteins               
              which enhance cell tolerance and plant survival.  The synthesis of             
              these proteins is regulated in part by the selective translation of            
              stress-response messenger RNAs (mRNA) into protein.  The                       
              mechanism(s) by which these specific mRNAs are selected from the               
              cellular mRNA pool is unknown, but is likely to depend on both the             
              structure of the mRNAs, and on the activity of the protein                     
              synthesis factors which bind to and recruit mRNAs for translation.             
              All of these factors can be modified by phosphorylation, and in                
              some cases this has been shown to affect their function.  This                 
              proposal focuses on the three initiation factors which bind to the             
              5'-untranslated region of mRNA, and will explore how changes in                
              their modifications and interactions affect protein synthesis.                 
              Maize factors will be studied to determine: 1) how phosphorylation             
              patterns fluctuate in response to environmental stress, 2) the                 
              location of phosphorylation sites in the proteins, and 3) the                  
              effect of specific phosphorylation events on factor function,                  
              subunit interactions, mRNA selection and translational efficiency.             
              These experiments will yield basic information on the mechanisms of            
              protein synthesis and translational control in higher plants, and              
              are an essential first step in achieving our long-term goals of                
              elucidating the importance of initiation factor phosphorylation in             
              response to the environment and to events in plant development.
