Title       : Phospholipid Metabolism: Its Role in Coupling Signal to Response in
               Photosynthetic Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1996       
File        : a9305154

Award Number: 9305154
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343039             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Crain   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9305154  Crain    Perception of environmental conditions and initiation of 
              appropriate responses to these conditions is crucial for survival  of all
              organisms.  Additionally, individual cells of multicellular  organisms must
              perceive and respond to internal signals, such as  hormones, which coordinate
              the behavior and physiology of the whole  organism.  In contrast to the case
              for animal systems, little is  known about transduction pathways coupling
              signals to cellular  responses in plants.  The coupling of light reception to
              leaflet  movement in the tropical legume Samanea saman and of environmental 
              stress to deflagellation in the unicellular alga Chlamydomonas  reinhardtii are
              signal response systems that appear to involve  calcium.  Phosphoinositide
              turnover, which produces inositol  phosphates and diacylglycerol, is
              hypothesized to mediate these  responses by mobilizing intracellular calcium
              and stimulating  protein phosphorylation.  To elucidate the role of
              phosphoinositide  turnover in these systems:  (1) the kinetics and properties
              of the  coupling between signal and cellular response(s) will be  investigated,
              (2) temporal changes in phosphoinositide metabolism  and intracellular calcium
              levels will be correlated with signal  reception and cellular response(s), and
              (3) the effects of  metabolites of phosphoinositide turnover and of agents that
              perturb  the functioning of phosphoinositide metabolism and calcium 
              homeostasis on cellular responses to signals will be examined.  %%%  The
              detailed mechanisms by which plants respond to signals, such as  light, that
              they receive from their environment are not known.  Dr.  Crain will study this
              in two systems:  the light-responsive  pulvinar cells of a tropical legume and
              a green alga which responds  to stress by shedding its flagellae.  The legume,
              S. saman, has  compound leaves, the leaflets of which open in the light and
              close  in the dark.  The movements of these leaflets are effected by  changes
              in turgor of the pulvinar cells.  Turgor chan ges are caused  by ion fluxes
              regulated by light.  Recent studies have indicated  that calcium ions are
              important in this response, and since  inositol triphosphate has been shown to
              regulate calcium in a  number of systems, Dr. Crain will study the formation
              and breakdown  of this metabolite in cells and subcellular fractions of the 
              pulvinus, the part of the leaf that moves in response to light.  He  will carry
              out similar studies of the role of calcium and  phosphoinositides in the
              flagellar shedding by the green alga in  response to environmental stresses. 
              These studies will provide  important new information on the biochemical
              mechanisms by which  plants respond to changes in their environment.  ***
