Title       : RUI: Characterization of the Novel Nitrate Reductase from Geobacter
               Metallireducens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1996    
File        : a9305399

Award Number: 9305399
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225815             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Stolz stolz@duq.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duquesne University
	      Administration Bldg
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15282    412/434-6000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9178,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9305399  Stolz  The strictly anaerobic microbe, Geobacter metallireducens
              (GS-15)  is a dissimilatory iron reducing bacterium which couples the 
              oxidation of short chain fatty acids and aromatic compounds to the  reduction
              of Fe(III), nitrate, Mn(IV), or U(VI).  This type of  organism is extremely
              important in the oxidation of organics and  the reduction of inorganics and
              metals in anaerobic soil, aquifers,  and estuarine sediments.  Nitrate induces
              both nitrate reductase  (NR) and the overexpression of five c-type cytochromes.
               This NR is  stable under oxic conditions and its inhibition by oxygen is 
              reversible.  It appears to contain three polypeptides of Mr 18, 36,  and 43 kDa
              and three c-type cytochromes (Mr 28, 46, and 68 kDa),  and is not related to
              the NRs from other nitrate-respiring or  denitrifying bacteria.  The objective
              of this proposal is to fully  characterize this novel NR and determine which
              cytochromes are  involved in nitrate reduction.  The NR and cytochromes will be
               purified, native structure, midpoint potentials, substrate  specificity, and
              kinetics will be determined, and antibodies will  be raised against each
              purified macromolecule.  The pathway of  nitrate reduction and electron
              transport will be deduced from the  data.  Future studies will use the
              antibodies as a taxonomic tool  in comparative studies and as environmental
              probes.  %%%  Geobacter metallireducens is a bacterium which grows by coupling 
              the oxidation of organic carbon to the reduction of iron in the  total absence
              of oxygen.  The type of organism is extremely  important in anoxic soils,
              aquifers, and estuarine sediments, since  it also metabolizes organic
              pollutants like benzene and toluene,  and inorganic contaminants, such as
              nitrate, manganese, and  uranium.  Preliminary work has shown that the enzyme
              that converts  nitrate to nitrite in this cell is novel and its function
              involves  c-type cytochromes.  The purpose of this work is then to 
              characterize the novel nitrate reductase and then determine th e  cytochrome(s)
              involved in nitrate reduction.  The results from this  study will help
              elucidate this unusual process of nitrate  reduction, and provide the
              background for future studies on other  unique biochemical pathways in this
              remarkable organism.  ***
