Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1993      
File        : a9305394

Award Number: 9305394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9028               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kam-Wing Chan kwchan@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The dramatic increase in tourism as an important dimension                
              of the global economy has been manifest in many regions of the                 
              world.  Much of the research on tourism in geography and other                 
              social sciences has focused on the tourists and on their impact                
              on local areas.  The analyses often have depicted local residents              
              as seemingly helpless victims of much wealthier visitors from                  
              other parts of the world.  Relatively little attention has been                
              given to the attitudes of the local residents, however,                        
              especially in those locales where the residents have actively                  
              promoted tourism to boost the local economy.  This doctoral                    
              dissertation project will explore the role of local initiatives                
              to advance tourism in the Guizhou region of southern China.                    
              Ethnographic methods, including archival research, interviews                  
              with local leaders, and participant observation will be used to                
              gather information at a number of tourist sites in and near the                
              city of Kaili in southeastern Guizhou.  Special emphasis will be               
              placed on the processes through which local leaders are                        
              attempting to maintain the region's distinctive ethnic character               
              and identity while facilitating economic development through more              
              active tourism.                                                                
                   This project will provide valuable new information and                    
              insights about the actions and attitudes of an ethnic minority                 
              group as it attempts to use tourism to boost its economy without               
              harming its culture.  Although specific information will focus on              
              a single region in southern China, the results of this project                 
              should provide more general understandings useful in the analysis              
              of other places.  As a doctoral dissertation improvement award,                
              this award also will provide support to enable a promising                     
              student to establish a strong independent research career.
