Title       : High Performance Adaptive Lossy Compression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1996      
File        : a9305027

Award Number: 9305027
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas E. Fuja                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303930             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Storer storer@cs.brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Cohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9305027      Storer       This project is a study of high performance adaptive
              lossy  compression techniques. That is, techniques that are able to  achieve
              the best possible compression in a single pass over the  data (with no prior
              knowledge of the data) and which can be  implemented to run in real time at
              high data rates. Thus, the  research employs a combination of data compression
              theory,  experimental results, algorithms (serial and parallel) design, and  to
              some extent, hardware design. A new approach to image  compression has been
              developed that combines some of the most  successful techniques for dynamic
              lossless compression and some of  the most successful techniques for static
              lossy compression to  achieve a fully adaptive single-pass lossy compression
              algorithm  that needs only the fidelity criterion to be specified in advance. 
              This new algorithm is capable of achieving "state of the art" image 
              compression; in fact, in practice for a given fidelity it typically  equals or
              exceeds the amount of compression achieved by the best  methods previously
              available. A number of new directions of  research are identified  that include
              extensions of this approach,  applications of a similar approach to video
              compression (where,  arbitrarily shaped "superblocks" of pixels are tracked
              from frame  to frame), the design of parallel lossless compression algorithms 
              (that can be used as components in a complete data compression  system), the
              design of parallel data compression hardware, and new  techniques to suppress
              error propagation with adaptive algorithms.  The theme of this research is
              flexible adaptive techniques that can  be used for data compression
              applications ranging from lossless  text compression, to lossy image
              compression, to compression of  digitized high resolution video.  All of the
              techniques  considered  have efficient parallel implementations and ultimately,
              inexpensive  custom hardware implementations.   ***
