Title       : Theoretical Studies of Heme Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1997      
File        : a9305619

Award Number: 9305619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gilda H. Loew loew@montara.molres.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Molecular Research Inst
	      
	      Palo Alto, CA  94304    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0510103   Physical Chemical Studies               
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
              12        Chemistry                               
              21        Mathematics                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The proposed studies involve the theoretical characterization of               
              the relationship between structure, spectra, and function of heme              
              proteins- focusing on peroxidases, a family of metabolizing heme               
              enzymes that catalyzes the oxidation of a variety of substrates by             
              hydrogen peroxide.  Specifically, a variety of techniques of                   
              computational chemistry will be used to continue to address three              
              major themes: (1) elucidation of the common steps and key                      
              intermediates in the enzymatic cycle of all peroxidases, leading               
              from the resting state to the biologically active species.                     
              Although the bioactive species formed is common to all peroxidases,            
              it is subsequently involved in two different types of oxidations.              
              These differences will be probed by: characterization of                       
              substrate/enzyme interactions using lignin peroxidase (LiP), an                
              isozyme typical of the family of peroxidases that oxidizes surface-            
              bound substrates by long range electron transfer and by                        
              characterization of substrate/enzyme interactions using horse                  
              radish peroxidase (HRP), an isozyme belonging to the second type of            
              peroxidase that oxidizes substrates near the heme unit by chemical             
              transformations.  Since no X-ray crystal structure has been                    
              reported for any member of this family, a 3D model of this enzyme              
              will be created by completing the homology modeling of HRP begun               
              during the current grant period.                                               
              %%%                                                                            
              Peroxidases are ubiquitous in many living species including                    
              bacteria, fungae, plants, and mammals.  They are involved in                   
              transforming and eliminating potentially toxic species as well as              
              of potential use in biodegradation.  Understanding the underlying              
              mechanisms of their two types of oxidations will lead to the                   
              identification of the stereoelectronic properties that modulate the            
              efficacy of substrates that undergo long range electron transfer as            
              well as those that are chemically transformed.  Moreover, key                  
              residues of the enzymes that are involved in both of these types of            
              catalytic oxidation will be identified and mutations suggested that            
              will increase enzyme efficacy.  These combined results can then be             
              used to guide in protein engineering of optimum mutant enzymes for             
              use in biodegradation of specific products as well as in enhancing             
              the understanding of the role that peroxidases play in regulating              
              toxicity.
