Title       : Collaborative Research: Scales of Hydrologic Transients in Holocene Lake
               Records: Ostracodes Groundwater Flow, and Paleochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1993     
File        : a9305572

Award Number: 9305572
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39778              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Donovan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal addresses the problem of determining the                         
              hydrochemical response of a groundwater-fed lake to climate change             
              over Holocene time.  We intend to determine the relative importance            
              of ground water and surface water input to Elk Lake, Grant Co.,                
              Minnesota.  We will examine and compare information obtained from              
              ostracode (Crustacea) species distributions, ostracode shell                   
              chemistry, and models that describe hydrochemical reactions and                
              groundwater flow.  The proposed research will provide an                       
              independent means of determining how a lake interacted with                    
              groundwater during specific times of past climate change, as well              
              as insight into how lake-groundwater systems can react to future               
              climate change.  Our approach will be 1) define the ground water               
              source(s) flowing into Elk Lake at present; 2) recover a complete              
              Holocene core from the lake; 3) reconstruct the solute history                 
              using ostracode species distributions, trace-elements, and stable              
              isotope analyses; and 4) test two hypotheses concerning the                    
              groundwater input and resultant lake chemistry through Holocene                
              time.  This study will provide a new way of reconstructing regional            
              changes in surface hydrology as it responds to climate change and              
              has wide application to the field of hydrology and climatology.                
              The results should be of practical value to hydrologists concerned             
              with surface water-groundwater interactions, and to climatologists             
              interested in climate model validation and forecasting of climate-             
              induced hydrologic changes.
