Title       : Molecular and genetic analysis of sex determination in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1997  
File        : a9305074

Award Number: 9305074
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen K. Salz hks@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9305074  Salz      How the sex of Drosophila melanogaster is determined is as
              well  understood as is sex determination in any organism. However, even  in
              this system how such determination is regulated remains a  mystery. We are
              concentrating on the identification and  characterization of genes required for
              the maintenance of the  ON/OFF activity state of the binary switch gene
              Sex-lethal (Sxl).  Maintenance of Sxl is regulated by "exon-skipping", a type
              of  alternative RNA splicing. Only in females does the processed  transcription
              product yield a functional protein. We are focusing  on the analysis of snf, a
              sex determination gene which is utilized  to establish the female-specific
              splicing pattern of Slx. We have  recently found that snf has homology to the
              mammalian snRNP  proteins U1A and U2B", suggesting that the snf gene product is
              an  integral component of the machinery required for splice site  choice. We
              will 1) continue our molecular characterization of the  snf locus 2) determine
              if the SNF protein is nuclear and/or  cytoplasmic as well as whether it is
              associated with nascent  transcripts on polytene chromosomes 3) determine
              whether the extant  mutations are simple loss of function mutations or have
              aberrant  functions by localizing the molecular lesions associated with the 
              extant snf mutations and examine the phenotypic consequences of  multiple
              copies of the mutant gene 4) determine whether snf is  likely to be an
              essential general-splicing factor, an essential  sex-specific splicing factor
              or an non-essential "facilitator" of  splicing, by generating and
              characterizing a small deficiency of  the locus 5)determine whether the human
              U1A protein and/or the  human U2B" protein is functionally equivalent to snf by
              expressing  the human genes in Drosophila and determine whether either can 
              complement snf mutations 6) determine whether the differences  between the RNA
              Recognition motifs (RRM) of U1A. U2B" and SNF are  functionally significant.
              These structure/function studies should  b e particularly informative in light
              of the extensive in vitro  structure/function studies that have been carried
              out on the human  U1A and U2B" proteins.  %%%  By identifying and
              characterizing both general and sex-specific  genes required for maintenance of
              Sxl activity, we will gain  insights into the mechanism regulating sex-specific
              splicing.  Moreover, our analysis will have broader implications for the 
              understanding of the mechanisms regulating RNA splicing in general  since
              little is known about how splice site choices are made.  ***
