Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Well-Posed Inverse Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1995     
File        : a9305882

Award Number: 9305882
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143158             (Estimated)
Investigator: James V. Ralston ralston@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Eskin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The object of this work, the study of inverse problems in                 
              mathematical analysis, is one of recovering physical properties                
              of an object or phenomenon from data obtained by remote                        
              observations.  The problems are well-posed in the sense that the               
              data sets are not so burdensome as to rule out any solutions, but              
              sufficient for the reconstruction. The problem of determining a                
              quantum mechanical potential from its scattering amplitude goes                
              back to the beginning of quantum mechanics.  But little attention              
              is given to finding data sets for which the problem is                         
              well-posed in the sense that the mapping from the potential to                 
              the scattering data is continuously invertible.  One likely                    
              candidate for such a data set is backscattering data, the subject              
              of this research.  Much successful work has been accomplished on               
              the question in three dimensions, though mainly confined to small              
              potentials.  The present work seeks to remove this assumption and              
              look for more general results, possibly giving up some degree                  
              of well-posedness.  Work will continue on                                      
              two-dimensional backscattering as well, where a type of                        
              singularity in a parameter makes backscattering a much more                    
              untractable problem, even assuming compact support of the                      
              potential.Inverse problems in the context of this project are                  
              formulated in terms of classical equations, such as the                        
              Schrodinger equation. These equations may represent wave                       
              phenomena involving magnetic and electric potentials, acoustics                
              and other type of waves in the presence of obstacles.  Although                
              much of the research focuses on the mathematical analysis of the               
              inverse mapping, its connections with the physical world are                   
              easily traced.
