Title       : Inheritance of Mitochondrial DNA in Didymiun iridis, an Isogamous, Coenocytic
               Organism with Multiple Sexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1993      
File        : a9305498

Award Number: 9305498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret E. Silliker msillike@wppost.depaul.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DePaul University
	      25 East Jackson Boulevard
	      Chicago, IL  606042218    312/341-8000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9178,9229,
Abstract    :
              9305498  Silliker       These experiments will determine the pattern of
              inheritance of  mitochondrial genomes in the acellular slime mold Didymiym
              iridis  (Ditmar) Fries (class Myxomycetes).  The mitochondrial DNA of one 
              strain of D. iridis will be characterized by cloning and  restriction enzyme
              mapping.  Mitochondrial DNA variation will be  assessed within strains of the
              largest heterothallic interbreeding  group by comparison of probe hybridization
              patterns between  strains.  Once probes diagnostic for a mitochondrial type are
               identified they will be used to follow the fate of mitochondria in  crosses. 
              The results will be interpreted with special attention to  the probable
              relatedness of these strains based on mitochondrial  restriction fragment
              length polymorphism, geographical origin, and  nuclear isozyme and mating type
              data.  Uniparental organelle  inheritance is an emerging rule for organelle
              behavior.   Transmittance patterns are a result of unequal parental 
              contribution (anisogamy) or mating type control in isogamous  organisms with
              binary mating systems.  Heterothallic myxomycetes  have multiple-allelic mating
              systems.  The pattern of mitochondrial  inheritance in the myxomycete Physarum
              polycephalum was found to be  determined by a mating type hierarchy. 
              Preliminary evidence  suggests that this is not the case with D. iridis.  When
              compatible  strains (different mating types) were crossed, about half the 
              individuals inherited one mitochondrial type and half the other  type. 
              Replicate crosses with ten strains will be made in all  possible combinations
              and the pattern of mitochondrial inheritance  will be determined by
              hybridization of strain diagnostic probes to  DNA samples from individuals. 
              %%%  Determining the pattern of mitochondrial transmittance in Didymium  should
              allow development of hypotheses about the mechanism of  inheritance.  One
              working hypothesis predicts that mitochondrial  inheritance will be more
              tightly regulated in closely related  strains.  The results of  this research
              could be of major importance  to evolutionary genetics.  The involvement of
              undergraduate  students in the project will be beneficial to the training of 
              molecular geneticists.  ***
