Title       : Noise Investigations of Condensed Matter Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1995      
File        : a9305763

Award Number: 9305763
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Weissman mbw@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Most materials exhibit slow fluctuations, with a broad distribution            
              of characteristic rates, in a variety of electrical, mechanical,               
              magnetic, and optical parameters.  Despite the ubiquity of a simple            
              form (1/f) for the frequency spectrum of such fluctuations, a wide             
              variety of mechanisms are involved, as has been demonstrated in                
              past experiments in this project.  These fluctuations are of                   
              interest for two general reasons:  First, they limit the                       
              performance of a variety of sensors and devices.  Second, they                 
              provide a useful tool to study fundamental properties of materials,            
              especially glasses, which exhibit partially frozen random                      
              structures.  This proposal applied fluctuation techniques to                   
              investigate several materials with some of the most common forms of            
              frozen disorder.  These include amorphous silicon, charge-density              
              wave systems, several types of spin-glasses, spin-density wave                 
              magnetic domains, domain fluctuations in ferromagnets, and the new             
              giant-magneto-resistive materials.  The work will emphasize                    
              particularly the interplay between the chaotic behavior of some                
              driven systems and the frozen randomness present in equilibrium.               
              %%%                                                                            
              New technologies often require new materials and increasingly                  
              involve the use of very small structures.  In small structures such            
              properties as the electrical resistivity of materials are generally            
              not constant, but fluctuate in time.  Such fluctuations are often              
              the most important factor in limiting the miniaturization of                   
              devices.  Past experiments in this project have shown that a wide              
              variety of mechanisms lie behind these fluctuations in different               
              materials.  This proposal explores the origins of the fluctuations             
              in some technically important materials, including amorphous                   
              silicon and the new giant-magneto-resistive materials.  Particular             
              attention is paid to developing a general understanding of the very            
              common but poorly understood types of materials known as glasses,              
              which exhibit partially frozen random structures.
