Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Human - Environmental Interaction and
               Sustainability in an East African Agricultural Landscape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1993    
File        : a9305503

Award Number: 9305503
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5120               (Estimated)
Investigator: Billie L. Turner bturner@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1577,9278,
Abstract    :
              9305503  TURNER       Few issues focus on the dynamic nature of human- 
              environmental interaction as completely as does the relationship  between
              economic development and environmental change.  In  Africa, the
              development-environment interface has been considered  as a "crisis" of Africa,
              especially in eastern Africa, where  incorporation of farming systems into the
              global economy and  unprecedented population growth have created intensive
              pressures  on people, land, and resources.  This doctoral dissertation 
              research project will provide a case study of one dramatic area  of
              contemporary human-environmental interaction by exploring  processes of
              landscape change in the Olmotonyi watershed of Mount  Meru, a densely populated
              agricultural region in northern  Tanzania.  The investigator will document the
              social and  ecological history of the landscape from colonial to present 
              times.  She also will inventory current land-use patterns and  practices and
              elicit the perceptions of land users about future  prospects.  Detailed
              interviews with land users will explore  social and environmental changes and
              individuals views about  past, present, and future land-use and livelihood
              alternatives.       This project constitutes a holistic and historical 
              examination of the complex dynamics of human-environmental  interaction in a
              region undergoing significant change.  It will  expand general knowledge about
              the human dimensions of global  environmental change, especially the through
              identification of  the perceptions of local residents of current and future
              options,  a factor that often has been ignored in examination of possible 
              forms of "sustainable development."  As a doctoral dissertation  improvement
              award, this award also will provide support to enable  a promising student to
              establish a strong independent research  career.  ***
