Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Origins and Ecology of Forest Islands in
               Amazonian Savannas of Northern Bolivia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1993 
File        : a9305629

Award Number: 9305629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Denevan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1577,9278,
Abstract    :
               

The need for clearer understanding of the complex ways that humans have
              altered and responded to changes in their natural environments has become more
              important as increasing attention is devoted to understanding the complex
              dynamics of global environmental change. Only recently have many natural
              scientists come to realize that the landscapes encountered by Europeans when
              they first explored large parts of the Americas had been modified significantly
              by native Americans over thousands of years of settlement. This doctoral
              dissertation research project will provide a timely examination of interactions
              between human and natural processes that occurred in pre-Columbian times.
              Research will focus on analyses of processes that resulted in the landscape
              patterns of the Llanos de Moxos, a seasonally flooded savanna in northeastern
              Bolivia in the southwestern Amazon drainage basin. Special attention will be
              given to formation of the "islas" (forested islands or mounds) that rise above
              the "pampa" (grasslands) of the region. Several alternative hypotheses
              purporting to explain development of the forested islands will be examined.
              Those hypotheses include termite activity, gallery-forest fragmentation,
              colonization of abandoned prehistoric earthworks, and intentional planting by
              indigenous people. Field work will be conducted in order to characterize
              different types of forest islands, identify island-forming processes, and
              develop a historical framework for understanding the landscape evolution of the
              region. Soil and stratigraphic profiles will be sampled and described, and
              vegetation will be mapped, collected, and measured across transepts. Forest
              islands will be surveyed, and the data will be analyzed and interpreted in
              order to classify islands with respect to their origin processes and the
              composition of their vegetation. Archaeological materials will be used to help
              identify the role of human processes in addition to natural processes found to
              be operating in the formation and maintenance of forest islands. This project
              will provide valuable new information regarding the historical role of humans
              in the transformation of complex landscapes. In addition to expanding knowledge
              about a landscape type found in elsewhere in South America as well as in North
              America and Africa, the research will provide more general insights into
              processes related to the study of conservation biology, tropical biogeography,
              and the origins and dynamics of landscape. The project is extremely relevant
              for the study of the human dimensions of global environmental change, and as a
              doctoral dissertation improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.
