Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Numerical Methods and Adaptivity for Nonlinear PDEs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1993    
File        : a9305935

Award Number: 9305935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ricardo H. Nochetto rhn@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project will support research in the design,                         
              implementation, and analysis of adaptive finite element methods                
              for phase transitions and free boundary problems arising in                    
              material sciences.  Numerical methods for phase transitions will               
              be studied; the use of highly graded meshes is extremely                       
              important for phase transitions and free boundary problems which               
              typically exhibit sharp interfaces as well as very thin                        
              transition regions.  The solution, or some of its derivatives,                 
              may exhibit discontinuities or just vary very rapidly within such              
              layers, leading to global numerical difficulties if the                        
              singularities are not properly resolved.  Related sharp interface              
              models exhibiting competition between surface tension and                      
              destabilizing mechanisms will also be studied, such as stress                  
              driven instabilities in solid crystals and solidification                      
              processes.  The design of linearization techniques for strongly                
              nonlinear partial differential equations will be studied and                   
              combined with mesh refinements.  The interaction of convective                 
              fluid with free boundaries, for example that corresponding to                  
              solid coexisting with its melt and interfaces of multiphase                    
              fluids, will be analyzed numerically.  Finally, mixed methods for              
              constrained problems will be studied, with special emphasis on                 
              the Stokes flow and related free boundary problems as well as on               
              free boundary problems for plates over obstacles.                              
                   This project is concerned with the design and implementation              
              of adaptive mesh refinements for nonlinear partial differential                
              equations arising in thermodynamics, fluid dynamics, and                       
              elasticity.  The use of highly graded meshes is important for                  
              many of these problems, which typically exhibit sharp interfaces               
              as well as very thin transition regions.  The increasing interest              
              in such problems stems not only from their mathematical features               
              but also their applications to phase transitions in material                   
              sciences, flame propagation, combustion theory, and crystal                    
              growth.
