Title       : Algorithms and Software to Predict the Structure and SurfaceCharacteristics of
               Coiled-Coil Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1995        
File        : a9305873

Award Number: 9305873
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347566             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanette Schmidt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gad M. Landau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. H. Sellers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vincent Fischetti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2860,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This project is a collaborative effort with  scientists in two disciplines,
              computer science and  biology.  Such a  collaboration is essential for the
              success  of the development of computational  tools and their later  use in
              biological research.  The first crucial step,  which  is to understanding the
              biological problem at hand in  mathematical terms  and to translate this into a
               mathematical problem with a clear objective,  provides the  foundation of this
              proposal.  In this project, the  resulting  mathematical problems are tackled
              by the computer scientist and their  solutions are implemented  and then used
              in biological research.  These  computational tools are of interest in their
              own right and are  likely to find application outside the biological area.  
              The focus  of this work is a study of alpha-helical coiled  coil proteins.  The
               streptococcal M-protein serves as a model protein.  For the majority of 
              proteins, the secondary  structure of the protein, which is critical for its 
              proper  function, cannot simply be resolved by examining the  sequence of the 
              amino acids that define the protein.  While  x-ray crystallography is the only 
              reliable means available  today by which to solve the structure of a protein 
              molecule,  it cannot always be used.  The alpha-helical structure is  commonly 
              found in proteins because of its ability to  stabilize proteins through short 
              regions of helix-helix  packing, referred to as a coiled-coil interaction.  The
              main goal of this project is to develop computational  tools that   enable the
              comparison of surface characteristics of two M proteins, and more  generally of
              any  two coiled-coil proteins.  Algorithms are devised to  identify identical
              amino acid clusters on the outer surface  of coiled-coil  proteins.  Such
              clusters, which are not  readily identified through linear  sequence homology,
              could  predict the formulation of cross-reactive epitopes  between  microbial
              and mammalian molecules .  This is then verified by the  synthesis of the
              peptide region and a  variety of serological tests.  Algorithms  are also
              designed to identify and display tandem repeat blocks in  sequences.  At the
              DNA level, these represent mutational `hot  spots.`  In  bacterial proteins the
              function of these repeats  is not fully understood, but  perhaps they have
              evolved as a  means of mutating orders of magnitude more  frequently than 
              spontaneous mutation events.  Finally, the sequence of M  proteins from strains
              of the same serotype, (M6), which were  isolated over the  last century are
              compared.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
