Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Chord-arc Domains and Quasiconformal Maps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1993      
File        : a9305792

Award Number: 9305792
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50904              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. MacManus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award supports mathematical research focusing on                     
              analytic and geometric problems associated with functions and                  
              domains defined in the complex plane.  The work combines methods               
              of harmonic analysis, quasiconformal mapping and geometric                     
              function theory.  Certain domains which have been identified as                
              being particularly suited to questions of extensions of analytic               
              maps to quasiconformal maps, chord-arc domains, form a class                   
              whose generic properties will be analyzed.  This will include the              
              question of whether the class is connected.  In addition,                      
              work will be done on the problem of factorizing                                
              bi-Lipschitz planar maps, using the boundedness of a the Cauchy                
              integral to obtain geometric information about domains                         
              and obtaining distortion estimates for quasiconformal maps in                  
              higher dimensions.  Included in the research will be work to                   
              extend the recent results of Bishop-Jones on quasicircles to the               
              problem of determining which quasiconformal maps send the line                 
              onto a chord-arc curve.                                                        
                   The theories of geometric function theory and quasiconformal              
              mapping have contributed significantly to the understanding of                 
              geometric transformations of plane domains and domains in                      
              higher dimensions where the transformations are constrained by                 
              the amount of twisting or shrinking that is permitted                          
              (bounded dilatation).   This project continues this tradition by               
              taking up the study of several new concepts which have arisen in               
              the past few years.
