Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Large-Eddy Simulations of Cirrus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1993     
File        : a9305237

Award Number: 9305237
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven T. Siems   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0511601   Cloud & Precipitatn Process             
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 5912,5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign centers                                
              of proven excellence.  The program's awards                                    
              provide opportunities for joint research, and                                  
              the use of unique or complementary facilities,                                 
              expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                                  
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Steven T.                                   
              Siems to work with Dr. Peter Jonas at UMIST in                                 
              Manchester, UK.                                                                
                                                                                             
              Dr. Siems and the atmospheric research group at                                
              UMIST have proposed adapting a large-eddy                                      
              simulation model in an effort to better                                        
              understand the direct impact cirrus clouds have                                
              on the Earth's radiation budget and the                                        
              coupling between cloud dynamics and radiative                                  
              exchange.  A large-eddy simulation should prove                                
              to be effective given the microphysical                                        
              variability found on scales of less than 1 km.                                 
              This model is to include a representation of                                   
              primary and secondary nucleation processes.  It                                
              must allow for microphysical growth processes                                  
              and dynamical structures to be present and                                     
              interactive with the radioactive fluxes.                                       
              Specifically, the model hopes to address issues                                
              concerning the occurrence of regions with high                                 
              concentrations of small ice crystals.  It is                                   
              unclear as to whether these occurrences are                                    
              more strongly influenced by fluctuations in the                                
              ice nucleus population or the internal dynamics                                
              of the cirrus.  The model will also be used to                                 
              address under the conditions under which                                       
              regions containing liquid water can exist at                                   
              temperatures below -30 degrees centigrade.  The                                
              model may also be used to investigate the                                      
              structure of contrails and how they differ from                                
              natural cirrus clouds.                                                         
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel, a stipend for                                      
              twelve months and a small allowance for in-                                    
              country travel and attendance of a meeting.
