Title       : Novel Fluorescent Probes of Intracellular Ca2+ Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1996     
File        : a9305555

Award Number: 9305555
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph P. Kao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9305555  Kao  The goal of this research is to design and synthesize a novel 
              class of fluorescent calcium indicators.  The approach entails  the use of a
              fura-2 type indicator bearing a chemically reactive  linker.  Covalent
              conjugation of such a reactive indicator to  proteins and peptides that contain
              targeting sequence information  and injecting the resulting conjugates into
              cells would allow the  fluorescent indicator moiety to be spatially targeted to
               subcellular domains or organelles.  Based on this targeting  approach, four
              separate projects are proposed:  1) To devise an  indicator linked to an
              N-terminal myristoylated oligopeptide  containing the targeting sequence that
              allows p60src to bind  specifically to its receptor in the plasma membrane. 
              Such an  indicator will, for the first time, permit one to examine how a  cell
              regulates calcium signals in a microenvironment very near  the cytoplasmic face
              of the plasma membrane. 2) To construct an  indicator covalently linked to an
              oligopeptide incorporating the  nuclear localization sequence of the SV40 large
              T antigen.  The  peptide-indicator conjugate is, in turn, conjugated to bovine 
              serum albumen (BSA).  Microinjected BSA targeting peptide-  indicator conjugate
              will be imported into the cell nucleus.  Such  a probe allows calcium
              regulation in the nucleus to be monitored  specifically and independently of
              cytoplasmic processes.  3) To  prepare an indicator attached covalently to
              calmodulin (CaM).   Such a calmodulin-based fluorescent probe is expected to 
              coassemble, along with native calmodulin, into various cellular  structures. 
              The calmodulin part of the probe thus serves as the  vehicle for bringing a
              fluorescent calcium indicator into the  immediate vicinity of cellular
              machinery that is specifically  dependent on calcium/calmodulin for activation.
               4) To explore  the possibility of studying calcium regulation in plant cell 
              chloroplasts by taking advantage of the post-translational import  of essential
              chloroplast proteins.  A  fluorescent calcium  indicator will be attached, via
              its reactive linker, to a  precursor protein that contains a chloroplast
              transit peptide.   Targeting of the indicator to the stromata of chloroplasts
              by way  of the protein import machinery will be investigated.  %%%  Living
              cells respond to many types of chemical and environmental  signals ranging from
              hormones and growth factors to light.  The  mechanisms by which these signals
              are detected and ultimately  result in changes in cell structure or physiology
              is the subject  of much research.  One important internal messenger in
              signaling  pathways is calcium.  The goal of this research is to design and 
              synthesize novel fluorescent dyes that can be targeted to  specific cellular
              structures or compartments and there change  their fluorescence properties in
              the presence of calcium.  Thus,  they will indicate localized changes in
              calcium concentration  under different physiological conditions.  The ultimate
              goal is  to be able, literally, to see calcium changes as cells respond to 
              specific signals.  These indicators should provide invaluable  probes to
              enhance understanding of cellular signal transduction  mechanisms.***
