Title       : Studies in Mineral Surface Reactivity and Geochemistry to the Atomic Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1993      
File        : a9305031

Award Number: 9305031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryellen Cameron                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Hochella hochella@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              We propose an ambitious mineral surface chemistry project                      
              that will proceed on two parallel and complementary fronts.                    
              One project deals with the study of the electronic structure                   
              of individual atomic sites on mineral surfaces.  The other                     
              project deals with heterogeneous redox reactions.                              
              Theoretical,  experimental, and analytic methods will be                       
              employed .  Including scanning tunneling microscopy,                           
              electron tunneling spectroscopy, scanning (atomic) force                       
              microscopy, x-ray and ultraviolet photoelectron                                
              spectroscopies, Auger electron spectroscopy and scanning                       
              Auger microscopy, low energy electron diffraction, and                         
              secondary electron microscopy.  Theoretical aspects of  this                   
              study will deal primarily with electron tunneling and the                      
              electronic properties of surfaces.  The specific objectives                    
              in Part I are a) to calculate the electronic structure of                      
              individual atoms on both "perfect" and defective surfaces of                   
              hematite, pyrite, and galena, b) to use this information to                    
              interpret tunneling images and spectra collected in vacuum                     
              and non-vacuum environments, and c) to relate our findings                     
              to theories/speculations on "reactive sites" on mineral                        
              surfaces.  The objectives in Part II are a) to determine the                   
              specific mechanisms by which Mn(II)aq is oxidized on mineral                   
              surfaces, b) to determine the influence of trace amounts of                    
              other environmentally important metals, and c) to relate our                   
              findings to other heterogeneous  redox and non-redox systems                   
              involving the interaction of aqueous metals on oxides.  If                     
              successful, our results will be applicable to nearly every                     
              aspect of mineral surface chemistry.
