Title       : RUI: DNA - Protein Interactions Regulating Transcription of the Skeletal Muscle
               Actin Gene in Different Myogenic Milieu
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1995      
File        : a9305351

Award Number: 9305351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra B. Sharp ssharp@calstatela.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-3481

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   A compelling question is how animals develop specialized                  
              organs from a single fertilized egg.  One facet of this process is             
              the formation of muscle or myogenesis.  When myogenesis is                     
              duplicated in cell culture, cells turn on numerous genes whose                 
              expression is required for muscle function.  One such gene is the              
              skeletal muscle actin gene.  Genes are turned on and off by                    
              interactions between specialized regulatory proteins and specific              
              DNA sequences in their promoter or control regions.  Our                       
              experiments will help determine specific protein-DNA interactions              
              in the promoter region of the skeletal muscle actin gene which are             
              important in establishing the different levels of actin gene                   
              expression observed among cells which have been programmed in                  
              different ways to become muscle.  We will transfer into different              
              muscle cells a reporter gene driven by the skeletal muscle actin               
              gene promoter and establish at what level the reporter gene is                 
              expressed.  We will next compare results using the same reporter               
              but with defined deletions in the actin promoter region.  We will              
              also use "in vivo footprinting" to determine more specifically                 
              where regulatory proteins are bound to the actin promoter in the               
              DNA of the different cell types.  The results will provide pieces              
              to the puzzles of gene regulation and development.                             
              %%%                                                                            
              A compelling question is how multicellular animals such as mice and            
              humans develop specialized organs from a single fertilized egg.  We            
              know that every cell, regardless of its location or function in the            
              body, contains for the most part the same set of instructions as               
              every other cell, but that different kinds of cells follow                     
              different subsets of these instructions.  These instructions are               
              encoded as genes in DNA.  This project is designed to help                     
              determine how muscle cells know which instructions to follow.  The             
              facet of the overall developmental process which results in                    
              formation of muscle is called myogenesis.  Some steps in myogenesis            
              can be duplicated with mouse pre-muscle cell lines cultured in the             
              laboratory.  During myogenesis in culture, cells turn on numerous              
              genes which code for proteins whose expression is required for                 
              muscle function.  One such gene is the skeletal muscle actin gene.             
              This gene is expressed at different levels in different muscle cell            
              types.  While it is known that the activity of genes is regulated              
              by interactions between specialized regulatory proteins and                    
              specific control regions in the DNA, the details of these                      
              interactions which are important in establishing different levels              
              of expression of the skeletal muscle actin gene are not completely             
              known.  Our experiments will use a combination of genetic                      
              engineering and biochemical techniques to help determine these                 
              specific protein-DNA interactions and how they might differ among              
              cells which have been programmed in different ways to become                   
              muscle.  The results will provide pieces to the puzzles of gene                
              regulation and development.  Solution of this puzzle is                        
              intrinsically attractive because of the undeniable elegance of                 
              development.  Beyond aesthetics, however, understanding the basic              
              science of molecular mechanisms of muscle gene expression and                  
              development may one day lead to applications in understanding and              
              managing muscle system disorders which are related to failures in              
              regulated gene expression.
