Title       : Mathematical Sciences: From Tori to Cantori: Symplectic Mappings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1995  
File        : a9305847

Award Number: 9305847
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Meiss jdm@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9305847  Meiss       The dynamics of four and higher dimensional symplectic 
              mappings is of fundamental importance to understanding stability  and chaos in
              conservative physical systems.  In this proposal a  combination of numerical
              and analytical techniques will be used.  We propose to determine the domain of
              existence of invariant tori  both by using recursive generation of the Fourier
              series for the  tori, and by continuation of the Cantor sets from the 
              anti-integrable limit.  The goal is to develop methods for  estimating
              practical stability boundaries and for investigating  the transition to chaotic
              behavior.  Computations will determine  the robustness of the tori of various
              frequency vectors, leading  to a generalization of the noble numbers that
              provide the most  robust frequencies in two dimensions.  A study of one 
              dimensional, resonant tori will also be undertaken-these may be  more
              persistent than two-tori, and form an important component of  the barriers to
              transport.  Transport in four dimensions. will be  studied by numerical
              computation of exit time decompositions for  cylinders of various homotopy
              types.  Our goal is the development  of a geometrical description of trapping
              regions and resonance  zones and a characterization of the practical stability
              domain  around an elliptic point.  New techniques for control of  transport
              will be developed for symplectic systems.       All of the fundamental
              equations of physics are formulated  as Hamiltonian dynamical systems.  We
              propose to study the  structure of the orbits of these systems with the
              motivation  being to understand the problem of "transport. " This is of 
              primary importance in such areas as particle accelerator  confinement, chemical
              reaction rates, fluid mixing, plasma  confinement in magnetic fusion devices,
              asteroid and planetary  ring stability, etc.  The basic question is: how does a
              system  evolve from one state (e.g. a confined beam in an accelerator),  to
              another (e.g. beam hits the tunnel wall), and how long does   this take. 
              Typically trajectories must wend their way through  exotic structures such as
              Cantor sets and self-similar fractals,  some of which exhibit a remarkable
              "stickiness", in order to move  through the phase space.  The construction and
              visualization of  these structures requires careful computer study guided by 
              mathematical insight.  A major problem is that the systems of  interest
              correspond to four and higher dimensional spaces--our  ordinary
              three-dimensional intuition fails.  In various  applications transport is
              either to be encouraged (speeding up  reaction rates) or discouraged (confining
              particles); we will  investigate techniques for accomplishing both tasks.  ***
