Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Adaptive Forcasting and Bayesian Time Series Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1995     
File        : a9305045

Award Number: 9305045
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruey S. Tsay ruey.tsay@gsb.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Traditional forecasting methods often assume that there is a  "true" model for
              the process under study.  Under such an  assumption, one can use maximum
              likelihood method to estimate the  model and then use the estimated model for
              forecasting. In  practice, however, there is no "true" model.  Consequently,
              the  traditional forecasting method may fare poorly in long-term  forecasts. 
              To overcome this difficulty, we proposed in this  project an adaptive
              forecasting procedure that can produce  accurate long-term forecasts. The
              proposed procedure selects a  statistical model for each forecasting horizon.
              In other words,  under the proposed procedure, different models are used to 
              produce different multi-step ahead forecasts. Our preliminary  results suggest
              that such an adaptive procedure outperforms  substantially the traditional
              forecasting 1 methods. In this  project, we plan to investigate properties of
              such an adaptive  forecasting procedure, to provide theoretical justifications
              of  the procedure, and to develop statistical criteria of model  selection in
              adaptive forecasting. The second part of the  proposed research is concerned
              with Bayesian time-series  analysis.  Its main objective is to develop new
              methodologies for  Bayesian inference that (a) make use of the recent
              developments  in repeated stochastic substitution such as the Gibbs sampler, 
              (b) allow for various structural changes in a process, and (c)  provide a
              flexible framework for estimating common features in a  vector process.  For
              instance, we consider a Markov switching  framework for modeling macroeconomic
              time series and for  discriminating non-nested non-linear time series models.
              We also  augment a probit model to a random variance-shift model to relate  the
              probability of a variance change to a set of chosen  explanatory variables. 
              These preliminary results are very  encouraging as they successfully describe
              many features that  cannot be captured by the traditional time-series analysis.
               The proposed research consists of  two main projects. In the first  project,
              we propose to develop new methods that can produce  accurate long-term
              forecasts. The basic idea of the proposed  research is that different models
              are selected to produce  forecasts of different horizons. Under the proposed
              research,  statistical models are used adaptively in long-term forecasts. 
              Advantages of the proposed new forecasting methods include (a)  they relate
              directly model selection to the objective of  forecasts, (b) it relaxes many
              "unrealistic assumptions" commonly  imposed by the traditional forecasting
              methods, and (c) they make  use of the recent advances in statistical 
              computing. Our  preliminary experience on forecasting the U.S. monthly consumer
               price index for foods indicates that the proposed methods  outperform
              substantially other forecasting methods available in  the literature. The
              second project is concerned with time-series  analysis. It emphasizes the
              recent developments in statistical  algorithms and the advances in computing. 
              The main objective is  to develop new methodologies that can incorporate prior 
              acknowledge on subject matters into data analysis in an efficient  manner.  It
              also widens the applicability of many statistical  methods by enlarging the
              class of possible statistical  distributions such as using scale mixture of
              traditional   distributions.
