Title       : Acetabularia Mutants That are Developmentally Arrested or Abberant in the Timing
               of Reproduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1995       
File        : a9305473

Award Number: 9305473
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dina F. Mandoli mandoli@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9305473  Mandoli    Dr.Mandoli's long term goal is to understand how
              developmental age  and/or size of an organism and environmental signals
              co-regulate  initiation of reproductive development. A genetic dissection of
              the  initiation of reproduction in Acetabularia acetabulum will provide  unique
              insights into development at the level of the single cell.  Initiation of
              reproduction in A. acetabulum, requires de novo  protein synthesis, and is
              regulated at the translational level by  a) developmental age/size of the cell,
              b) blue light and c) a  putative cytosolic, nuclear encoded inhibitor. There
              are three  specific aims in this proposal: 1) To breed an isogeneic cell line. 
              Isogeneic cells will provide a homogeneous background for mutants.  The cell
              line also will be screened for increased fecundity and DNA  content using four
              parameters which correlate with these  phenotypes; 2) To screen for two types
              of developmental mutants;  those which are developmentally arrested at specific
              points during  vegetative growth (da mutants) and those which initiate 
              reproduction or 'cap' prematurely (early mutants) which may be  defective in,
              or null for, an inhibitor. Mitotically active haploid  nuclei will be
              mutagenized with EMS prior to gametogenesis at a  dose known to induce 50% kill
              of the subsequent generation.  Treatment of mitotically active haploid nuclei
              will propagate  populations of mutant gametes inside gametangia. Selfs and 
              backcrosses of gametes will recover recessives; 3) To characterize  these
              mutants using nuclear and cytoplasmic complementation in  trans (cell grafting
              and nuclear transplantation) and classical  genetic techniques. Dr. Mandoli can
              rescue da mutants in three  ways. First, implanting a wild type nucleus will
              'piggy-back' the  mutant nucleus through reproduction. Second, grafting a wild
              type  cytoplasm may complement the mutant in trans. Third, repetition of 
              development post amputation will determine if regrowth and normal  development
              are the same. Classical genetics  of early and rescued  da mutants will
              determine dominance, numbers of alleles and  complementation groups.  ***
