Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Analyses of Clast Fabrics in Periglacial
               Mass-Movement Deposits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1993       
File        : a9305029

Award Number: 9305029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9959               (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan W. Millar  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Periglacial processes are those processes that operate in                 
              near-glacial conditions, whether along the margins of glaciers or              
              in areas where the climates are almost cold enough to support                  
              glaciation.  In locales like the Driftless Area of southwestern                
              Wisconsin and parts of the northern Appalachians just beyond the               
              limits of Pleistocene glaciation, and in locales like those of                 
              central and northern Alaska, periglacial processes have had                    
              significant impacts on the landscape.  Quaternary scientists long              
              have attempted to differentiate between the effects of various                 
              periglacial processes, but unambiguous lines of evidence are                   
              rare, and standard analytic procedures to identify forms of mass-              
              wasting in periglacial environments have not been well developed.              
              This doctoral dissertation research process will focus on                      
              comparisons of the directional orientation of "clast fabrics"                  
              (materials consisting of rock fragments) within colluvium from                 
              three different sites.  Two of these sites (one in central Alaska              
              and one in southwestern New York and northwestern Pennsylvania)                
              are locales where previous studies have identified formations                  
              that appear to be relics of previous periglacial episodes.  The                
              third site (in eastern Alaska) is a site where periglacial                     
              processes are still active.  Data derived from material extracted              
              from these sites will be analyzed with other sedimentary and                   
              environmental data in order to assess the validity of extant                   
              models of sediment-transport processes operating in periglacial                
              environments.                                                                  
                   This research project will provide valuable new insights                  
              from a number of perspectives.  Methodological advances should be              
              realized through refinement of new statistical approaches for                  
              identifying and comparing orientational variations within and                  
              between deposits.  Fundamental knowledge of the processes                      
              operating in periglacial environments also will be advanced, with              
              special value likely to result from efforts to relate fossil                   
              evidence to active processes.  As a doctoral dissertation                      
              improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable              
              a promising student to establish a strong independent research                 
              career.
