Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Post-Glacial Fire History in Yellowstone
               National Park
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9305436

Award Number: 9305436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7755               (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah Millspaugh  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   Fire is a major form of disturbance that influences the                   
              composition, structure, and distribution of vegetation.  Fire                  
              frequency is affected by climate, and as climates change, so does              
              the way that fires shape and maintain spatial patterns of                      
              vegetation.  Past changes in fire frequency have been shown to                 
              accelerate and amplify effects of climate change, thereby                      
              producing more rapid shifts in vegetation composition and                      
              distribution than would have otherwise occurred.  The specific                 
              links among long-term changes in climate, vegetation, and fire                 
              regimes are not well understood, however.  This doctoral                       
              dissertation research project will analyze charcoal, magnetic                  
              susceptibility, and pollen from sediment cores taken from lakes                
              in three different biogeographic provinces in Yellowstone                      
              National Park in order to reconstruct the fire history of the                  
              area over the last 14,000 years.  These analyses will elucidate                
              fire regimes for different kinds of vegetation and will address                
              the role of regional climatic change as an influence on fire                   
              frequency.                                                                     
                   This project will provide information and insights of value               
              from a number of different perspectives.  Although focusing on                 
              change in Yellowstone National Park, the data gathered through                 
              analyses in this project will complement data gathered from                    
              numerous other sites in the northwestern U.S. thereby advancing                
              knowledge of regional climate and vegetation change since the                  
              last glacial advance.  The study also will contribute to deeper                
              understandings of the complex involvement of fires in climatic                 
              and vegetational processes.  This type of knowledge may have                   
              increasingly significant utility for resource managers in the                  
              park and in other environments if climatic changes forecast for                
              future decades occur.  As a doctoral dissertation improvement                  
              award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising              
              student to establish a strong independent research career.
