Title       : Dissertation Research: Ateline Primates as Seed Dispersers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1996     
File        : a9528861

Award Number: 9528861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9668               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter S. Rodman psrodman@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The majority of the earth's biodiversity is found in tropical rainforest,
              and species diversity  is particularly high in the lowland tropics. As vast
              areas of these habitats are destroyed  worldwide, the ecological relationships
              between plant and animal species in these areas, such as  those between mammals
              and their food plants, remain little-studied, although it is known that 
              dispersal of the seeds of trees and lianas must be critical to the maintenance
              of plant diversity in  tropical forests.       The work proposed here
              constitutes an 18 month field study to be conducted in the  lowland rainforest
              of the Yasuni National Park in eastern Ecuador to investigate the dispersal of 
              seeds in fleshy fruits by primates. The study will compare the feeding
              ecologies of two sympatric  primate species, Humboldt's woolly monkey
              (Lagothrix lagotricha) and the white-bellied spider  monkey (Ateles belzebuth).
              Research protocols include a dietary and behavioral comparison of  the two
              species, with particular emphasis on the dispersion, morphology, and chemical 
              characteristics of fruits eaten, as well as continuous monitoring of the
              flowering and fruiting of  trees in the area and tracking the seed dispersal
              and seedling recruitment patterns of individual  trees. By studying primate
              feeding patterns in concert with the dispersal and germination of food  plants,
              the dynamics of these mutualisms will be documented in detail, and will
              identify plant and  animal species that appear to play the most important roles
              as ecological interactors. The work  will contribute substantially to knowledge
              of the Amazonian rainforest community and the  dynamics of diversity in that
              forest by providing detailed information on the composition of the  plant
              community, the reproductive biology of the plant community, and the interaction
              of plants  and primates through the role of primates as seed dispersers of key
              rainforest trees and lianas.  The project will also extend and deepen knowledge
              of the interactions of primate species. Woolly  and spider monkeys in the study
              share a recent common ancestry, similar body size, and  overlapping diets, and
              these characteristics make them excellent study species to test  hypotheses on
              niche separation and coexistence of rainforest animals in conjunction with the 
              study of their roles in dispersal of seeds. Detailed study of the manner in
              which these two related  species divide the food resources in their shared
              habitat will benefit our understanding of their  relatively recent evolutionary
              divergence.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
