Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Archaeology of the Maritime Peninsula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1998  
File        : a9528189

Award Number: 9528189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10188              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Wright   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dean R. Snow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Gary Wright, Mr.  Adrian Burke will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. His goal is to understand the social organization of
              prehistoric Native American inhabitants of the Maritime Peninsula, an area
              which includes Maine and adjacent parts of Canada. This is a issue which is
              extremely difficult to address because archaeological sites in this region
              generally have poor preservation of remains and thus it is usually difficult to
              wring much information from them. Mr. Burke has already conducted a significant
              amount of excavation in this region and has recognized that it is possible both
              to locate the geological deposits which provided the raw material for the stone
              tools which were used throughout the area. In this study Mr. Burke will
              continue his fieldwork to locate additional rock outcrops. Materials collected
              from these sources will be subjected to both microscopic and chemical analysis
              to search for identifying structural characteristics and chemical signatures.
              Mr. Burke will conduct similar analyses on stone tools recovered from many
              sites across the region. On this basis he will then be able to establish trade
              routes and economic interactions. It will thus be possible to reconstruct one
              important aspect of social organization. Mr. Burke will also analyze the kinds
              of tools which were made and by this means describe a technological system
              which was crucial for survival in this  region which lacked metal.  In addition
              to providing information which is of interest to a wide range of
              archaeologists, the research will also serve to advance archaeological
              methodology. Researchers have postulated a number of  models which concern how
              human populations, at a simple level of technology, make use of irregularly
              scattered resources. Some have postulated that individual mobility is limited
              and that trade serves as a primary mechanism to distribute these resources.
              Others have argued for a high degree of population mobility. The proposed
              research will address this question directly. It will also assist in the
              training of a promising young archaeologist.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
