Title       : ECM: Development of Plasma-Based Techniques to Reduce the Environmental Hazards
               Associated with Wet-Bath Electroplating Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1997  
File        : a9528746

Award Number: 9528746
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Conrad conrad@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9153,9161,ECDM,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9528746  Conrad     The objective of this research is to investigate Plasma
              Source Ion Implantation (PSII), a dry, non-polluting surface modification
              technique, to mitigate the problems associated with wet chemical bath plating
              procedures.  PSII is a non-line-of-sight, dry surface modification technique
              that has been shown tos improve wear and corrosion of materials.  In PSII, the
              parts to be treated are placed in a plasma (ionized gas) and pulse-biased to a
              high negative potential.  As a result, ions in the plasma are accelerated into
              the parts' surfaces at high velocities, resulting in the enhancement of its
              surface properties.  In addition to implantation, the PSII process can be used
              to deposit overlay coatings with a degree of mixing at the coating-substrate
              interface that assures good adhesion.  This research will involve the
              application of the PSII process in both the ion implantation and deposition
              modes.  Process variables in PSII such as energy, dose, and pulse shape will be
              utilized to control the phases and microstructure of the coatings.  The
              PSII-treated coatings will be characterized using Auger spectroscopy and
              electron microscopy for microstructural aspects such as grain size, cracks, and
              porosity.  Wear, corrosion, and adhesion characteristics of the coatings will
              be of primary interest and will be studied in detail, modeled computationally,
              and compared to existing electroplated coatings.   The research will be
              performed in a multi-disciplinary environment involving plasma physics,
              materials science, ion-materials interactions, computer modeling, and
              tribology.  Consequently, it will develop new knowledge at the interfaces
              between these areas and apply the fundamental knowledge in these fields to
              environmentally conscious manufacturing, where it has the potential to make a
              significant impact on ecology and workers' environment.  The research will have
              a strong educational component as well as industrial participation.  Currently,
              wet chemical bath platings (e.g., chromium and  cadmium) are widely used for
              improving wear, corrosion, and erosion resistances and lowering friction in a
              variety of machine tooling, process equipment, and manufactured goods. 
              However, the chemical baths and the rinse water generated from the plating
              plants are environmentally toxic and present significant problems in both
              handling and disposal.  PSII provides an appealing substitute to these wet
              chemical processes, because of its ability to produce high performance material
              surfaces in a chemical-free, environmentally-clean manner.
