Title       : Molecular Systematics and Coevolution in Yucca Moths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1998       
File        : a9528072

Award Number: 9528072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162925             (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Olof Pellmyr olle.pellmyr@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Claude W. dePamphilis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Leebens-Mack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9528072  PELLMYR   Understanding the mechanisms that determine host utilization
              and specificity is central to the study of plant-animal interactions,
              diversification, and the process of coevolution.  This project will explore the
              phylogenetic systematics of yucca moths in the genera Tegeticula Parategiticula
              and Prodoxus (Insecta: Lepidoptera: Prodoxidae), some of which are obligate
              pollinators of their host yucca plants, to test hypotheses about host
              specificity, reversal of mutualism, and patterns of species diversification
              among these moths.  Phylogenetic hypotheses will be developed using
              morphometric and molecular tools.  The latter entails mitochondrial and nuclear
              DNA sequencing, and denaturing-gradient gel electrophoresis.  The results will
              be used to test hypotheses of one-on-one host specificity between pollinators
              and their host plants, multiple reversals of pollination behavior, congruence
              of plant-insect phylogenies, constrained patterns of life history change, and
              host shifts as a path for defection in cooperation.  Modern systematic
              revisions will also be compiled for all genera in these classical model groups
              for the study of interspecific interactions.   The results will be a framework
              for one of the most important model systems of plant-insect interactions and
              will increase our understanding of host shifts in plant feeding insects.  The
              results could have immediate application in agriculture and applied entomology
              by contributing to understanding how pest organisms respond and change over
              time in their interactions with plants.
