Title       : Discretely Propagating Fronts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1997   
File        : a9528853

Award Number: 9528853
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303485             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Fritsch fritsch@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9528853  Fritsch        While the fundamental physics of fronts has been know
              for many years, new   observational tools and theoretical frameworks are
              driving a reevaluation of some of  the classical concepts.  It has been
              observed over the years that frontal boundaries  sometimes appear to propagate
              in a discrete rather than continuous manner.  While  observed with some
              frequency, this behavior has not been well documented nor  studied in any
              depth.  The principal investigator proposes to begin an exploratory  study of
              discretely-propagating fronts.  The objectives are: 1) establish the 
              characteristics of discretely-propagating fronts and their environment, 2)
              determine  why and how fronts propagate in a step-like (discrete) manner, 3)
              relate the  processes of discrete propagation to current theories concerning
              frontogenesis, and 4)  construct a conceptual model of discrete propagation.   
                  The research methodology is composed of four parts: 1) compilation of a ten
               year climatology of discrete propagation events using standard surface and
              upper air  data, 2) compilation of the properties of individual events and
              construction of a  composite environment, 3) numerical simulation of a
              representative event(s), and 4)  calculation of the evolution of each of the
              terms (processes) that contribute to  frontogenesis over the entire model
              domain and for the complete life cycle of the  event(s).  Under this initial
              research effort primary emphasis will be on objectives 1  and 2.  While some
              progress is expected on the remaining objectives, they will be  attacked more
              fully under a subsequent  research effort that will be proposed only if 
              warranted after completion of this exploratory effort.        It is expected
              that the knowledge gained from these investigations will  enhance our
              understanding of how frontogenesis is related to potential vorticity  anomalies
              and, most importantly, why, and under what conditions, discrete  propagation
              occurs. It is anticipate that the results will provide practica l benefits, 
              such as improvements in short-term (3-18 h) weather forecasts. The results
              should  also provide a basis for further theoretical studies of the
              frontogenesis problem.  ***
