Title       : Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing: Economical Cryogenic Machining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1995 
File        : a9528710

Award Number: 9528710
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shane Y. Hong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9153,ECDM,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9528710  Hong      To eliminate both the health problems and the environmental
              contamination of using conventional cutting fluid in the machining industry, a
              recent joint University-Industry research has led to an economical and
              practical cryogenic machining technology.  This new process, which is dry,
              clean, and neat, cools the cutting tool with super cold nitrogen.   By adopting
              a new cooling concept, "manipulating the cutting temperature in the micro
              sense," the consumption of liquid nitrogen is minimized to a level at which the
              nitrogen costs less than conventional cutting fluid.  Temperature is a factor
              in changing materials properties.  The material properties at micro locations
              in the chip formation process, such as the primary shear zone, the formed chip,
              the friction zone, the bulk workpiece, the tool face, and the tool body, will
              be adjusted by varying the temperature to be the most favorable for the cutting
              process.  This project includes a material study of target workpiece and tool
              materials to determine the ideal temperature distribution to yield the optimum
              material behavior for specific operations.  The nozzle spray pattern, covering
              area, and liquid nitrogen flow rate are design parameters to adjust the
              temperature distribution.  By controlling the cooling pattern, the temperature
              distribution can be manipulated to the most desirable range.  Thermodynamic and
              heat transfer finite element analyses will be conducted to predict the
              temperature distribution of the specific cutting process.  The amount of liquid
              nitrogen needed to achieve the cooling to that temperature will be
              theoretically and experimentally determined.  The flowrate then can be
              controlled to the minimum amount to still be able to do the job; an intelligent
              control system will be developed for it.  The expected result of this approach
              is the most efficient machining and most economical nitrogen dispensing.     
              Cutting fluid plays a key role in the machining process.  Historically, cutting
              fluids have been optimize d primarily for the cutting efficiency but at the
              sacrifice of environmental concerns.  This has led to the need for innovative
              research such as cryogenic machining.  If it can be proven that the cutting
              efficiency can be improved while maintaining the current cutting fluid cost per
              part, the impact on the machining industry could be broad-based resulting in a
              market pull for this environmentally conscious manufacturing technology.
