Title       : Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Managed Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1997 
File        : a9528775

Award Number: 9528775
Award Instr.: Contract                                     
Prgm Manager: Joyce A. Jatko                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130760             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Internat Ctr for Ant Info
	      14 Orchard Rd PO Box 14-199
	      , NZ  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5152      ENVIRONMENTAL COORDINATION ACT
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Managed  Areas
                 Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic  Treaty
              provides a new  framework for protection and management of  areas in the
              Antarctic with special environmental, scientific,  historic, aesthetic, or
              wilderness values.  Sites of Special  Scientific Interest (SSSI)  and Specially
              Protected Areas (SPAs), old  categories used by the Antarctic Treaty
              Consultative Parties, are  replaced in Annex V by Antarctic Specially Protected
              Areas (ASPA).  The Protocol also includes provisions for the development of a 
              detailed management plan to protect the values for which the area was 
              designated. While the Protocol has not yet been formally adopted by  the United
              States, there has been agreement to voluntarily implement  as many of its
              provisions as practicable.  One of those provisions is  that the country which
              proposes a site for designation as an ASPA  prepare a proposed management plan
              for the site for submission to the  Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting.   
              Several SPAs and SSSI in the Ross Sea area were proposed by the United  States.
               One, Linnaeus Terrace, Asgaard Range, Victoria Land, has had  a management
              plan prepared using the Protocol guidelines and is in the  submittal process. 
              Six others still need to be prepared.  One new  area is being proposed for
              protection and must also have a management  plan prepared for submission to the
              Treaty Meeting.    Management plans are needed for the following  sites:       
               Cape Hallett (SPA 7) - designated in Treaty recommendation IV-7       Cape
              Royds, Ross Island (SSSI 1) - designated in Treaty  recommendation VIII-4      
              Arrival Heights, Ross Island (SSSI 2) - designated in Treaty  recommendation
              VIII-4       Barwick Valley, Victoria Land (SSSI 3) - designated in Treaty 
              recommendation VIII-4       Cape Crozier, Ross Island (SSSI 4) - designated in
              Treaty  recommendation VIII-4       NW White Island (SSSI 18) - designated in
              Treaty recommend ation  XIII-8       Cape Washington (to be proposed for
              designation)    The content of the management plans will follow the general
              format  proscribed in Article 5, Annex V of the Protocol on Environmental 
              Protection.
