Title       : National Science Foundation Alan T. Waterman Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9528578

Award Number: 9528578
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew P.A. Fisher mpaf@itp.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 1765,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9528578  Fisher  Dr. Matthew P. A. Fisher of the Institute for Theoretical 
              Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, is the  20th recipient of the
              Alan T. Waterman award.  Fisher will  receive $500,000 in research support over
              three years as  part of this award.  The Alan T. Waterman Award Committee 
              overviewed the recommendation process after receiving 96  nominations.  The
              National Science Board unanimously agreed  to present the award to this
              theoretical physicist.  The  National Science Foundation presents this annual
              award to a  promising scientist, no more than 35 years of age or within  five
              years of receiving his/her Ph.D., who is judged to be  in the forefront of
              his/her field.    The committee recognized Fisher for his pioneering 
              contributions to the theory of disordered superconductors.  He is an
              outstanding condensed matter theorist who predicted  a new state of
              superconductive matter, the "vortex glass"  phase.  This novel prediction was
              compellingly confirmed by  experiment shortly afterwards.  The work of Fisher
              in this  area has had a major impact on the field of high-temperature 
              superconductivity.  He also developed a theory to describe  how
              superconductivity is destroyed with increasing disorder,  predicting that the
              material would pass directly into an  insulating phase as disorder increases. 
              In other work, he  developed a theory of quantum transport for one-dimensional 
              metals, enabling the first definitive experimental search  for this new
              metallic phase.    Fisher has emerged as a leader among his generation of 
              condensed matter theorists.  His creativity, originality,  and leadership
              ability set him apart in this field and have  inspired both experimental and
              theoretical progress.  The  award is the most prestigious honor of the National
              Science  Foundation for young researchers.  ***                                
                     Report on the 1995 Alan T. Waterman Award recipient  Dr. Matthew P.A.
              Fisher  Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of California,   Santa
              Barbara    DATE:  7/18/95    PROPOSAL:  DMR-9528578    Dr. Matthew P. A. Fisher
              of the Institute for Theoretical  Physics, University of California, Santa
              Barbara, is the  20th recipient of the Alan T. Waterman award.  The National 
              Science Foundation presents this annual award to a promising  scientist, no
              more than 35 years of age or within five years  of receiving his/her Ph.D., who
              is judged to be in the  forefront of his/her field.  Fisher will receive
              $500,000 in  research support over three years as part of this award.    The
              Alan T. Waterman Award Committee (see following list of  names) overviewed the
              recommendation process after receiving  96 nominations in response to a
              September 1, 1994 Dear  Colleague letter.  The National Science Board
              unanimously  agreed to present the award to this theoretical physicist at  its
              March 20, 1995 Executive Closed Session Meeting  following a report by Dr. Neal
              F. Lane, Director and Chair  of the Executive Committee, on behalf of the
              committee.  Dr.  Lane and Dr. Frank Rhodes (Chairman of the National Science 
              Board) notified Fisher of the award by letter on April 6,  1995.    The
              committee recognized Fisher for his pioneering  contributions to the theory of
              disopdered superconductors.  He is an outstanding condensed matter theorist who
              predicted  a new state of superconductive matter, the "vortex glass"  phase. 
              This novel prediction was compellingly confirmed by  experiment shortly
              afterwards.  The work of Fisher in this  area has had a major impact on the
              field of high-temperature  superconductivity.  He also developed a theory to
              describe  how superconductivity is destroyed with increasing disorder, 
              predicting that the material would pass directly into an  insulating phase as
              disorder increases.  In other work, he  developed a theory of quantum transport
              for one-dimensional  metals, enabling the first definitive experimental search 
              for this new metallic phase.    Fisher has emerged as a leader among his
              generation of  condensed matter theo rists.  His creativity, originality,  and
              leadership ability set him apart in this field and have  inspired both
              experimental and theoretical progress.  The  award is the most prestigious
              honor of the National Science  Foundation for young researchers.          Craig
              Rottman  Program Director, Materials Theory, DMR/MPS
