Title       : Dissertation Research: Male Tactics and Female Mate Choice in Captive Savanna
               Baboons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1996  
File        : a9528277

Award Number: 9528277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10928              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara B. Smuts barbara smuts@um.cc.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, an increasing amount of research has been devoted to examining
              the  importance of mate choice by females in primate sexual relationships. 
              However, our  understanding of female mate choice is limited due to the
              difficulty of teasing apart effects of  female choice from effects of male
              behavior which may influence female mate choice.  For  example, evidence from
              numerous nonhuman primate species suggests that females are  constrained in
              expressing their mating preferences due to male strategies that involve
              aggressive  exclusion of rivals and sexual coercion of females.  Because female
              mate choice will often be  constrained by male tactics, it is difficult to
              ascertain whether a particular act represents the  female's preference, or a
              compromise between her interests and those of males.  This research will
              involve an experimental study on captive savanna baboons in order to 
              investigate female mating preferences in the absence of male opportunities to
              coerce females or  exclude rival males.  This will be accomplished by comparing
              male-female interactions in a  naturalistic outdoor group setting and an
              experimental condition in which females are given an  opportunity to associate
              and mate with a choice of males in the absence of male tactics.  If  females'
              choices of mates are constrained significantly by male behavior, they should
              associate  and mate with different males and/or a greater number of males under
              experimental conditions  than naturalistic group conditions.  The proposed
              research is one of the first attempts to examine  nonhuman primate female mate
              choice experimentally and the first study in a nonhuman primate  to investigate
              the extent to which male mating tactics constrain female mate choice.  This
              experimental paradigm also provides a unique opportunity for validating female
              preference  signals.  By comparing females' behavior in the outdoor group
              setting with their behavior during  experimental mate-choice trials, the
              researchers will determine whether any behaviors exhibited  by estrous females
              in the naturalistic group setting are reliable indicators of female mating 
              preferences for particular males (i.e. female preference signals).             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
