Title       : Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing: Waste Reduction through Mass Exchanger
               Network Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9528653

Award Number: 9528653
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vasilios I. Manousiouthakis vasilios@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9153,9197,ECDM,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9528653  Manousioutakis  UCLA      The design of environmentally conscious
              manufacturing processes is a challenging problem.  At risk are public health,
              the competitiveness of US industry, and the well being of the key chemical and
              manufacturing sectors of the economy.  Direct costs dedicated to pollution
              control are in hundreds of billions of dollars, and as public demands for
              reduced or zero discharge grow, these costs escalate.  These demands have made
              conventional, end-of-pipe treatment technoogies inadequate and expensive.  To
              remain competitive in world markets, American industry must develop new
              manufacturing processes designed to avoid the generation of pollutants, rather
              than rely on technologies that capture pollutants once they have been
              generated.    A current approach to this problem is in the design of separation
              systems, since recovery of raw materials and by-products from reactor effluents
              can lead to reduced raw material consumption and waste disposal costs.  Thus a
              multi-technology based separation synthesis method that can systematically
              design flowsheets, featuring the optimum combination of the many separation
              options, could be instrumental in arriving at competitive, minimum waste
              generating processes.    In an effort to develop waste reduction methods based
              on separation processes, and in particular distillation, the PI has been
              working on a concept that he calls mass-exchange network (MEN) synthesis and
              the "State-Space Approach".  MEN synthesis systematically generates a
              cost-effective network of mass exchanges that preferentially transfers certain
              species from a set of rich streams to a set of lean streams.  A mass exchanger
              is any countercurrent direct-contact mass-transfer operation (for example,
              absorption, desorption, adsorption, liquid-liquid extraction, ion exchange, 
              vapor-liquid equilibrium). Mass exchangers, together with heat exchangers or
              other technologies (such as membrane separations), form the building blocks of
              separation networks.  The "State-Space Appr oach" provides a flexible tool to
              synthesize mass/heat exchange networks, distillation column sequences and other
              hybrid networks using such tools as the "pinch" concept for mass and heat
              exchange. The end result is improved resource utilization through integration.
