Title       : Disseration Research: Nuclear and Mitochondrial Phylogeny of the New World
               Monkeys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1996  
File        : a9528339

Award Number: 9528339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis H. O'Rourke                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Maryellen Ruvolo ruvolo@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Understanding how animal species are related to each other is fundamental
              to  understanding the diversity of the living world, and provides the framework
              upon which the rest  of biology can build knowledge. Today, new genetic
              technologies involving the acquisition and  analysis of DNA sequence data are
              providing major new insights in this area, allowing us to  understand both how
              diverse organisms are related to each other and how DNA itself changes  over
              time.  One group of animals that is poorly understood is the family of New
              World monkeys.   The application of new DNA technologies to elucidating the
              relationships among the members  of this group has the potential to yield
              significant amounts of information, clarifying our view of  this branch of the
              primate order and contributing to our overall knowledge about the natural 
              world.       Nuclear and mitochondrial DNA sequence data will be collected for
              representatives of  fourteen taxa of New World monkeys. The genes to be studied
              are the nuclear X-encoded  glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase locus (G6PD) and
              the mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase  subunit II (COII) locus. These
              newly-generated 32 kilobases of DNA sequence data will be  combined with
              existing DNA sequence data for the same two loci from other New World  monkey
              taxa to reconstruct phylogenetic trees of the platyrrhines using a variety of
              tree-building  algorithms (maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, and
              distance).  These new data will be  used to measure the extent of genetic
              variation within seven genera of platyrrhines and to  increase the overall
              robustness of phylogenetic estimation.       Molecular evolutionary rates of
              change will be compared between these mitochondrial  coding and nuclear
              non-coding regions.  The mitochondrial COII data will be examined to gain a 
              better understanding of the rate speedup within haplorhines at this locus. 
              Finally, substitution  patterns at the functionally characterized mitochondrial
              locus will be studied for evidence of  constraints on nucleotide substitutions.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
