Title       : UV Photobiology of Planktonic Development Stages of Antarctic Benthic
               Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1998     
File        : a9528241

Award Number: 9528241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220269             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deneb Karentz karentzd@usfca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University San Francisco
	      2130 Fulton Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941171080    415/666-6886

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9528241  Karentz  Recently documented global decreases in stratospheric ozone 
              have brought attention to the potential ecological  consequences of increased
              ultraviolet-B (UVB) radiation in  marine communities. Even without ozone
              depletion, UVB  radiation penetrating into surface waters of the ocean 
              represents a biological hazard to many marine organisms. The  most extensive
              destruction of ozone has been occurring over  the Antarctic continent and
              Southern Ocean, where over 50%  depletion is recorded each spring.  A major
              obstacle in  assessing UV effects is that very little is known about the  UV
              photobiology of individual species.  In the Antarctic,  some of the more
              ecologically dominant benthic invertebrate  species occupy intertidal and
              shallow subtidal depths where  biological effects of UVB have already been
              documented. Many  of these species have planktonic development and their 
              spawning season coincides with the period when ozone  depletion is occurring;
              thus their microscopic embryos and  larvae are exposed to increasingly higher
              levels of UVB.  At  present there is no information on the potential short- or 
              long-term effects of increased UVB levels on populations of  Antarctic benthic
              invertebrates.    The research proposed here will focus on the UV photobiology 
              of three important Antarctic invertebrate species that  inhabit intertidal and
              subtidal areas in the region of  Palmer Station, Anvers Island, Antarctic
              Peninsula.  These  species are the limpet Nacella concinna, the sea urchin 
              Sterechinus neumayeri and the sea star Odontaster validus.  The adults of these
              species are dominant members of  Antarctic intertidal and shallow subtidal
              benthic  communities, and their embryos and larvae develop for months  in
              surface waters from late austral winter through summer.  This study will
              evaluate the impact of ambient UVB on early  stages (gametes, embryos and
              larvae) of the life histories  of these species by 1) examining potential UV
              exposure  levels, 2) assessing differential sensiti vities, 3)  identifying
              molecular, chromosomal and morphological UVB  induced damage, and 4) evaluating
              potential protection and  recovery from UVB exposure. Since these species have 
              taxonomic equivalents at both temperate and tropical  latitudes, this work will
              provide important biological  parameters for increasing our knowledge about UV
              effects on  both local and global scales.
