Title       : Origins of Stress in Elastic Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1998    
File        : a9528957

Award Number: 9528957
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Witten t-witten@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9528957  Witten  Soft materials such as rubbers, foams, gels and biological 
              tissues will be the subject of this theoretical project.  The project will
              develop new ways to describe and predict  this softness quantitatively using
              mathematics, statistical  physics and computer simulations.  The research will
              focus  on two materials that show promise for improved prediction.  The first
              type are deformed elastic sheets, such as a wad of  paper, a distorted red
              blood cell or a crumpled fender.  The  amount of force to distort these elastic
              sheets will be  predicted by utilizing a recently discovered insight about  how
              the deformation energy is distributed in a deformed  sheet.  The results of
              this research will assist engineers  in designing sheets of materials which
              crumple in controlled  ways.  The second type of material to be studied will be
               microscopic layers of polymer molecules attached to  surfaces.  Such layers
              are used to keep tiny solid particles  suspended in many widely-used fluids
              such as motor oil or  ink.  These layers resist deformation because of the 
              tendency for the flexible polymers to remain as random as  possible.  This
              drive to maximize randomness leads the  polymers to distort collectively rather
              than individually.  The research will predict how these layers distort in 
              various situations.  %%%  This theoretical research project will deal with two
              types  of materials.   First, sheets of elastic materials, such as  rubber,
              will be studied in order to determine how they  behave as they crumple under
              stress.  These results will be  important for predicting the behavior of a
              large number of  different materials as they crumple.  Second, the behavior  of
              polymer layers attached to surfaces will be studied.  These materials are used
              to suspend small particles, such as  used in motor oils.   The research will
              study the behavior  of these materials as they are distorted.  ***
