Title       : Surface and Bulk Diffusion on Single-Crystal Ice and Acid Hydrate Multilayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1996  
File        : a9528473

Award Number: 9528473
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. George georges@spot.Colorado.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1318,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The investigation of the diffusion of small, atmospherically relevant  
              molecules on and in ice is the subject of this research project supported  
              jointly by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program and the   Atmospheric
              Chemistry Program.  Laser resonant desorption methods will be   used to probe
              the diffusion of ClONO2, HOCl, HNO3 and HCl on the surface   and in the bulk of
              ice and acid hydrate multilayers produced and   characterized in an ultra high
              vacuum apparatus.  An understanding of the   diffusion process and a knowledge
              of diffusion rates is important to   developing an understanding of the
              heterogeneous chemistry of polar   stratospheric clouds that convert stable
              halogen containing reservoir   molecules into active halogen species which
              destroy ozone catalytically   in the stratosphere.  This work will also provide
              new basic information   about the diffusion process on and in molecular solids.
               In order to understand the detailed mechanisms and rates of stratospheric  
              ozone depletion by man made chemicals such as chlorofluorocarbon   propellants
              and refrigerants, it is important to know about the rates and   mechanisms of
              diffusion of these molecules and their decomposition   products on the surfaces
              and in the bulk of the ice particles which exist   in the stratosphere. 
              Obtaining this understanding is the goal of this   research project.  Using
              laser desorption methods developed previously by   the principal investigator,
              the details of this diffusion process will be   examined.  This information
              will help in developing models of the   chemistry of the atmosphere which will
              aid scientists in proposing   solutions for problems such as the depletion of
              the ozone layer in the   stratosphere.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
