Title       : Collaborative Research: Species Introductions as Ecological Experiments-Linking
               Biogeographical Patterns and Ecological Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9528445

Award Number: 9528445
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91708              (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig W. Osenberg osenberg@zoo.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9528445  Osenberg  The introduction of species outside their native ranges can
              provide unique opportunities to study the factors determining species
              distributions and abundances on both local and regional scales.  Introductions
              of fishes into lakes are particularly useful because they resemble experiments;
              they are often replicated (introductions are made to multiple lakes), have
              controls (nearby lakes that did not receive introductions), and are often
              documented (recorded by agencies performing the introductions).  For example,
              the redear sunfish (native to the southeastern US) is currently being
              introduced into Michigan lakes, where the pumpkinseed sunfish is native.  The
              redear and pumpkinseed are similar in morphology and ecology (both feed
              primarily on snails), and are expected to compete strongly.  Indeed, initial
              studies in Michigan suggest that pumpkinseed populations decline by 80%
              following redear introduction.  The present research makes use of past and
              ongoing introductions of sunfish into Michigan lakes, coupled with comparative
              studies of sunfishes in the Carolinas (where both species are native), to
              explore the consequences of species introductions on native species, examine
              the causes of geographic distributions, and investigate some of the ecological
              mechanisms that drive these relationships.  Species introductions are an
              increasingly common source of human impacts on natural systems, yet there is
              currently little ability to predict their impacts, mitigate their effects, or
              discriminate between introductions that have major effects and those that are
              relatively benign.  This work attempts to integrate functional morphology,
              community ecology, and biogeography into a framework that can help resolve
              these shortcomings, and it addresses these issues in a group of economically
              and recreationally important fishes.
