Title       : Acquisition of an X-Ray Diffractometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1998   
File        : a9528493

Award Number: 9528493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith L. Eglin jle2@ra.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth L. Brown  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities Program
              will assist the  Department of Chemistry at Mississippi State University
              acquire an automated X-ray   diffractometer system with an additional computer
              for structural solutions, specifically, a  Siemens P4 four -circle instrument
              and a Silicon Graphics Iris computer. This equipment will  enhance research in
              a number of areas including the following: (1) structural determinants of the 
              energetics of carbon-cobalt bond homolysis in alkyl-cobalamins, (2) reactivity
              of ditungsten  (II,II) carboxylates, (3) studies of the pi-coordination of
              alkynes and nitriles to multiply bonded  ditungsten compounds, (4) structural
              and stereochemical assignments in the synthesis of  triarylmethanes,
              discorhabdin D, and staurosporine analogs, (5) structural studies of mono- and 
              bi-metallic complexes of 1,2-diethenyl cyclopentadienyl and
              1,2-diethenylbenzene ligands, (6)  design and synthesis of binuclear manganese
              complexes for use as oxidation catalysts, and (7)  synthesis and properties of
              1,2,3,5-benzothiatriazine- 1,1-dioxides,2,3-dihydro-1,2,3,5- 
              benzothiatriazepine 1,1-dioxides, and their tautomers and identification of the
              structure of  homogeneous catalysts.      The X-ray diffractometer is used to
              make accurate and precise measurements of the full three  dimensional structure
              of a molecule. The information obtained gives the precise values of all the 
              bond distances and bond angles of a given molecule and it gives accurate
              information about the  spatial arrangement of the molecule relative to the
              neighboring molecules.This award from the  Chemistry Research Instrumentation
              and Facilities Program will assist the Department of  Chemistry at Syracuse
              University acquire a modern single crystal X-ray diffraction system. This 
              equipment will enhance research in a number of areas including the following:
              (1)metal oxide  clusters and solid, (2) boron hydride clusters, (3)
              metal-thiolate chemistry, (4) alkaline,alkaline-  earth and lanth anide
              chemistry, and (5) the development of technetium and rhenium 
              radiopharmaceuticals.       The X-ray diffractometer is used to make accurate
              and precise measurements of the full three  dimensional structure of a
              molecule. The information obtained gives the precise values of all the  bond
              distances and bond angles of a given molecule and it gives accurate information
              about the  spatial arrangement of the molecule relative to the neighboring
              molecules.
