Title       : A Framework for Knowledge-Based Abstraction of Time OrientedData
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1998      
File        : a9528444

Award Number: 9528444
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239739             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuval Shahar shahar@smi.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A   domain-independent   knowledge-based   framework   is   being  developed, 
              specific to the task of abstraction of  higher-level,  interval-based  concepts
              from time-stamped  data  in  a  context-  sensitive  manner.   The inference
              structure used  is  knowledge-  based   temporal-abstraction,  which 
              decomposes  the   temporal-  abstraction  task into five subtasks, each solved
              by a  temporal-  abstraction  mechanism.   The research provides a  formal 
              method  for  specification  of  temporal-abstraction  knowledge  and  for 
              facilitating its acquisition, maintenance, reuse, and sharing.  A 
              representation  of  the  knowledge in  the  web-based  Ontolingua  language 
              also is evaluated.  The temporal-abstraction mechanisms  are  being  extended
              and validated within the RESUME system.   An  automated   graphical  tool  for 
              acquiring  temporal-abstraction  knowledge   is  developed  using  the 
              PROTEGE-II   system.    An  evaluation is being performed of the
              knowledge-acquisition  tool,  the  computational mechanisms, and the overall
              framework  in  the  diabetes-therapy  domain  and within  the  EON 
              architecture  for  guideline-based   care.   The  research  has   implications 
               for  construction  of knowledge-based planning and monitoring  systems  in
              time-oriented domains, for automated summarization of temporal  databases,  for
              the  operational semantics of deductive  temporal  databases,   and  for  the 
              semantics  of  queries  to   temporal  databases;  preliminary  evaluation in
              clinical  and  engineering  domains is highly encouraging.
