Title       : Collaborative Research: Paleoecology of Fossil Horses (Family Equidae) over the
               past 55 Million Years
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2000     
File        : a9528020

Award Number: 9528020
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86645              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce J. MacFadden bmacfadd@flmnh.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Betty D. Camp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              MacFadden  9528020      The   rich   55  million  year  fossil  record   of  
              horses  demonstrates  evolution in dietary adaptation through  time, 
              potentially in response to environmental change.  Tooth  and  skull morphology
              changed many times and are associated  with  adaptation  to  new  diets.  
              Using  a  combination  of  new  methods,  this research will test, for the
              first  time,  the  prevailing theory that the earliest horses were browsers  in
               rain   forests  and  then  gradually  evolved  into  savanna  grazers.  
              Evolution  from  horse  browsers  to  grazers  is  assumed  to be an adaptive
              response to climatic changes  and  the  associated  changes in the distribution
               of  vegetation  types.   During the Miocene (approximately 20 million  years 
              ago),  North  American  savannas and grasslands  spread  and  replaced rain
              forests as global climate became cooler, dryer  and more seasonal.  In this
              study, the diet of fossil horses  will be compared to modern ungulate
              herbivores by examining:  (1)  the  microscopic scratches made by  vegetation 
              on  the  surface  of the teeth as viewed with an electron microscope;  (2)
              restoration of chewing muscles; (3) analysis of size and  shape  of  snouts;
              and (4) carbon isotopic  composition   in  tooth  enamel (the isotopic
              signature of savanna grasses  is  different  than  forest  leaves and  the 
              specific  isotopic  signature  of  the  diet  should be  incorporated  in 
              tooth  enamel).   The project thus uses four methods to  study  the  same 
              dietary  questions  and the  detailed  interaction  of  morphologic  change
              with the environment.  The  results  may  significantly alter the classic story
              of horse evolution  as  it  is  currently  presented in books and  museum 
              exhibits.  Furthermore,  they will provide detailed insights  into  the 
              process  of  evolutionary change in mammals in  response  to  changing climates
              and vegetation.
