Title       : Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing: Methodology for Selection of
               Environmentally Sustainable Processes for Pharmaceutical Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1995 
File        : a9528680

Award Number: 9528680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Cooney ccooney@mitvma.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory J. McRae  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9153,ECDM,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9528680  Cooney   A critical challenge facing the chemical and pharmaceutical
              industries is management of the complexity that arises from diverse and often
              conflicting objectives in product and process development.  Simultaneously
              dealing with environmental, cost, safety, and flexibility objectives in design
              makes solution of the optimization problem difficult.  The goal of this
              research is to develop a rigorous methodology for evaluating and choosing
              between alternative manufacturing processes that allow for introduction of
              environmental decisions early in the design strategy.  The approach involves
              selection of performance metrics that reflect the differing objectives and
              developing a design tool that can simultaneously handle multiple and
              conflicting objectives.  The performance metrics along with a hierarchical
              method for decomposition of processes will be used to formalize a decision
              process for process selection.  Multiple case studies will be examined from
              processes used to manufacture chiral pharmaceuticals; these case studies will
              be used as a basis for developing teaching modules to introduce environmentally
              conscious manufacturing into undergraduate and graduate design classes.    
              Case studies involving chiral drug manufacturing will be used in this research
              because promising new production methods are being introduced in this segment
              of the pharmaceutical industry.  These new production methods could yield purer
              products, require smaller capital investments, and have less environmental
              impact.  The results of this work will provide a framework for implementation
              of software to aid the design engineer.  While focused on pharmaceuticals, the
              framework will be applicable to chemical processing more generally as well.
