Title       : Magnetorheaological Damping: A Practical and Affordable New Retrofit Technology
               for Life Extension of Civil Infrastructure Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1998      
File        : a9528083

Award Number: 9528083
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272807             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. F. Spencer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael K. Sain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9528083  Spencer  This project conducts research on development of high-tech 
              devices for the safety and life extension of civil  infrastructure systems. 
              Passive and active retrofit  strategies represent the two ends of the spectrum
              in the use  of control for reducing the response of civil infrastructure 
              system subjected to dynamic hazard such as earthquakes.  Semiactive and hybrid
              control devices potentially combine  the best features of both the passive and
              active approaches  for mitigating undesirable response.  An interdisciplinary 
              investigation of a new semi-active control device that uses  a
              magnetorheological (MR) fluid in a controllable fluid  damper is carried out. 
              The MR damper overcomes many of the  cost and technical difficulties of current
              semi-active  control devices, and has high potential for use in civil 
              infrastructure systems.  In addition to its great promise  for retrofits, the
              MR dampers are also attractive for new  construction.  The research will
              involve: (1) testing of the  MR damper to characterize its behavior and to
              identify  control-oriented models, (2) development of device specific 
              nonlinear control algorithms that can take maximum advantage  of the unique
              features of the MR damper, (3) conducting  proof of concept tests for several
              structural system  configurations in the Structural Dynamics and 
              Control/Earthquake engineering Laboratory (SDC/EEL) at the  University of Notre
              Dame, and conducting larger scale  implementation and verification tests at the
              National Center  for Earthquake Engineering Research (NCEER) in Buffalo, New 
              York.  Successful completion of this research is expected to  accelerate
              economic and practical implementations of  innovative retrofit strategies for
              dynamics hazard  mitigation in civil infrastructure systems.  ***
