Title       : RUI: Undergraduate Research at a Four College Consortium Utilizing an Automatic
               Photometric Telescope for Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9528506

Award Number: 9528506
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310440             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Dukes dukesr@cofc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College/Univ of Charleston
	      66 George Street
	      Charleston, SC  294240001    843/953-5673

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1206,1215,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9528506  Dukes    This award will provide support for seven astronomers at four
              primarily undergraduate institutions.  The observations, to obtain data for the
              research projects, will be obtained by the continued use of an automated 0.75-m
              telescope.  This telescope is operated by computer control and does not require
              an observer at the telescope.  This type of telescope, known as an Automatic
              Photometric Telescope or "APT" yields data that is as good or better than that
              obtained by most manual observers.  Telescopes of this type are revolutionizing
              the observations of certain types of astronomical objects which require an
              extensive series of measurements.  These objects have traditionally been
              neglected since most astronomers have not had the time or the dedicated
              facilities required to observe them properly.  Undergraduate students will be
              able to participate directly in the valuable research.    The schools involved
              in the Four College Consortium are The College of Charleston, The Citadel, the
              University of Nevada-Las Vegas, and Villanova University.  Some of the data
              needed for the projects are solely dependent on the APT data, and in other
              projects the APT data provides crucial ground-based data in support
              observations from orbiting observatories such as the International Ultraviolet
              Explorer (IUE), Hubble Space Telescope (HST), and ROSAT and ASCA satellites,
              which collect data in the X-ray region of the spectrum, as well as observations
              made with instruments such as the Very Large Array (VLA) radio telescope.   
              The major long term monitoring projects involve studying stars on and near the
              main stellar evolutionary sequence.  Stars lying on the main sequence are those
              which are fusing hydrogen into helium in their central regions.  These stars
              (the Sun is an example) are considered "normal" stars.  The research projects
              to be carried out involve studying "peculiar" properties of these "normal"
              stars.  These "peculiar" properties are observed in the Sun but are enhanced in
              stars which are o n the main sequence and are cooler than the Sun or hotter
              than the Sun.  Specific projects to be carried out range from observations of
              hot, massive "B" stars to those of cool, low mass "M" stars.  In order of
              decreasing stellar mass, these projects include:    * Stellar Seismology and
              Investigations of Mass Ejection Events of "B" Stars  * Hot, Chemically Peculiar
              Stars with Strong Magnetic Fields  * The Sun in Time Project: A Coordinated
              Optical APT, UV, and X-ray Study OF Stars similar to the Sun                   
                        but of different ages.  * APT Observations of Very Young, Active Red
              Dwarfs  * Search for Starspot Variability among Strong X-ray emitting Cool
              Stars     Projects not involving main sequence stars include:  * Internal
              Structures of Stars and Tests of General Relativity from Apsidal Motion:
              Studies of Eccentric    Eclipsing Binaries  * Studies of Stars having exhausted
              hydrogen in their central regions (Cepheid Strip Variable and Red Giant Stars)
