Title       : Fluid Mechanics and Mass Transfer of the Rotating Screw Electrode Process for
               Plating Through-Holes in Multilayered Printed Circuit Boards.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a9528642

Award Number: 9528642
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. F. Chen                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139694             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ari Glezer ari.glezer@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9528642    GLEZER  GEORGIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY       A key
              problem in manufacture of multi-layered printed  circuit boards is rapid and
              uniform deposition of copper on  inner surfaces of plated "through-holes."  For
              conventional  boards (in which all interconnects are by means of through-
              holes) as well as boards also using surface-mount technology,  the trade-off
              between plating speed, uniformity, and deposit  ductility is such that
              acceptable yields are achievable only at  the cost of reduced speed, requiring
              large capital investment  and in-process inventory costs.  For holes of higher
              aspect  ratio in future boards, incremental modification of the  existing
              process will be incapable of providing the desired  uniformity at acceptable
              processing rates.          This project consists of a fundamental study  of the
              fluid mechanics and mass transfer of a radically new  approach to plating high
              aspect ratio holes.  The key idea is  to operate rotating screw electrodes
              (RSEs) in through-holes  of submerged boards.  The RSE generates radial,
              azimuthal,  and axial flow, leading to much more effective mass transfer  into
              and within the hole than is possible using conventional  technology. 
              Experiment shows the thickness of the resulting  copper deposit has much
              greater axial uniformity than is  achieved using the popular oscillating board
              technique, which  establishes time-periodic Poiseuille flow in the hole.  Flow
              modification by an axial pressure gradient,  whose magnitude will be chosen to
              give flow reversal, will also be considered.  This  will provide countercurrent
              mass transfer between oppositely  directed portions of the flow and suppress
              formation of  cation-depleted boundary layers in the central section of the 
              hole.          This approach will lay the foundation for  industrial evaluation
              and development of an improved plating  process for high aspect ratio
              through-holes currently being  developed.  The results will also have
              implications for  enhancing heat and mass tra nsfer in other applications.
