Title       : Dissertation Research: Archives Analysis of the Development of Archaeological
               Tree-Ring Dating
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1996      
File        : a9528790

Award Number: 9528790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11851              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Dean jdean@ltrr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Jeffrey Dean, Mr. Stephen Nash will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will examine the archives and unpublished
              documents of a number of scientists who helped to found and expand the
              technique of tree ring dating and will analyze sample lists from laboratories
              which pioneered this approach. He wishes to understand how the development of
              dendrochronology affected the practice of archaeology in the United States and
              also how archaeology itself served to guide the direction the technique took.  
              Until the 1920s, archaeologists in the United States had no means to date
              prehistoric events and chronologies were all relative rather than absolute.
              Tree ring dating provided the first of the many techniques now employed which
              can assign absolute dates. It was first developed in the Southwestern United
              States and is now widely used in this region. Because dendrochronology is based
              on the analysis of variation in the thickness of annual tree rings which in
              turn are dependent on local climatic events, chronologies must be developed
              independently from region to region. What Mr. Nash notes is that early in its
              history, researchers worked in a number of areas as far afield as Alaska to
              establish tree ring chronologies. Ultimately however all were abandoned and it
              is only in the Southwestern U.S. where the technique took hold. Mr. Nash wishes
              to examine this process and understand why different outcomes emerged.  This
              research is important for several reasons. Archaeology is heavily technique
              dependent and is driven, in significant measure, by the development of new
              analytic techniques. The results of Mr. Nash's study will extend well beyond
              tree ring dating itself. The project will also assist in the training of a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
