Title       : Small Molecule Activation and Materials Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1998   
File        : a9528914

Award Number: 9528914
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $541000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter T. Wolczanski ptw2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Peter Wolczanski of Cornell University proposes to investigate the  
              chemistry of low-coordinate inorganic/organometallic complexes supported   by
              bulky siloxide, silamide, silimide, thiolate, and acetylide ligands.    In
              particular, the small molecule activation chemistry of these systems   will be
              explored, and a new class of metal-organic solid state materials   will be
              developed, with an emphasis on comprehensive training of the   graduate
              students involved.  A major goal is to generate a greater   understanding of
              the thermodynamic aspects of C-H bond activiation by   `tying` C-H bond
              activations to energetically similar ligand   substitutions, and by measuring
              equilibrium isotope effects and comparing   them to theory.  Also, C-N bond
              cleavage reactions will be explored,   especially as they relate to
              HydroDeNitrogenation processes.  Mechanistic   studies and systemization of
              oxidative addition processes of these   systems is a general research goal, and
              studies of early transition   metallaradical based C-H bond activation
              chemistry and metal organic   solid-state compounds with covalent networks are
              included.  The chemistry of a class of unique inorganic complexes with bonds to
                nitrogen, oxygen, sulfur, and carbon substituents will be studied for two  
              reasons.  One is that these compounds display unusual and unique   reactivity
              with C-H and C-N bonds in other molecules, and have   implications for
              improving industrial processes.  The other is that they   can be used as
              molecular precursors in the synthesis of novel materials   of high complexity. 
              These studies place experimental studies in a   theoretical framework, and it
              is hoped that the fundamental chemistry   discovered will lead to improved
              methods of controlling the reactivity of   hydrocarbons and of designing
              interesting materials.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
