Title       : Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing of Large Area Electroluminescent
               Displays and Illuminators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1996      
File        : a9528731

Award Number: 9528731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fotios Papadimitrakopoulos papadim@mail.ims.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Faquir C. Jain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1775,9153,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9528731  Papadimitrakopoulos         Recent manufacturing breakthroughs in
              lightweight, low-power  light sources made at E-Lite Technologies, Inc., using
              polymer  encapsulated ZnS:Cu/Mn phosphor materials, gave substantially 
              improved their flexibility and allowed a cost-efficient coil-form  production. 
              Based on similar phosphor (ZnS), employing a more  rigorous all-inorganic
              ZnS-based approach, multi-color  electroluminescent (EL) flat panel displays
              are being  manufactured at Westinghouse-Norden Systems.       This proposal
              seeks to develop an environmentally conscious,  solvent-free processing of
              large area ZnS:Cu/ electroluminescent  illuminators.  The present technology
              employs 85 weight % solvent  (a mixture of methyl ethyl ketone and N-methyl
              pyrrolidone) to  disperse the active EL ingredients and the polymeric binders. 
               Subsequent evaporation of the solvents poses environmental  difficulties.  The
              proposed process would be based on 100%  photopolymerizable monomers along with
              electrostatic phosphor  deposition.  This would allow the manufacture of high
              quality EL  films without the requirements of any solvent.  In addition, we 
              propose to enhance light out-coupling efficiency (with 50-100%  increase in
              brightness) as a result of "medium-transparent" EL  particles.  This novel
              process would involve matching the  refractive indices of the EL ZnS:Cu/Mn
              particles with that of the  binder polymer matrix.  The refractive index of the
              polymer  matrix would be substantially increased by incorporation of nano- 
              sized high refractive index, non-emitting inorganic  nanoparticles, such as GaP
              and A1GaP.  The entire procedure can  be applied by a supercritical CO2
              process, followed by ultra-  violet curing.       The proposed process would
              not only increase the brightness  and lifetime of EL lamps, but it would also
              allow pixelation to  realize flat-panel displays.  This will enhance the 
              competitiveness of thin-film EL against upcoming competing  technologies, such
              as organic EL.  In addition, the  novel,  environmentally friendly and cost
              effective processing techniques  and high efficiency structures would provide
              the technological  edge to compete in the large display market that is
              forecasted to  grow over two hundred billion dollars during the next five
              years.   The background of principal investigators at UConn, E-Lite 
              Technologies Inc.  and Westinghouse Norden Systems, as well as  the
              availability of complementary research laboratories and  production facilities
              makes the proposed research a natural  collaborative endeavor.  ***
