Title       : Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing: Integrating Environmental Issues into
               Product Design Planning and Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1999   
File        : a9528759

Award Number: 9528759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Melnyk melnyk@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erik D. Goodman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger J. Calantone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramamohan L. Tummala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9153,ECDM,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9528759  Melnyk   This research is focused on the development and evaluation of
              a new process for integrating environmentally conscious manufacturing (ECM)
              concerns and issues into the design of new products/processes and the planning
              and scheduling of production, not only within the factory of a single firm, but
              also within the product supply chain.  Integration of the supply chain implies
              bringing in the issues, activities,  and actions of the suppliers into the
              planning and scheduling process. The project will integrate parts of this
              process into an existing material requirements planning (MRP) system to create
              a "Green MRP" system. The objectives of the research are: (1) develop a working
              prototype of an ECM product design/manufacturing system  (PDMS), (2) examine
              the process of incorporating Green MRP into an existing MRP system, (3) explore
              new options with different production plans, including recycling, (4) provide
              accounting reports, feedback, and support for environmental compliance, (5)
              develop a working system for incorporating the supply chain into the ECM
              system, and (6) develop implementation guidelines and procedures  to follow
              when incorporating environmental concerns into the PDMS. The research
              methodology includes qualitative techniques, such as interviews, verbal
              protocol analysis, and content analysis and quantitative analysis methods,
              including computer simulation, data recording, fuzzy set theory, bills of
              waste, by-product processing, waste streaming, and network theory. An
              interdisciplinary advisory  and review team from both academia and industry
              will be convened to support the overall research.   In today's competitive
              market, firms are under pressure to develop and introduce new products quickly
              and at lower costs while meeting or exceeding environmental requirements.
              Countries are investigating ways to come up with legislation that would hold
              manufacturers directly responsible for the entire life cycle of the products
              they manufacture. This research through its devel opment of the PDMS and Green
              MRP can help a manufacturer by (1) identifying potential problems in advance;
              (2) improving waste management planning; (3) improving the ability of a
              manufacturer to ensure compliance; (4) generating the formal documentation
              required for government regulations; and (5) improving the ability of designers
              and planners to understand the link between their decisions and the outcome to
              the environment.
