Title       : Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing: Aqueous Surfactant Solutions as
               Replacements for Volatile Organic Solvents in Chemical Manufacture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1997    
File        : a9528627

Award Number: 9528627
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Rathman rathman.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,9197,ECDM,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  James F. Rathman  Ohio State University  CTS-9528627    Reduced
              utilization of hazardous organic solvents in industry is necessary to minimize
              the environmental impact of chemical manufacturing processes.  In the past,
              pollution control was largely achieved by separation techniques designed to
              remove hazardous materials from waste streams prior to their release into the
              environment.  Recently the emphasis has switched to source reduction as the
              optimum pollution control strategy, wherein non-hazardous materials are used in
              place of hazardous components.  The goal of the proposed research is to
              evaluate aqueous surfactant solutions as replacements for organic solvents in
              synthesis processes of interest to the photographic, pharmaceutical, polymer,
              and petrochemical industries.  The catalytic effect of surfactant micelles on a
              wide variety of reactions is well-known.  Despite the wealth of fundamental
              knowledge, primarily because kinetic data alone are not sufficient for
              successfully replacing organic solvents with aqueous surfactant solutions in
              existing processes.  For example, premixing of components via emulsification
              and separation of products after reaction are two additional areas that must be
              addressed.    In order for micellar catalysis to be economically viable,
              acceptably high production rates must be achieved, selectivity of the desired
              product must be attained, and methods of separating products and surfactants
              must be identified.  High production rates require maximizing solubilization of
              lipophilic reactants in aqueous media, as well as preparation and handling of
              two-phase water-continuous emulsions.  Surfactant mixtures, which often exhibit
              synergistic solubilization capacities relative to single surfactant systems,
              will be investigated.  Reaction rates and product yields will be investigated
              for alkylation reactions of phenols, aromatic amines, and amino phenols. 
              Methods of separating the desired product from the post-reaction solution, and
              methods of recovering the su rfactant for recycle, will be developed and
              evaluated.  Finally, a bench-scale semi-batch process will be designed and
              constructed to demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed technology.    This
              project will be performed in collaboration with the Chemicals Developed
              Division of the Eastman Kodak Company.  The nature of he collaboration will
              include working closely with industrial scientists and engineers to define
              reaction systems of interest and possible avenues of implementing new methods
              that minimize the impact of production processes on the environment.  The
              principal investigator and student researchers will visit Eastman Kodak
              facilities to become familiar with current industrial methods and to consult
              with industrial experts on various phases of the project. None of the research
              performed in this project will be proprietary.    By studying micelar catalysis
              in surfactant mixtures from a broader perspective than has been done
              previously, the proposed research will enable industries to implement this
              technology with minimum effort and expense.  Results of this project will
              provide the understanding necessary to bridge the gap between current
              fundamental knowledge of reaction kinetics and the actual application of this
              promising technology in industrial processes.
