Title       : Interaction of Intense Ultrasound with Genetically Engineered Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9528168

Award Number: 9528168
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy Cheng Vollmer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Erich C. Everbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Swarthmore College
	      500 College Avenue
	      Swarthmore, PA  19081    610/328-8000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9528168  Vollmer  The general objective of this project is to investigate the 
              interaction of intense ultrasound energy with Escherichia  coli bacteria that
              have been genetically engineered to emit  visible light (bioluminescence) when
              subjected to physical  or chemical stress. Acoustic cavitation, the rapid
              growth  and violent collapse of micro-sized bubbles in response to  an
              impinging ultrasonic wave, is know to be responsible for  damage to biological
              cells in vivo and in vitro. The high  temperatures and pressures produced
              during radial bubble  collapse can produce direct and chemically-mediated
              effects  on nearby cells, or asymmetric bubble collapse can produce 
              high-velocity microjets that puncture cellular membranes or  bacterial walls.
              By systematically varying the acoustic  parameters and by using particular
              promoter::lux fusions in  genetically altered strains of E. Coli, this complex 
              interaction will be better understood, allowing for an  assessment to be made
              of the feasibility of applications  such as ultrasonic water purification and
              intracorporeal  sterilization of medical implants.    The investigation during
              this twelve month award would  follow a five step experimental protocol to test
              the  hypothesis that ultrasound causes damage to bacterial  membranes through
              the shear forces and free-radical  production that accompany violent inertial
              cavitation of  resonant microbubbles. The researches will use an heretofore 
              unavailable acoustical detection system for cavitation  together with a
              sensitive biological assay to quantify  bacterial stress response
              (luminescence).    The investigation is expected to provide an understanding of
               the bacterial stress-response due to the collapse of  microbubbles undergoing
              transient cavitation that would help  optimize the killing of bacteria and lead
              to improved  sterilization procedures.  ***
