Title       : Ecosystem and Soil Studies of Native American Runoff Agriculture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1998      
File        : a9528458

Award Number: 9528458
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $479550             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan A. Sandor jasandor@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Ankeny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carleton S. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah A. Muenchrath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9528458  Sandor   Generations of Zuni farmers have used a storm runoff
              harvesting system to grow maize and other crops in the area of the present day
              Zuni Indian Reservation in the West-central New Mexico.  As with other Pueblo
              tribes of the semiarid southwest U.S. Zuni methods of runoff farming use on
              fertilizer or irrigation in the conventional sense.  Farmers credit ephemeral
              stormwater flows, which they divert onto well placed fields, with supplying
              moisture and nutrients to produce crops.  The goal of this three year study is
              to analytically describe agroecological structure and function of Zuni runoff
              fields.  System inputs to be evaluated are moisture, nutrients, and soil
              materials derived from natural watersheds upslope from fields and transported
              by ephemeral runoff.  System output will be evaluated as productivity both in
              terms of  immediate crop yield and long-term productivity, reflected in
              agricultural soil quality.  The approach to be used in this project  is based
              on two key areas of research on sustainable land use: monitoring long-term
              condition of agricultural soils and developing management practices that
              conserve ecosystem resources.  The Zuni area, farmed for over two thousand
              years, provides information valuable to both  endeavors: the Reservation
              contains some of the oldest identifiable agricultural land in the U.S. Studies
              here extend knowledge about effects of agriculture on landscapes into a time
              frame envisioned in the concept of sustainability, complementing modern
              long-term ecological and agricultural experiments.  This research will also
              contribute to basic understanding of such semiarid ecosystems.  It will have
              applications to sustainable agriculture development in other arid and semiarid
              areas, and to revitalization of a sustainable agricultural system for Zuni. 
              The project is a partnership between the Zuni Tribe and an interdisciplinary
              research team, including scientists from New Mexico, Iowa State University, and
              University of Wyoming.  The Zuni Tribe's curre nt plan for redevelopment of a
              sustainable agarian economy has direct applications for the work.
