Title       : SGER: The Effects of Mechanical Foreces on Neural Growth Rates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1995      
File        : a9528466

Award Number: 9528466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John T. Edwards                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45435              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Galbraith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The environment provides a wide range of cues that growing and regenerating
              nerve cells need to successfully reach their targets. A variety of approaches
              have been pursued to identify these cues and to understand neuronal growth and
              pathfinding. All of these methods have carefully controlled a particular
              component of the neuron's environment such as biochemical factors, interactions
              with other cells, or local electric fields. However, the amount of physical
              force that is exerted on neurons is one component of the cell environment which
              has not been investigated as a potential growth regulator. It is the objective
              of this research to investigate the ability of the mechanical environment to
              affect neural growth rates and directions. Cells within the body are subjected
              to mechanical forces on a continuous basis, and these inputs induce responses
              during early embryonic development and later remodeling of fully developed
              tissues. Sensitivity to the mechanical environment is a characteristic of many
              types of cells. Muscle, bone, cartilage, endothelial and fibroblast cells all
              exhibit modified growth or morphology when subjected to physical forces. Nerve
              cells are not typically thought of mechano-responsive; however a limited number
              of studies have demonstrated reversible responses to mechanical stimulation and
              these investigations form the basis for the hypothesis that mechanical
              stimulation may direct and increase growth. This research will explore the
              ability of mechanical stimulation to affect the growth and orientation of
              cultured sensory ganglion neurons. The growth rates and characteristics of
              these cultures have been well characterized under control conditions, and
              outgrowth rates will be measured from time-lapse video microscopy recordings of
              both mechanically stimulated and non-stimulated cells. Since the response of
              cells to mechanical forces is often dependent on the method of application, the
              mechanical forces in these studies will be applied to the cells by placing them
              in one of three lo ading apparatus that will be capable of applying either
              compression, elongation, or shear to the neurons. Any preferential response in
              outgrowth rates or directions will be correlated with the magnitude and type of
              loading used for each experiment. The ultimate aim of the experiments proposed
              here is to determine whether mechanical forces can act to direct or modulate
              neurite outgrowth.  The results will have considerable impact on our
              understanding of the processes controlling neurite outgrowth.
