Title       : How Single Genes Provide Proteins to Multiple Cellular Compartments;
               Collaborative Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2000 
File        : a9528216

Award Number: 9528216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy C. Martin nancymartin@louisville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven R. Ellis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1167,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9628216  Martin and Hooper    The Hopper and Martin laboratories collaboratively
              study an  unusual category of yeast genes that code for "sorting  isozymes". 
              These are enzymes coded by the same gene but  located in more than one
              subcellular compartment.  Study of  these genes has provided information about
              the cis signals  that target proteins to their correct destination, and 
              promises to provide a means of uncovering gene products that  play roles in the
              sorting process.  TRM1 codes for 2  isozymes, an amino-terminal extended
              protein found in  mitochondria and a protein lacking the extension found in 
              mitochondria and nuclei,  MOD5 also encodes 2 isozymes; the  amino-terminal
              extended Mod5p is in mitochondria and the  form lacking this extension is in
              nuclei, but the cytosol  has contributions from both isozymes.  CCA1 codes for
              3  isozymes.  The amino-terminal extended longest form is  located in
              mitochondria and the other two forms are in  cytosol/nuclear compartments. 
              Trm1p, Mod5p, and Cca1p are  all involved in tRNA biosynthesis.  tRNAs encoded
              by the  nuclear genome are located in the cytosol and the nucleus.  One goal of
              the proposed studies is to determine whether  cells require both nuclear and
              cytoplasmic forms of Mod5p  and Cca1p for the reactions they carry out.  In
              addressing  this problem, sequences necessary and sufficient for nuclear 
              import of these proteins will be identified.  Then the  sequences will be
              altered to determine the consequences of  mislocalizing them.  The
              amino-extended forms of Trm1p and  probably Cca1 and Mod5p possess both
              mitochondrial and  nuclear targeting information, yet are not found in the 
              nucleus.  Mechanisms that could account for the dominance of  the mitochondrial
              targeting information will be explored.  In particular, the hypotheses that
              mitochondrial targeting  signals play a role in coupling import to translation
              will  be tested.  These studies are timely as new information  suggests an
              association of translation and mitochondrial  protein i mport.  Proper function
              of a eukaryotic cell is  dependent upon appropriate subcellular distribution of
               proteins.  Although there is a growing body of literature  that addresses the
              trans-acting components that assure  appropriate distribution, much remains to
              be learned.  The  hypothesis of the PI's is that the natural distribution of 
              sorting isozymes to multiple cellular compartments can be  used as a powerful
              new tool to study protein delivery to  mitochondria and nuclei and that the
              outcome of such studies  may have general applicability for understanding the
              sorting  of proteins with a single subcellular destination as well as  those
              with multiple destinations.  The understanding of  sequences necessary for the
              distribution of sorting isozymes  allowed the PI's to devise genetic studies to
              identify  components that affect the distribution process.  The first  genetic
              studies using Mod5p identified 4 genes: MDP1/RSP5,  MDP2/VRP1, MDP4, and PAN1. 
              Mutations of MDP2/VRP1 and PAN1  cause a decrease in the mitochondrial pool of
              Mod5p.  Other  mitochondrial proteins also may be affected because these 
              mutations cause respiratory deficiency and conditional  growth even though
              Mod5p itself is unessential.  MDP2/  affects the actin cytoskeleton and PAN1
              codes for a protein  that interacts with 3' ends of mRNA and affects initiation
               of protein synthesis.  Finding MDP2 and PAN1 implicates the  actin
              cytoskeleton, proteins synthesis and 3' mRNA sequences  in the distribution of
              proteins between the mitochondrial  and the cytoplasm.  Studies to decipher the
              mechanism of  action of MDP2 and PAN1 are proposed.  Success using one  sorting
              isozyme to identify genes that alter its  distribution to mitochondria predicts
              success of  complementary studies to identify additional genes that  alter the
              distribution of Mod5p as well as Cca1p.  Genetic  schemes to accomplish this
              are described in the proposed  work.  %%%  This is a project engaged by two
              collaborating women  scientists, one a biochemist and one a  geneticist, who
              use  multidisciplinary approaches to a fundamental question in  biotechnology:
              how a protein which is the product of a  single gene can be sorted to multiple
              locations within the  cell.  The basic problem behind cellular protein traffic
              is  how to coordinate that protein traffic in the context of a  structurally
              complex cytoplasm, composed of many different  membrane-bound and non-membrane
              delimited compartments. If a  protein is targeted to a single compartment, it
              can be  initially made with a "targeting signal" which can  subsequently be
              cleaved, depending on whether it is  necessary for the protein's subsequent
              function.  Targeting  signals for the mitochondria and nucleus are known for 
              several proteins which come to reside solely in those  compartments, but this
              project concerns some proteins which  are involved in tRNA modification which
              are found in both  the mitochondria and nucleus and which contain both types of
               signals. The project examines what happens when these  signals are changed in
              a way which changes the balance of  the protein between the mitochondria and
              nucleus.   Although  the protein is coded by a single gene, different sizes of 
              the protein exist, with the longer form found in  mitochondria and the shorter
              form in the nucleus.  Genetic  analysis has found some intriguing genes which
              alter the  amount of the longer form in the mitochondria.  One of them  affects
              the initiation of protein synthesis and one affects  the actin cytoskeleton of
              the cell.  The coupling of the  synthesis (translation) of the protein to
              targeting to the  mitochondria is examined. This project also addresses how 
              altering the initiation of protein synthesis and the actin  cytoskeleton can
              change the distribution of the protein  between the nucleus and mitochondrion. 
              This study provides  insight into how the sorting information necessary for 
              maintaining  complex cellular compartmentation is regulated  by the
              interactions of  newly-made proteins with other  cellular components.   ***
