Title       : VLF Imaging of Lightning-Induced Disturbances of the Lower Ionosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9528173

Award Number: 9528173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431490             (Estimated)
Investigator: Umran S. Inan inan@nova.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI proposes an experimental investigation of lower ionosphere localized and
              transient disturbances, occurring with lightning discharges.  These
              disturbances are remotely sensed by their effect on the phase and amplitude of
              very low frequency (VLF) signals propagating in the nearby Earth-ionosphere
              waveguide.  This program is an outgrowth of previous VLF observation programs,
              and will establish an experiment configuration of measurements at multiple
              sites, constituting two arrays (east and west).  These arrays provide high
              resolution measurement of disturbances, capturing a sufficient number of
              necessary events, and providing a database for holographic imaging of the
              disturbances' size.  Ionospheric disturbances may be produced by lightning
              radiation and quasi-static fields directly interacting with the ionosphere, or
              by bursts of energetic electrons precipitated out of the radiation belts by
              whistler waves originating in lightning discharges.  Both phenomena regularly
              occur; however, the PI must determine the spatial extent and distribution of
              these events to assess their global significance.  He will transfer data from
              field sites over the Internet, making it available to the scientific community
              in near real-time.  Finally, this program will provide important educational
              outreach, since field equipment will be deployed at high schools, where
              students and teachers will be encouraged to interact with Stanford University
              investigators.
