Title       : Dissertation Research: Cultural Notions of Gender and Illness in Indonesia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1996     
File        : a9528305

Award Number: 9528305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9560               (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Bowen jbowen@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This award to Washington University-St. Louis supports the dissertation
              research of a student of cultural anthropology.  The project will investigate
              the knowledge possessed by women in an Indonesian town about HIV/AIDS.  Through
              interviews and ethnographic observations of married women, never-married women,
              and commercial sex workers, the student will assess the women's knowledge of
              how AIDS spreads, sexual practices which limit or facilitate the spread of the
              disease, and the women's abilities to negotiate `safe-sex` practices with their
              partners.  The student will survey women in an urban area, select sub-samples
              of 60 women in each of the three groups to conduct longer interviews with, and
              select a sub-sample of 15-20 women from each group for open-ended, intensive
              discussions on gender relations, perceptions of risk of contracting disease,
              and general cultural values about gender and sexual relations and marriage. 
              This research is important because it adds to our general expertise about this
              important area of the world, as well as specific information about women's
              knowledge of sexually transmitted diseases and HIV/AIDS in this region.  The
              project will increase our understanding of what women know about heterosexual
              transmission of this growing social problem, and will produce valuable
              knowledge of women's self-perceptions of their own abilities to engage in
              less-risky behaviors.  This sort of understanding will be valuable in designing
              programs to limit the spread of the problem not only in Indonesia, but in other
              places where women have comparable understandings and constraints.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                
