Title       : Dynamics of Fundamental Optical Transitions in Gallium Nitride and Aluminum
               Gallium Nitride
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1998     
File        : a9528226

Award Number: 9528226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jingyu Lin jylin@phys.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hongxing Jiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9528226 Lin  This research project is targeted at the investigation of the
              dynamics of band-to-band exciton, and band-to-impurity transitions in GaN and
              AlGaN, including recombination lifetimes and quantum efficiencies, employing
              time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy measurements. These dynamic
              processes will be investigated in epitaxial layers, heterostructures, quantum
              wells, and artificially structured laser cavities under different
              conditions--temperature, excitation energy, intensity, and polarization.
              Fundamentally important physical quantities, including the free- and
              bound-exciton oscillator strengths which determine basic optical processes such
              as excitation, absorption, and recombination, will be measured. The effects of
              post-growth annealing, external fields, and alloy composition on the optical
              recombination dynamics will be included in the study.  In addition, the
              dynamics of optical transitions will be investigated under conditions of
              optically-pumped stimulated emission and lasing to ascertain information
              regarding preferable optical transitions for laser applications as well as to
              provide model descriptions for gain mechanisms and quantum efficiencies in GaN
              lasers. %%% In wide bandgap semiconductor optical devices, such as UV emitters
              and UV-blue laser diodes, it is the dynamic processes of the fundamental
              optical transitions that predominantly determine their performance. The history
              of GaAs and ZnSe semiconductor laser development shows that understanding
              fundamental optical recombination dynamics is an important key to the
              understanding of laser activity.  Additionally, an understanding of the dynamic
              processes of optical transitions provides new directions for improving material
              quality as well as being of great value in designing and optimizing
              optoelectronic devices. The research will contribute basic materials science
              knowledge at a fundamental level of technological relevance to several aspects
              of advanced photonics.  Additionally, the knowledge and understandin g gained
              from this research project is expected to contribute in a general way to
              improving the performance of advanced devices and circuits used in computing,
              information processing, and telecommunications by providing a fundamental
              understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved materials.  An
              important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area. ***
