Title       : Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing: Utility Tradeoffs and Statistical
               Analysis for Pollution Prevention
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1999     
File        : a9528629

Award Number: 9528629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah L. Thurston thurston@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James V. Carnahan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9153,ECDM,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9528629  Thurston   This grant provides funding to develop a robust theoretical
              foundation for design decisionmaking for pollution prevention.  The research
              will develop a rigorous new method for integrating quantitative decision
              analysis over the entire range of product design, manufacture, use and
              disposal.  Specifically, a methodology for combining statistical manufacturing
              process control with lifecycle analysis and concurrent multiobjective design
              optimization will be developed.  Pollution and its removal cost will be treated
              as product defects.  This project will significantly expand on previous work to
              develop design tools that can be used by any industry.  Procedures for classes
              of manufacturing processes and their resultant waste streams will be specified.
                If successful, United States manufacturers will be better able to integrate
              the unique, site-specific considerations of the international marketplace into
              their design analysis to identify optimal pollution prevention strategies.  The
              goal is not to attempt to identify the "environmentally correct" alternative. 
              Instead, it is to develop a mathematically rigorous method for modeling
              tradeoffs under uncertainty between pollution, cost and quality.  The best
              combination of strategies will be identified, including specification of the
              product design, materials, manufacturing process design and manufacturing
              process control settings.  Instead of generating pollution, waiting for the
              regulators to respond, then paying the price, manufacturers will be able to
              anticipate these events and integrate them into the design decision-making
              process.  The twin benefits are that their products will then possess a
              strategic advantage in the marketplace, and also generate less pollution.
