Title       : Engineering Coalition of Schools for Excellence in Educationand Leadership
               (ECSEL)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a9528925

Award Number: 9528925
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: William Butcher                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14117145           (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Lucius Walker  (Principal Investigator former)
              James H. Johnson jj@scs.howard.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    The Engineering Coalition of Schools for Excellence in Education and
              Leadership (ECSEL) will focus on the following which are grouped into the three
              major programmatic areas:    1. Learning by Design: This task has three main
              components: (i)Industry-driven, interdisciplinary design projects for
              upper-level students; (ii) a comprehensive assessment program developed in
              partnership with industrial allies and professional associations to identify
              actual knowledge and skill needs of engineers and engineer technicians, and
              yielding authentic curricular design criteria and (iii) the formation of a new
              type of collaborative curriculum development and dissemination environment.
              These components wil be combined with ongoing efforts to expand, enhance, and
              further validate the design-centered ECSEL experience.    2. Our Role in the
              K-14 Community: A comprehensive program will be launched to break down the
              barriers that prevent the infusion of engineering and technology into K-14
              curricula, while simutaneously preventing the infusion of talented youth into
              the engineering and technical workforce.  Engineers, teachers, professional
              societies, unions, and K-14 educators will work together to create new
              mechanisms whereby: (i) teachers learn to design alongside engineers; (ii)
              engineers are provided pathways to become teachers; (iii) doors are opened
              between engineering and engineering technology programs; and (iv) ECSEL
              innovations are made available within the richly diverse community college
              environment.    3. Student and Faculty Development: ECSEL's work in building
              the infrastructure and human support networks necessary for students and
              faculty to become effective agents of reform will be bolstered and broadened by
              a variety of mechanisms, including (i) shared responsibility and leadership in
              all ECSEL activities, with continued and enhanced leadership roles for our
              students; (ii) creation of new programs to attract and retain underrepresented
              groups in the engineering professoriate; and (iii ) exchanges, workshops, and
              programs for new and veteran faculty to promote ECSEL's theme of learning by
              design.    The seven members of this Coalition are:   City College of New York 
               Howard University   Massachusetts Institute of Technology   Morgan State
              University   Pennsylvania State University   University of Maryland, College
              Park   University of Washington  ??
