Title       : Deep Ocean Ventilation Through Antarctic Intermediate Layers (DOVETAIL)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9528805

Award Number: 9528805
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292742             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Schlosser peters@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,1326,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9528805  Schlosser         The propoqed project is a multi-institutional
              integrated  study of the outflow of newly formed bottom water from the  Weddell
              Sea and its dispersion into the South Atlantic Ocean.  It  builds upon earlier
              successful studies of the inflow of  intermediate water masses into the Eastern
              Weddell Sea, their  modification within the Weddell Gyre, and their interaction
              with  bottom water formation processes in the western Weddell Sea.  The  study
              is called Deep Ocean Ventilation Through Antarctic  Intermediate Layers
              (DOVETAIL) and includes six components  involving hydrographic measurements,
              natural tracer experiments,  and modeling studies.  The study will be centered
              east of the  Drake Passage where water masses from the Weddell Sea and the 
              Scotia Sea come together in the Weddell-Scotia Confluence, and  will be carried
              out in cooperation with the national antarctic  programs of Germany and Spain. 
                   The study has four related objectives.  The first is to  assess the
              quantity and the physical and chemical characteristics  of  Weddell Sea source
              waters for the confluence.  The second is  to describe the dominant processes
              associated with spreading and  sinking of dense antarctic waters within the
              Weddell-Scotia  Confluence.  The third is to estimate the ventilation rate of
              the  world ocean, and the fourth is to estimate seasonal fluctuations  in the
              regional ocean transport and hydrographic structure and to  assess the likely
              influence of seasonal to interannual  variability on rates of ventilation by
              Weddell Sea waters.       Ventilation of the deep ocean -- the rising of
              sub-surface  water masses to the surface to be recharged with atmospheric 
              gases and to give up heat to the atmosphere -- is a uniquely  antarctic
              phenomenon that has significant consequences for global  change by affecting
              the global reservoir of carbon dioxide, and  by modulating the amount and
              extent of seasonal sea ice in the  southern hemisphere.       This component of
              DOVETAIL will make measurem ents on both  transient and steady-state tracers to
              examine the sources,  pathways, and average residence times of the various
              water masses  in the confluence region.  Tritium (an isotope of hydrogen), 
              helium-3, helium-4, carbon-14, oxygen-18, and various  chlorofluorocarbons will
              be used to differentiate the sources of  confluence water (e.g. precipitation,
              glacial melt water, deep  water of Atlantic origin), to determine their average
              residence  times at the surface, and to use the tracer distributions as  input
              to model simulations of the bottom water formation process  ***
