Title       : Instrumentation and Measurement Methodologies in Atmospheric Chemistry Research
               Workshop, Buenos Aires, Argentina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1995 
File        : a9528908

Award Number: 9528908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68256              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene W. Bierly ebierly@agu.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Geophysical Union
	      2000 Florida Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  200091231    202/462-6900

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9528908  Bierly    The International Global Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC) program
              and the  Global Atmosphere Watch (GAW) program of the World Meteorological 
              Organization (WMO) have included monitoring activities in their plans that 
              will establish baselines for atmospheric chemistry research and  assessment.
              The baselines are to be established by operating a series of  six monitoring
              stations in remote, un-industrialized areas throughout the  globe.  A GAW
              baseline station is currently operating on the Tibetan  plateau, and will soon
              be followed by baseline stations in Ushuaia,  Sumatra, Mt. Kenya, South-east
              Algeria, and a final proposed station North  of Bel=E9m, in Brazil.  Baselines
              are to be established at each of these  stations in five basic areas: a) the
              chemical  composition of rain and  snow, b) atmospheric gases, including
              greenhouse gases, ozone, and  reactive gases like SO2 and NOx, c) aerosol
              chemical and physical  characteristics, including total concentration and
              vertical profiles, d)  solar radiation, including UV-B, and e) radio-nuclides. 
              A series of GAW  regional monitoring stations also exists in more
              industrialized areas  around the globe.  The data from these regional stations
              will be used in  combination with the baseline stations to assess anthropogenic
              impacts.  An effective means of establishing a stations for global atmospheric 
              chemistry data set collection, gathered using not only similar equipment,  but
              similar measurement methodologies, is to build a local capacity in  atmospheric
              chemistry with a series of standard courses offered in  different areas of the
              globe by leading scientists in the field.  A pool  of international volunteer
              lecturers has been recruited by a previous  effort of the IGAC and GAW, in
              collaboration with the International  Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) and
              the Global Change System for  Analysis, Research, and Training (START).  This
              NSF grant, on behalf of  the Inter American Institute for Global Change
              Research (IAI), will cover  tra vel and per diem costs of Latin American
              scientists from countries that  have or will have GAW regional stations, as
              well as those scientists  responsible for operating, maintaining, and managing
              the GAW baseline  station at Ushuaia.  The first two-week course will be held
              at the  Instituto de Qu=EDmica F=EDsica de los  Materiales, Medio Ambiente y
              Energ=EDa (INQUIMAE) of the University of  Buenos Aires, and will cover
              emission, infra-red, UV/visible, and tumble  diode laser spectroscopy, gas
              chromatography, conductometry, colorimetry,  coulometry, enzymatic techniques,
              and quality assurance and control  techniques, as well as data assessment and
              management methods.%%%  This program will train local experts to operate global
              atmospheric  chemistry monitoring stations.  These 'baseline' monitoring
              stations will  collect data from areas relatively free of pollution, and allow
              comparison  with similar data from industrial areas in order to assess how much
               atmospheric pollution is related to human activity.  The training program  is
              being carried out as a U.S. contribution to the Inter American  Institute for
              Global Change Research (IAI), which has a strong commitment  to training
              scientists in the Americas.  Sixteen nations of the Americas  are Member States
              of the IAI, a U.S. initiative to stimulate cooperative  research on global
              change issues among the scientific institutions of the  Americas. The National
              Science Foundation is the U.S. Government agency  designated by the White House
              to carry out U.S. responsibilities within  the IAI.  ***
