Title       : Tailoring Surface Morphology of Epitaxial Layers on Silicon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9528513

Award Number: 9528513
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349473             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ignatius S. Tsong ig.tsong@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               9528513 Tsong  This research project uses a unique combination of ultrahigh
              vacuum (UHV) microscopies: low energy electron microscopy (LEEM) and scanning
              tunneling microscopy (STM), to conduct in situ deposition and growth studies on
              Si surfaces to clearly identify different growth modes, i.e. Frank-van der
              Merwe, Volmer-Weber, and Stranski-Krastanov, and also to observe gross changes
              of the surface during growth, such as faceting and step-bunching.  The
              investigation focuses on tailoring the surface morphology of homoepitaxial and
              heteroepitaxial layers on Si surfaces with different orientations.  Ge/Si(100)
              and Ge/Si(311) and the homoepitaxial systems of Si/Si(100) and Si/Si(311) will
              be studied.  Real-time LEEM observations of the development of 2D-island
              density during growth with and without a surfactant will be used to assess
              whether or not the presence of surfactants increases or reduces the diffusion
              lengths of adatoms to promote layer-by-layer growth. %%% The proposed LEEM/STM
              investigations are expected to pinpoint the role of energetics versus kinetics
              played by the high-index (311) substrate surface.  STM, with its better spatial
              resolution, is ideal for the study of the initial stages of nucleation; while
              LEEM is particularly suited to examine growth kinetics dependent upon substrate
              temperature, diffusion rates and mass transport.  These two powerful lateral
              spatial resolving techniques will enable identification of critical parameters
              necessary to tailor growth morphologies, and hence the synthesis of new and
              improved materials for microelectronic applications. The Ge/Si system is
              significant from the technological point of view of enhanced carrier mobility
              in SiGe/Si superlattices and their application in heterojunction bipolar
              transistors, while Si/Si homoepitaxy is a model system to study fundamental
              mechanisms controlling growth kinetics, in particular the minimization of
              substrate temperature for step-flow growth.  The knowledge and understanding
              gained from this research pr oject is expected to contribute in a general way
              to improving the performance of advanced devices used in computing, information
              processing, and telecommunications by providing a fundamental understanding and
              a basis for designing and producing improved materials.  An important feature
              of the program is the integration of research and education through the
              training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area.
              ***
