Title       : Dissertation Research: Structural Differences in the Corpus Callosum of Macaca
               fascicularis and Pan Troglodytes by Confocal Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1999     
File        : a9528100

Award Number: 9528100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10963              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey T. Laitman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph L. Holloway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Sinai School of Medicin
	      One Gustave L. Levy Place
	      New York, NY  100296504    /   -

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is an investigation of sexual differences in that part of the brain which
              serves as the major  communicating highway between the two cerebral
              hemispheres, the corpus callosum.  This study  will examine the brains of two
              species of higher primates, the cynomolgus monkey (Macaca  fascicularis) and
              the common chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes) using laser scanning confocal 
              microscopy, a recent advancement in microscopic imaging that allows for a level
              of  investigation and analysis not available previously.  Data from this
              project will offer new information on both the basic biology of the nonhuman 
              primate corpus callosum and provide a substrate which will enable
              reconstruction of the  evolution of sex differences in the primate brain.  For
              example, findings from this study may  directly relate to observations on the
              existence of male-female cognitive and/or linguistic  differences in Old World
              monkeys and great apes.  The proposed research will address these  claims by
              testing the hypothesis that sex differences in the corpus callosum of Macaca 
              fascicularis and Pan troglodytes  are present in gross morphology related to
              total and regional  callosal areas, and also with regard to the number of
              myelinated and unmyelinated nerve fibers.   Knowledge about fiber composition
              can shed light on the ability of the two cerebral hemispheres  to communicate
              with each other, and the speed at which this communication may occur.  For 
              example, the quantity of fibers traversing the corpus callosum will reflect the
              degree of  connectivity between the hemispheres, and offer insight into the
              lateralization (i.e., left-right  compartmentalization) of functions.  The size
              of the myelinated fibers (i.e., those nerve fibers  surrounded by a myelin
              sheath which aids in conduction velocity) which pass through the corpus 
              callosum will offer insight into the speed at which messages are passed between
              the  hemispheres. In general, the larger the diameter of the nerve fiber the
              faster the signal will be  conducted.  The ability to address these fundamental
              questions on a largely unexplored region of  the nonhuman primate brain will
              offer significant new information on how sexual differences in  the human brain
              came to be.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
