Title       : Monolayer Aspects of Silicide Reaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1998     
File        : a9528503

Award Number: 9528503
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312427             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Bennett peter.bennett@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9146,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9528503  Bennett    This research project explores fundamental aspects of the 
              interaction of metals with silicon surfaces using advanced  surface
              characterization techniques including 'hot STM'  which provides in situ, real
              time observations of processes  on an atomic scale; synchrotron X-ray
              diffraction which  allows observation of buried interfaces; and Low Energy 
              Electron Microscopy(LEEM) for video rate observations of  thin film and surface
              reactions at high temperature.  Materials systems of practical importance in
              silicon  microelectronics are emphasized, particularly Co/, Ti/ and  Au/Si. The
              long range goal of this research project is to  establish a connection between
              surface and bulk phenomena  for silicide reactions.  Prototype systems will be
              studied  as they progress through various stages of reaction from  submonolayer
              precursor adsorbates or buried interface  structures to reacted silicide
              structures to high  temperature phase transformations.  %%%  The objective of
              this research is to develop  a fundamental  understanding of crystal growth in
              ultrathin film systems  that are relevant to advanced silicon metallization
              schemes  needed for next generation microelectronic devices and  circuits.  The
              research will contribute basic materials  science knowledge at the fundamental
              atomic level of  technological relevance to several aspects of advanced 
              microelectronic circuitry.  Additionally, the knowledge and  understanding
              gained from this research project is expected  to contribute in a general way
              to improving the performance  of advanced devices and circuits used in
              computing,  information processing, and telecommunications by providing  a
              fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and  producing improved
              materials.  An important feature of the  program is the integration of research
              and education through  the training of students in a fundamentally and 
              technologically significant area.  ***
